---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 November 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-11-14
---

WEDNESDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

     REFERRAL OF UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE CONTRIBUTIONS BILL TO PORTFOLIO
                                  COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
draft resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That, notwithstanding Rule 290(1), the Unemployment Insurance
  Contributions Bill [B 85 - 2001] - (National Assembly - sec 77), upon its
  introduction, be referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour for
  consideration and report, the Committee to have the power to confer with
  the Portfolio Committee on Finance.

Agreed to.

                 ALARMING INCIDENCE OF CHILD RAPE AND ABUSE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, hon members, I must, from the onset,
say that I have been moved by the manner in which South Africans,
regardless of gender, have spoken out and expressed outrage at the
reprehensible abuse of nine month old baby Tsepang, and other children. The
resounding expression of revulsion by this nation is a good sign as it
shows that we are united in saying that we shall not tolerate such barbaric
behaviour.

There is clearly consensus that something is seriously wrong if
grandfathers, fathers, brothers and uncles sexually molest their own flesh
and blood. The rape of a nine month old baby defies description in any
language, and, indeed, displays moral depravity of the highest order. There
is also something seriously amiss when people forget the very philosophy
that has been the anchor of our communities for decades, namely the
principle that any child is my child, and when a child who goes out to play
at a neighbour's house is found murdered or raped.

As the Government we have done what we should. The laws to fight this
scourge exist and are being implemented. As I said in this House last week
during Question Time, this Government has also prioritised the rights of
women and children, as can be seen from the existence of the office on the
rights of the child, the office on the status of women and the office on
the status of disabled persons. These programmes, located in the
Presidency, under the Minister in the Presidency, are succeeding in their
aims of actively promoting the rights of women, children and people with
disabilities, as the most vulnerable sectors in our communities.

It is because of the recognition of the importance of these sectors, that
they are located in the Presidency and that there is a Minister dedicated
to this crucial responsibility and ensuring that all Government programmes
are aligned such that they actively promote the advancement and protection
of the rights of these sectors. However, the Government alone cannot
eradicate this scourge which resides within our communities. Each and every
one of us has a role to play.

As we all know, the apartheid history of this country left behind a legacy
of a serious breakdown in the moral infrastructure of our society.
Apartheid brutalised everyone: its perpetrators, its victims as well as its
beneficiaries, through the migrant labour and homeland systems. Apartheid
sowed the seeds for the breakdown of the institution of the family. The
breakdown in the moral fibre manifests itself in many ways and in all
sectors of our society: rich and poor, urban and rural, black and white,
young and old. The molestation of children and infants is a symptom of this
degeneration.

Among the manifestations of moral degeneration are the following: the
breakdown of parental control over children in some families; the condoning
of deviant behaviour; a lack of respect for authority; the present breaking
of the law; lack of respect for rules and regulations; crime and
corruption; abuse of alcohol and drugs; abuse of women and children; lack
of respect for the next person and, indeed, for human life. Clearly, we
need to do something in our respective areas of influence to restore
morality and rebuild a protective environment for the most vulnerable in
our country.

In this vein, I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate a call I
made to men in our country recently. Let us as men become positive role
models who are symbols of love, empathy and caring and eradicate the
stereotype that is developing that men are abusers of the most vulnerable
in our society. Historically, men were known to protect their loved ones,
who felt safe in their company. These days, some men are clearly becoming
``izinswelaboya'' [animals]. This must change. In line with the theme of
HIV/Aids campaigns last year and this year, let me repeat that ``Men Can
Make a Difference''. Let us make this difference by leading campaigns on
eradicating violence of any form against women and children.

Most importantly, we need to continue addressing the question of the
economic and social vulnerability of women and girls in our society, as
this opens them up to abuse. Many women are economically dependent on men
and this makes them reluctant to report abuses as this may lead to a loss
of financial support. Therefore, we need to strengthen social support
structures in our communities which make it possible for women in such
situations to report abuse and leave abusive relationships, in order to
protect their children and themselves. Women must have somewhere to run to.

I cannot finish my address without commending the hardworking officials in
our criminal justice system who are diligently implementing laws aimed at
ridding our society of sick individuals who molest women and children.
Allow me also to congratulate communities, organisations and individuals
who are already blowing the whistle on child abusers. The SA Democratic
Teachers Union, for example, deserves mention for exposing teachers - some
of them principals and deputy principals - who abuse children entrusted to
their care during the day. The fact that child abusers are facing the law -
and that we are today debating this matter, which has become public - shows
that our communities are vigilant. That needs to be encouraged.

Once again, let me repeat my call for all of us to revive in our
communities the principle of ``Any child is my child''. If we hear children
crying, children left alone and uncared for, or children being abused in
any way, let us speak out and report the matter to the police. Let us
recognise that children have rights which should be respected by all. No
one will be allowed to get away with abusing children, regardless of their
position in society.

It should become crystal clear to any potential child abuser or would-be
rapist that this Government is determined to ensure that they face the full
might of the law. We are not going to sit back and watch them destroy our
future - our children. When Parliament rises on Friday we, as members of
this House, should use the opportunity to spread the message of moral
renewal in our constituencies and ensure that we remove hiding places for
criminals who prey on children.

As part of the national moral regeneration movement that we are
spearheading, I will be hosting a summit early next year which will include
representatives of various sectors such as political representatives,
religious groups, community leaders, the church, women, the youth, the
disabled, business, labour and traditional healers. This great imbizo will
enable us, as South Africans, to take stock of the moral barometer of our
country and identify the critical factors that are affecting the moral
health of this nation. Its objective is to establish a broad national
coalition across all sectors of society, and it will chart the way forward
for a mass-based moral regeneration campaign which will ensure that
eventually the lines between right and wrong no longer become blurred. If
we work together, we can defeat the monster and make our homes and streets
safe for our children. [Applause.]

Ms L M T XINGWANA: Madam Speaker, this is a great opportunity for me to
speak on the alarming incidents of child rape and abuse throughout our
country.

A nine-month-old baby was raped and sodomised by six men who stand accused
in Upington today. The baby has undergone extensive surgery and, according
to doctors, she still has to undergo three more operations. She will have
to carry a colostomy bag for the rest of her life. Her 16-year old mother
was also a victim of statutory rape when she fell pregnant at the age of 14
years, and her great grandmother was a victim of rape in the same house.
The six men accused of raping the baby are in custody and will be appearing
in court on 23 November 2001.

A 14-month-old baby from Tweeling in the Free State was raped by her two
uncles. She also had to undergo surgery and is now recuperating at her
home. The two uncles are in custody. A three-year old girl was brutally
raped by her father in Tshirolwe village in the Northern Province. She died
on 29 October 2001. The father was arrested and will appear in court on 28
December 2001. A four-year old girl - also from the Northern Province - was
allegedly raped by her grandmother's boyfriend. The man is also in custody
and will soon be appearing in court.

More reports of sexual assaults in Rouxville, a small rural town in the
Free State, have once again shocked the country in the past week. A 13-year
old schoolgirl from IQ School in Rouxville was raped by a 37-year old truck
driver at gunpoint. She was on her way, early in the morning, to school
with a young boy of 13 years, who was able to run away and called the
police. When the police found him in the forest with the little girl, he
was busy raping her. He fired three shots at the police, but unfortunately
for him, they were able to arrest him and he is now in custody.

Four young 14-year-old girls were given a lift by two white men. They were
coming from school - the Uitkoms Community school in Rouxville. The two
white men drove them to a sportsground nearby and bought them liquor. When
they thought that they were drunk, they raped them and thereafter offered
them R50 or R20 to buy their silence. The girls went home and reported the
case to the police. The two men are now in custody and will be appearing in
court soon.

Another 10 year old girl, also from Rouxville, was raped by a 14-year-old
boy living next door. The boy is still a minor and has been given R300
bail. He has been released into the care of his parent. In Bloemfontein, at
the Joe Slovo informal settlement, an eight-year-old girl was raped by a
white man. She was sent by her grandmother to go and buy something at his
shop. The man will be appearing in court on 26 November 2001. More cases
have been reported in the North West and the Eastern Cape, where 20 girls
were raped and impregnated by their teacher. [Interjections.] The list is
long and endless. It involves both black and white rapists. Rapists do not
know any colour. [Interjections.]

Le nto yenze kwacaca mhlophe ukuba sijongene nesihelegu esigqibe ilizwe
lonke. [This has made it clear that we are faced with a tragic situation
which is world-wide.]

The reports, however, are encouraging, because people are breaking the
culture of silence. People have confidence in this Government. Our
Government is acting with speed and has caught the perpetrators of these
horrible atrocities.

We also want to urge the SABC not to promote the abuse of women through the
violent and pornographic films they shown to our children. [Applause.]
These reduce our women to mere sex objects.

We also want to object to sexist advertising, also by the SABC and various
other companies, where women are used to advertise liquor, such as in the
Hansa Pilsner advertisement. And again women are portrayed there as sex
objects.

We would like to warn all our leaders, especially the Leader of the
Opposition, their silence has been deafening on this issue.
[Interjections.] We want to make it very clear that this is not a racial
issue, but a national issue. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Ms L M T XINGWANA: We want to make it clear that because it is black
children who are involved, it does not mean that the opposition should keep
quiet.

We would like to call on all our traditional and religious leaders to take
up this cause. We believe that many of them have already started,
especially in Upington where they are in the forefront of mobilising our
communities in support of the family of the nine-month-old baby. We want to
encourage all our traditional leaders, all over the country, to take up
this cause.

We also want to expose the lie and the myth that sleeping with a virgin or
a little child will cure one of HIV/Aids. We believe that the heroes of
HIV/Aids are those men and women who have accepted their situation and
status with responsibility and made it a point that they strive to protect
the nation, and not spread the virus. Those are the heroes of our struggle
and our war on HIV/Aids.

 We also want to indicate to women, as mothers, that this also has
something to do with how we bring up our children. Drugs and alcohol are
implicated in these atrocities. We are the ones that must stand up and
expose our next-door neighbours who are involved in illegal shebeens and
also sell drugs; even to little children. We are the ones that must stand
up and ensure that we bring up our children, both boys and girls, and make
sure that we inculcate in them respect and love for one another.
[Applause.] I think it is especially important that we teach our boys to
respect their sisters, and from there to respect girls, women as well as
human life.

We also want to appeal to HIV/Aids activists to go out and make sure that
our people are informed and educated about HIV/Aids. We all know that there
is no cure for HIV/Aids at this point in time. Therefore, we need to go out
and inform our people about this. We also want to ask our traditional
healers to go out and educate the public about the fact that there is no
cure for HIV/Aids and that abusing women and raping children is not going
to cure anybody.

We commend Kimberley Hospital and its doctors who went out to expose this
lie. We also commend the traditional healer from Kimberley, Mashia, who
also stated publicly that there is no cure for HIV/Aids and that sleeping
with virgins and little children will not help to cure this disease.

I would like, therefore, to add to what the hon the Deputy President has
said, that this is an important issue facing the nation. We commend the
Deputy President for organising a summit or imbizo for early next year to
address this issue. We also urge the leaders of the opposition parties to
support this cause and to support the nation. We would like to reiterate
the fact that this debate must be supported by all of us. It must be firmly
supported, particularly in the light of the need for abhorrent acts of
child rape and abuse to be brought forth for serious discussion and for us
to make sure that the perpetrators are apprehended.

We want to make sure that no bail is given to these alleged rapists. We do
not understand how grandfathers, especially a sixty-six year old
grandfather, can be a party to these atrocities. We, therefore, want to
call on the nation as a whole, that is mothers, fathers and parents, to go
out and say: Enough is enough. Let us work together for the good of South
Africa and for the future of our children. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I want to remind you that the issue that
we are debating is not one about black or white. [Applause.] No community
in South Africa is immune. No child is immune from what is going on.
[Interjections.] Equally, the perpetrators are also black and white. So
please let us remember this. We are trying to address this not as the
Government or the opposition or party this or party that. We are trying to
come together as a nation to expose a problem and collectively address it.
So, I appeal to you to think of the children we are talking about.
[Applause.]

Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, this is not a political issue. I wish to
thank the hon the Deputy President for his message in particular. I
requested this debate for one purpose only. [Interjections.] Yes, hon
member, I requested this debate to enable Parliament, as a unit that is
constituted by our political leaders and Cabinet in particular, to face
South Africa, look our nation in the eye and acknowledge our obligation to
do whatever it will take to end this ongoing destruction of the lives of
our children. Apart from murder, the rape of an innocent child is the most
hellish manifestation of a society that is rotten to the core. When we note
with horror the rape of babies as young as nine months these deeds are
often nothing less than extended death sentences to the victims.

I also have some personal obligations. I stand here as a man and on behalf
of all decent men, today, I apologise to our mothers and children for these
acts done by demons disguised as men. For no decent man would commit such
atrocities. I could call them animals, but that would demean animals. The
true yardstick for the moral values of a society is the way in which it
treats its children. We fail miserably. A decent society cherishes and
respects its children.

Ek staan ook hier as 'n eggenoot en vader van twee dogters. Toe God in Sy
wysheid my 'n vrou en twee dogters geskenk het, het ek daarmee saam baie
spesifieke verpligtings ontvang. Behalwe om hulle lief te hê, getrou te
wees en te respekteer is daar 'n besondere verpligting om hulle te alle tye
met alles wat ek in my het te beskerm, en dit is wat my hartseer maak.

In 'n pragtige land met pragtige mense behoort ons lewens gevul te wees met
die vreugde van liefde en geluk, maar die teendeel is waar. Daagliks vrees
ek vir die veiligheid van my dierbares. Wanneer ons toelaat dat nie alleen
ons strate nie, maar dikwels ook ons huise, plekke van verskrikking vir ons
kinders word, neem ons hulle kindwees weg, die grootste onreg wat
volwassenes kan pleeg. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I also stand here as a husband and father of two daughters. When God in
His wisdom granted me a wife and two children, I received very specific
obligations along with them. Apart from loving them, being faithful to and
respecting them, there is a particular obligation at all times to protect
them with all I have within me, and this is what makes me so sad.
In a beautiful country with beautiful people our lives ought to be filled
with the joy of love and happiness, but the opposite is true. I fear daily
for the safety of my loved ones. When we allow not only our streets, but
often also our homes, to become places of terror for our children, we
deprive them of their childhood, the biggest injustice adults can commit.]

However, being a parliamentarian and the National Assembly being the forum
for today's debate, my particular obligation is as such. Although it may be
true that our first line of both offence and defence in this fight are the
Minister of Safety and Security and the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development it would also be a foolish assumption. These
horrific crimes go far beyond those particular line functions and touch all
aspects of society. Today I cannot underline enough the necessity for an
integrated approach to successfully wage this war against these demon
rapists.

Ons kan die oortreders vang, en ek bring hulde aan ons toegewyde polisie;
ons kan hulle voor ons howe bring en lewenslange vonnisse oplê, wat ons
howe in die meeste gevalle doen en waarvoor ek dankbaar is, maar permanente
sukses sal afhang van die herstel van die morele basis van ons samelewing.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We can apprehend the offenders, and I pay tribute to our dedicated police;
we can bring them before our courts and hand down life sentences, which our
courts do in most cases and for which I am grateful, but lasting success
will depend on our restoring the moral fibre of our society.]

To repair this, we need the overall assistance of NGOs, welfare
organisations and churches. Frankly, when I look at the statistics, it is
difficult to accept the amounts of money from the proceeds of the lotto
going to sports organisations which, in a very real way, disempower these
role-players.

Wanneer ek van 'n geïntegreerde aanslag praat, verwys ek nie alleen na
onderwys waar ons kinders op hulle regte gewys word nie, maar ook die
opvoeding van die gemeenskap in geheel - ook volwassenes - ten opsigte van
die regte van kinders en ons verantwoordelikheid om hulle te respekteer en
te beskerm. My kollega die agb lid Cupido sal later in die debat aandag gee
aan die maatskaplike verantwoordelikhede in ons gemeenskap.

Wanneer ek na justisie verwys, is daar ook 'n ander verantwoordelikheid.
Dit is die manier waarop hierdie jong slagoffers gehanteer word wanneer
hulle sake voorkom. Die DA is geboekstaaf dat ons reeds jare lank pleit vir
die daarstelling van voldoende kinderhowe asook geriewe om slagoffers te
beskerm wanneer getuienis gelewer word. My kollega die agb lid Waters sal
daarna verwys. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[When I speak of an integrated onslaught, I do not only refer to education,
where our children are informed of their rights, but also to the education
the community as a whole - adults included - regarding childrens' rights
and our responsibility to respect and protect them. Later on in the debate
my colleague the hon member Cupido will deal with the social
responsibilities in our community.

When I refer to justice, there is another responsibility as well. It is the
way in which these young victims are treated when their cases come up for
trial. The DA is on record as having advocated for years the establishment
of sufficient children's courts, as well as facilities to protect victims
when evidence is being given. My colleague the hon member Waters will be
referring to this.]

During the year 2000, 21 438 cases of rape and attempted rape against
children were reported. Only 1 797 or 8,38% of these  resulted in
convictions. Surely, this must indicate something very wrong within the
system. It is my contention that the problem is the way in which these
innocent victims, who often do not understand what happened to them, are
handled by the police and justice department during the investigations and
court cases. I am not criticising.

While the first line of action lies in particular with our Child Protection
and Sexual Offences Units, it is indeed disturbing that we only have 30
Child Protection Units in the whole country, with only 368 police officers
deployed out of a complement of 504. When we note the occurrence of rapes
of minor children, with more than 31 000 cases reported in the past 18
months, this does not make sense.

Today, I call on the Minister of Safety and Security to place at least one
dedicated police officer at each and every police station to see to the
protection of our children. Such a person should be well versed not only in
police skills but also in specialised training to cover an understanding of
the development and maturity of the child; a child's response to trauma;
communication with a child, including interviewing and listening skills;
ability to offer expert assistance to a traumatised child and, at least,
some medical knowledge.

These skills should also be available at our courts. Whilst restoring the
moral fabric of our society, which our hon Deputy President called for, the
only interim deterrent to perpetrators of these crimes will be the
prescribed life sentence. With the above in place we will see more
convictions.

Our children are the building blocks of the future of this country. Let us
treat them with compassion, and understand our need to respect and protect
them at all times, and ensure them a happy and secure childhood.

Kom ons, as Parlement oor politieke grense heen, neem hande met mekaar en
die samelewing daar buite. Die samelewing daar buite is 'n onmisbare
deelnemer in die herstel van hierdie probleem in ons gemeenskap. Kom ons
bou 'n vreedsame en kommervrye gemeenskap in 'n land wat mooi is en waar
ons gelukkig kan wees, maar kom ons as Parlement wys ook met dade en nie
alleen met woorde nie, dat hierdie tipe oortredings nie in hierdie mooi
land van ons geduld sal word nie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)
[Let us, as Parliament across political barriers, join hands with each
other and with society out there. Society out there is an essential
participant in the correction of this problem in our community. Let us
build a peaceful and carefree community in a country that is beautiful and
where we can be happy, but let us as Parliament show by way of deeds, and
not only with words, that this type of offence will not be tolerated in
this beautiful country of ours. [Applause.]]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Somlomo, mhlonishwa Sekela-Mongameli, bahlonishwa
oNgqongqoshe, malungu ahloniphekile ale Ndlu, kukhona abantu abagula
ngamakhanda, abacabanga ukuthi ukudlwengula izingane kungukuvimbela
iNgculazi noma ukungenwa yisifo seNgculazi.

Ngithi kumhlonishwa uSekela-Mongameli singakhuluma size sifike noma kuphi
kodwa uma umuntu ehlanya, usuke ehlanya nje, angefaniswe nomunye umuntu.
Masizame ukukhuluma nalaba abasacabanga ukukwenza lokho ukuze bazi ukuthi
uma bekwenza lokho, kuyinto engabuyiseli futhi akwakhi, kube kungeke
kumsize lowo muntu oguliswa yileso sifo. Ngeke abe ngcono, kunalokho
uyogula aze afe kunokuthi abe ngcono.

Okwesibili, indaba enkulu manje ukuthi - angazi noma yingoba sibhidlikelwa
yimizi yethu yini emakhaya - kuyabonakala ukuthi abanye abazali kithina
abakwazi ukuzibheka kahle izingane zabo. Baye baze bahambe nazo baye lapho
bephuza khona, badle amanzi amponjwana nazo. Ngithi-ke mina uma
singakakukhulumi lokho njengabantu izinto ngeke zihambe kahle. Umuntu
nomuntu ozele ingane akayiphathe njengoba naye ayephethwe unina. Kuzoba
ngcono uma abazali bekwazi lokho. Kodwa, uma abazali bezokhohlwa ukuthi
lezi zingane abazizele ngezabo, baphilise okwenyoka yona ezala maqedane
ife, kuyingozi lokho ngoba kusho ukuthi lezi zingane ezikhulayo nezizalwayo
namhlanje ngeke zibe nalo ikusasa. Ngakho-ke, uma singenabo abazali,
masakhe abazali ukuze thina esilapha eNdlini sihole abantu abaphilileyo,
hhayi abagula emakhanda futhi abangakwazi ukuzala izingane bazifukamele.

Kukhulunywa ngamadoda lapha, kuthiwa yiwo adlwengula izingane. Mina ngithi
cha, hhayi, ngiyaphika impela. Ngiyindoda ngempela mina kodwa angizange
ngidlwengule noyedwa umuntu. Ngakho makungashiwo ukuthi amadoda lawo.
[Ihlombe.] Amalungu akhona lapha ayiNdlu ehloniphekile, kanti kukhona
namadoda ahloniphekile ngaphandle. Ngakho-ke ukusetshenziswa kwaleli gama
kuthiwa ``la madoda'' kuze kuthiwe ngamadoda wonke abukeka engemahle
emhlabeni ngoba ayadlwengula, kuyigama elibi lelo. Akushiwo ukuthi yilezi
zigebengu, imigulukudu nezigelekeqe okuyizona ezenza lokho ukuze kubhekwane
nazo. Kufuneka kuyekwe ukuthi kukhonjwe noma ubani. Umhlonishwa uSekela-
Mongameli ngeke akuvuma nje ukuthi kuthiwe, njengedoda, naye-ke
uyabandakanywa nalabo. Mina-ke, njengendoda, cha angikuvumi impela lokho.
Ngakho mina ngithi laba bantu abayeke ukuthi ngamadoda. Abathi yilezi
zigebengu, imigodoyi, ukuze amaphoyisa abhekane nezigebengu nemigodoyi,
angavimbeli wonke amadoda nanjengathi nje, athembekile.

Uma ngikhuluma ngendoda, ngikhuluma ngendoda ezaziyo ukuthi iyindoda.
Ngithi kumhlonishwa uSekela-Mongameli mina-ke uma ngikhuluma ngendoda
ngiyehlukanisa. Kukhona abantu besilisa bese kuba khona amadoda. Lapha-ke
ngikhuluma ngamadoda, amadoda aziyo ukuthi ekhaya kuyadliwa, njengoba kade
esho nje umhlonishwa uSekela-Mongameli ethi kufukanyelwa izingane futhi
kufukanyelwe wonke umuzi ekhaya. Babhekelwa bonke abantu ukuthi baphephile.
Uma kukhona umnumzane ekhaya, kukhona indoda, kufanele kwaziwe ukuthi
singethintwe muntu ngoba kukhona umnumzane, kukhona indoda.

Kodwa uma sikhuluma ngalaba bantu besilisa-ke, yibo-ke laba esikhuluma
ngabo namhlanje. Bangabantu abangazi lutho olunye lokufukamela umndeni
nezingane futhi bangabantu abazi ukuthi izingane azilutho. Bangaphezu
kwegama elithi ``izilwane.'' Angifuni mina babizwe ngezilwane ngoba ngabe
sidlala ngazo izilwane. Izilwane zihlonipha kabi, azikwenzi lokhu
esikhuluma ngakho. Ngakho-ke akufuneki ukuthi sifanise abantu abagangayo,
imigulukudu nezigelekeqe, siyifanise nezilwane ngoba izilwane zingcono
kakhulu. Uma zizihlalele laphaya ehlathini, zizihlalela kahle nje
kungabikho lutho, ngaphandle-ke uma umuntu esuka eyodlala ngazo-ke bese
nazo zimdlala.

Mina ngiyahlupheka ngoba mhlawumbe laba bantu esikhuluma ngabo abakwazi
ukushela. Ukushela umuntu kuyinto enhle kabi. Kuyinto enhle kabi nje
ukuvuma komuntu athi: ngiyakuthanda sibanibani. [Uhleko.] Kodwa laba bantu
esikhuluma ngabo lapha kusho ukuthi abakwazi lokho. Inkinga enkulu uma
umuntu engakwazi ukuxoxa nomunye umuntu ongaphesheya kwakhe ngoba kusho
ukuthi lowo muntu unenkinga yokuphila nabantu. Manje lowo muntu
uyovalelwaphi-ke ngoba nomhlonishwa uSkosana uzothi amajele akhe agcwele?

Inkinga ekhona ukuthi sinabantu abangakwazi ukubhekana nabanye abantu,
abangakwazi ukuxoxa kahle nabo. Yileyo nkinga esinayo lapha. Umuntu uma
edlwengula ingane enezinyanga eziyisishiyagalombili usuke esho ukuthini
ngempela? Kusho ukuthini ngempela lokho ngoba ayikwazi ukukhuluma, ayikwazi
kwenza lutho? Uma-ke manje singeke sikwazi ukuhlala nabanye abanumzane
ngoba kukhona izingane ezigaqayo lapho, osekuzodingeka zibalekiswe lezo
zingane ngoba kufike thina, hhawu, kuyinto embi kabi leyo. Kuyinto embi
engamukeleki, engafuneki futhi ewubunuku obuphindwe kaningi.
Ngithi-ke mina kumhlonishwa uSekela-Mongameli masingabi ngabantu besilisa,
njengoba bengishilo ukuthi kukhona umehluko phakathi kwabantu besilisa
namadoda. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers and hon members
of this House, there are people who are psychologically disturbed and who
think that raping babies will protect them from contracting Aids.

I would like to say to the Deputy President that we can talk endlessly
about this but the fact remains that if one is mad, one is simply mad, and
cannot be compared with normal people. We should try to speak to people who
are planning to do this, so that they will know that if they do it, it will
be of no use because it does not help to protect the person who is infected
with the disease. He will not recover, instead he will ail until he dies.

 Secondly, the big issue is that I do not know whether it is because our
homes are breaking down. It seems as if some parents are unable to look
after their children at home. Sometimes they go with their children to
where they drink and drink with them. What I am saying is that if we do not
discuss these things as human beings, things will not go well. Everyone
with a child must treat it in the way that he or she was treated by his or
her mother. It would be better if parents understood that. It will be
dangerous if parents forget that the children that they have given birth to
are theirs, and start behaving like a snake which dies after giving birth.
That will mean that those growing children and babies that are being born
will not have a future. Therefore, if we do not have parents, let us build
parents so that we in this House lead healthy people, not people who are
mad and fail to look after their children.

We are talking about men here. It is said that they are the ones who rape
children. I say no, I disagree. I am a man but I have never raped anyone.
Therefore, it must not be said that those are men. [Applause.] Hon members
here constitute an honourable House, and there are honourable men outside.
Therefore, the use of the words "these men" which causes people in the
world to look at men in a bad light, is not suitable for the rapists. It
must be said that people who commit these atrocities are these criminals
and gangsters so that we can deal with them. People should stop pointing
fingers at anyone. The hon Deputy President will not like the idea that as
a man he is involved in doing these things. I as a man do not agree.
Therefore, I say they should stop saying that "men are the ones who commit
these crimes". They must say crimes are committed by "these criminals,
these dogs" so that police will deal with them, and let honourable men like
me go.

When I talk about a man I am talking about someone who knows himself that
he is a man. To the Deputy President I say I am making a distinction here.
We have males and men. Here I am talking about men, men who know that
people at home need food, as the Deputy President has said that children
need to be protected as well as the whole family at home. A man ensures
that all people in the family are okay. If there is a man in the family,
members of the family know that they will not be touched by anyone because
there is a man in the house.

Now these males that we are discussing today, do not know anything about
protecting a family and children and they are the people who believe that
children are nothing. They are far beneath the word "animals". I do not
want us to call them animals because we will be soiling animals. Animals
have respect, they do not do what we are talking about here. Therefore, we
should not liken criminals and gangsters to animals because animals are far
better than they. When they are in the forest, they stay there peacefully,
except if one goes to them and teases them, then they respond the same way.

I am worried because I am thinking that maybe these people that we are
talking about here are unable to declare their love for a woman. Declaring
one's love for a woman is a very good thing. It is a good thing when
someone accepts that declaration and says: I love you, so and so.
[Laughter.] It means that the people that we are discussing here do not
know that. It is a big problem if a person cannot talk to someone sitting
opposite him, it means that that person has a problem communicating with
other human beings. Where are we going to lock up that person because even
the hon Skosana will say his prisons are full?

The problem that we have is that we have people who cannot live well with
others, and who cannot even talk well to other people. That is the problem
we have here. If a person rapes an eight-month-old baby, what does that
person really mean? Is it because a baby cannot talk? It cannot do
anything? Now if we cannot stay with other people just because there are
crawling babies in that place, they should be hidden just because we have
arrived, Hawu! That is a very bad thing! It is bad and unacceptable. It is
more that dirty.

 I would like to say to the hon Deputy President that we should not have
males, as I have said that there is a difference between males and men.]

Let us stand up as men. Let us be real men. I think that we must preach
that those people who are raping and molesting children and their wives
must know that they do not belong to the category of men. Therefore, they
must not be called men. They should be called something else. Those who are
developing languages must start looking for a word to describe these
people. [Applause.] It is very important that we, as men, must protect
ourselves because we are not in the category of rapists. Therefore, we must
not be lumped together with these animals. It will help us, therefore, to
know that all of us agree that whatever we do as Government, structures of
society and members of the public, we should help the police to apprehend
whoever is still harbouring the criminals. [Applause.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Madam Speaker, the Sowetan of 5 November 2001
reports as follows, and I quote:


  Shocking reports of the violation of children dominated the media last
  week. A nine-month-old baby was raped by six men at Upington. A 14-month-
  old baby was raped at Tweeling last Tuesday. A three-year- old girl was
  treated in hospital after being raped, allegedly by her grandfather. A
  man appeared in the Protea Magistrate's Court for raping a six-year-old
  girl. A four-year-old girl died after she was allegedly raped in the
  Northern Province last week. A two-year-old girl was allegedly raped by
  her father three days before her mother, who had Aids, died of illnesses
  related to the disease in Dobsonville. A 12-year-old girl tested HIV-
  positive a year after she was allegedly raped by her stepfather.

As the political fathers and mothers of the nation, we need to ask
ourselves whether this is the kind of freedom we envisaged for our children
when it was announced that the South African people were free at last -
free with the Constitution and the Bill of Rights which afford our children
the opportunity to grow up in a protected, normal and open society.

In order to take care of the children of this country, the Child Care
Amendment Act, Act 13 of 1999, came into operation on 1 January 2000. The
main purpose of the amendments was to provide for the establishment of
secure care facilities and for the prohibition of the sexual exploitation
of children. The Minister of Social Development, together with the Minister
for Justice and Constitutional Development, requested the SA Law Commission
to appoint a project committee to review the Child Care Act and draft
comprehensive child care legislation compatible with the provisions of the
South African Constitution, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child.

Let us just look at a few aspects contained in these documents. Firstly,
they recognise that a child occupies a unique and privileged position in
African society and that for the full and harmonious development of its
personality, the child should grow up in a family environment, and in an
atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding. Secondly, it recognises
that the child, due to the needs of his physical and mental development,
requires particular care with regard to health, physical, mental, moral and
social development. It also recognises that the child requires legal
protection in conditions of freedom, dignity and security.

States which are party to the African Charter are to adopt specific
legislative, administrative, social and educational measures to protect the
child from all forms of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment and
especially physical or mental injury or abuse, neglect and maltreatment,
including sexual abuse, while in the care of its parents. Protective
measures must include effective procedures for the establishment of special
monitoring units to provide the necessary support for the child and those
caring for it as well as other forms of prevention, treatment and follow-up
of instances of child abuse and neglect.

Participants to the charter should take appropriate measures to eliminate
harmful social and cultural practices that affect the welfare, dignity and
normal growth and development of the child, especially those customs and
practices that are prejudicial to the health or life of the child, and
those that are discriminatory to the child on the grounds of sex and other
status.

In die lig van die 31 780 gevalle van kinderverkragting gedurende die
afgelope 18 maande, doen die Nuwe NP 'n beroep op godsdienstige groepe,
burgerlike organisasies, nie-regeringsorganisasies en gemeenskapsgebaseerde
organisasies om die Regering te steun in sy poging om dié misdade te beveg.
Ons meen dat spesiale howe vir seksuele misdrywe met multidissiplinêre
steunsentrums uitgebrei behoort te word om slagoffers van seksuele misdrywe
te bemagtig. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In the light of the 31 780 cases of child rape during the past 18 months,
the New NP appeals to religious groups, civic organisations, non-
governmental organisations and community-based organisations to support the
Government in its effort to combat these crimes.

We feel that special courts for sexual offences must be extended by means
of multidisciplinary support centres to empower victims of sexual abuse.]

In conclusion, if we say we believe in the future of our country, it also
implies that we believe in our duty to look after and care for the future
of our country, namely our children. Let us not make this the
responsibility of other people. Let us all become part of this process.
[Applause.]

Miss O N MNDENDE: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, and hon members, our
society views with concern the increasing incidents of child rape which
have come to plague our country. It is indicative of a sick society.

An animal's natural instinct is to protect its offspring. It is therefore
incomprehensible and alarming when humans project themselves as a species
that preys on its own progeny. These twisted monsters are excited by the
helpless pleas, cries, agonised gasps and uncomprehending, horrified stares
of their offspring victims whom they violate with perverted impunity.
Perhaps these monsters, with their twisted minds, think that when a child
is crying or gasping, it is giggling or laughing. We have a responsibility
to deal with these psychopaths.

It is a matter of serious concern that in this House our criminal justice
system is apparently impotent to combat this and many other crimes. The
characterisation of our criminal justice system as ineffective is not
intended to score cheap party-political points. It is a mother's agonised
appeal to our natural instincts of self-preservation as a people, to take
up our responsibilities and create a normal and safe environment for our
children.

I am perturbed at the erosion of decency and the perceptible decline of the
moral fibre of the South African society. This social degeneration does not
happen in a vacuum. It underpins the collapse of social, economic, cultural
and religious systems that sustain a society. We as leaders, spokespersons
and role-models in our diverse societies should stand up and fight against
this. Society demands of us to account for our inability to give them a
safe environment.

It is not enough to report these deeds in the media and then lament about
them in our drawing rooms and erudite seminars. We have to introduce
visible and effective measures to curtail brutality and depravity. It is
now clear that the intellectual refinement and sophistication that informed
the drafting of our Bill or Rights, did not foresee a situation where our
society would have such an audacious influence. Our law enforcement
agencies and criminal justice system were never designed to deal with these
miscreants and therefore they are at a loss as to how they should handle
them.

Radical situations call for radical thought and solutions. Let us begin to
think likewise. Criminals terrorise us because they know they will get away
with it. They know that we are concerned about their human rights, which
entitles them to VIP status in prisons and early parole. People on the
ground demand the death penalty. Let us revisit this deterrent by way of a
referendum. [Applause.]

Mrs M P COETZEE-KASPER: Ke a leboha Mme Speaker le Motlatsa Presidente, ha
ke fumane sebaka puisanong ena ya masisa-pelo kajeno. Masisa-pelo a peto ya
bomme le, holoholo, masea le bana. [Thank you, Madam Speaker and Deputy
President, for the opportunity I have to speak in this very emotional
debate on the heart breaking situation where women, and more especially
babies and children, are being raped.]

Ons is kwaad. Ons is seer en ons kan nie verstaan hoe enige mens dit aan 'n
kleine kindjie kan doen, wat daardie mans in Upington voorverlede naweek
gedoen het nie. Dit is nie die enigste voorval van sy soort nie. Ek weet
van nog twee klein kindertjies wat in my provinsie verkrag is, al het dit
nie die koerante gehaal nie. So is daar nog baie sulke gevalle.

Hoe moet 'n mens dit verstaan? In die eerste plek moet ons onthou dat ons
maar onlangs uit 'n bestel gekom het wat mense as gevolg van hul kleur as
niks gereken het nie. Ons het maar eers in 1995 begin om te probeer om op
alle vlakke in ons samelewing die konsep van menseregte te laat posvat. Met
menseregte so 'n jong begrip is ons nog ver daarvandaan om werklik die
regte van vroue en kinders te laat geld.

In die tweede plek moet ons onthou dat mishandeling van kinders meer
dikwels voorkom in omstandighede van haglike armoede. Daarmee wil ons nie
voorgee dat dit net onder sulke omstandighede voorkom nie, maar
maatskaplike ontbering dra daartoe by dat ons mense die waarde van 'n kind
se lewe misken.

Ons het in Suid-Afrika goeie wette om te verseker dat kinders en vroue teen
geweld beskerm word. Die Wet op Huishoudelike Geweld bied hierdie tipe
beskerming en die wet is 'n groot vooruitgang op die ou gesinswetgewing wat
ons uit die vorige bestel geërf het. In die wet word die seksuele misbruik
van kinders eerstens beskryf as geweld. Ons moet hierdie boodskap duidelik
uitstuur. Verder sê die wet dat seksuele misbruik beteken dat mens die
regte van daardie kind skend en die Grondwet sê dat elke kind het die reg
dat sy of haar liggaam gerespekteer moet word. Dit moet die tweede deel van
ons boodskap wees. Verder praat die wet van mishandeling op verskillende
vlakke: emosioneel, liggaamlik, intimidasie en ekonomies. Dit beteken ook
dat waar die kind die basiese lewensmiddele ontsê word, ons ook moet aandag
gee aan die daaglikse behoeftes van ons kinders.

Die Suid-Afrikaanse Regskommissie is ook op die oomblik besig met die
herskryf van kinderwetgewing. In daardie nuwe wet moet ons seker maak dat
kinders se regte die uitgangspunt is, sodat ons nie net op probleme reageer
nie, maar dat ons hele manier van dink oor die voorkoming en beskerming van
ons kinders teen geweld verander. Ons moet ook sorg dat daar dienste is
waardeur die kinders se reg om in 'n gesonde omgewing groot te word en om
nie skade berokken te word nie, bevorder sal word. Soos ander sprekers
ookal aangedui het, moet ons sorg dat die strawwe wat in ons wette
voorgeskryf word, behoorlik toegepas word. Ek dink ons moet voortgaan met
ons veldtogte om mense bewus te maak van kinders se regte. Vroue moet hul
regte ken. Kinders moet hul regte ken. Mans moet hierdie regte ken en dit
respekteer. Ons in die gemeenskap moet ook begin beheer oorneem oor hoeveel
geweld ons toelaat. Ek weet die mense sê hulle kan nie in ander mense se
huishoudelike probleme inmeng nie. Ek gee toe dat dit ook te ver gevoer kan
word.

Nou vra ek saam met die Adjunkpresident: Wat het geword van ons ubuntu?
Wanneer gaan ons weer die kinders in ons gemeenskappe beskou as ons eie
kinders? As al die kinders in die gemeenskap ook myne is, dan het ek ook
die verantwoordelik om hulle te beskerm. Ons moet ook in die skole die
boodskap deurstuur, sodat kinders oral weet hoe om nee te sê. Kinders moet
weet dat as hulle mishandel word, hulle vir iemand daarvan kan vertel.
Iemand wat na hulle sal luister. Ons moet ook onderwysers in staat stel om
patrone van mishandeling te herken en hulle in staat stel om iets daaraan
te kan doen. Dit is baie belangrik, want dikwels sien 'n onderwyser of
predikant in die gemeenskap dat 'n kind mishandel word, maar hulle voel hul
hande is afgekap. Dit is noodsaaklik dat ons mense het waarnatoe hulle kan
gaan om die mishandeling van kinders aan te meld. Daarvoor het ons
maatskaplike dienste nodig, maar ons weet dat die meeste klein dorpies nie
toegang het tot sulke dienste nie. Ons moet geld bewillig om maatskaplike
dienste wat deur vrywillige organisasies en deur kerke bedryf word, te
ondersteun. Daarom moet ons ook seker maak, dat die instansies wat die
regering daargestel het om fondse te bewillig, goed funksioneer. Daar is
dikwels fondse beskikbaar, maar die aansoekvorms is so ingewikkeld en die
prosedure so moeilik dat die organisasies - veral vir die kleineres in ons
agtergeblewe gemeenskappe - sukkel om fondse te bekom. Daar is genoeg mense
wat bereid is om te werk. Ons moet dit nie vir hulle onnodig moeilik maak
nie. Ek het 'n klein gediggie hier geskryf:


  Die gehuil, gekreun van 'n kind deur geweld
  Daar is 'n gejaag na geld
  Mag en verdrukking in ons gemeenskap
  Ek het nie gevra om gebore te word nie
  Ek het nie gevra vir mishandeling nie
  Waarom doen jy dit aan my,
  Pa? Ma? Suster? Broer? Tannie? Oom en my bure?
  Ek vra net liefde aandag en beskerming van almal
  As jy dit nie vir my kan gee nie
  Waar moet ek dit kry?
  Moet my nie seermaak nie
  Want ek kan nie sê waar dit seer is nie
  Moet my nie verkoop
  Vir drank of geld nie
  Beskerm my teen alle geweld.
  Jesus het my lief
  As jy my nie liefhet nie
  Laat ek liefde, aandag en beskerming
  By iemand wat oorloop van goeie dade
  Kerke en skole
  Dis julle kinders ook
  Beskerm hulle teen die uitheemse geweld
  Wat ons kinders, vroue en oumense tref.

[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We are angry. We are hurt and we cannot understand how anyone can do to a
small child what those men in Upington did the weekend before last. This is
not the only incident of its kind. I am aware of two more small children
who were raped in my province, even though it was not reported in the
newspapers. There are many such incidents.

How is one to understand this? In the first place, we must remember that we
only recently emerged from a dispensation in which people counted for
nothing as a result of their colour. We only began in 1995 to attempt to
establish the concept of human rights at all levels in our society. With
human rights being such a young concept we are still very far from really
asserting the rights of women and children.

In the second place we must remember that the abuse of children occurs more
often in circumstances of desperate poverty. In saying that we do not want
to suggest that it only occurs under such circumstances, but social
deprivation does contribute to our people undervaluing a child's life.

We have good laws in South Africa to ensure that children and women are
protected against violence. The Domestic Violence Act offers this kind of
protection and the Act is a great improvement on the old family legislation
which we inherited from the previous dispensation. In the Act the sexual
abuse of children is firstly described as violence. We must convey this
message clearly. Furthermore, the Act says that sexual abuse means that one
is violating the rights of that child and the Constitution says that every
child has the right to have his or her body respected. That must be the
second part of our message. The Act further talks about abuse at various
levels: emotional, physical, economic; and intimidation. This also means
that where the child is deprived of basic sustenance, we must also give
attention to the daily needs of our children.

The South African Law Commission is also currently redrafting child
legislation. In that new Act we must ensure that children's rights are the
point of departure, so that we do not only respond to problems, but that
our whole way of thinking about the prevention of and protection from
violence of our children changes. We must also ensure that there are
services by way of which the children's right to grow up in a healthy
environment and not to be injured, will be promoted. As other speakers have
also indicated, we must see to it that the penalties prescribed in our laws
are properly implemented. I think we must continue with our campaigns to
make people aware of children's rights. Women must know their rights.
Children must know their rights. Men must know these rights and respect
them. We in the community must also begin taking control over the amount of
violence we allow. I know that people say they cannot interfere in other
people's domestic problems. I will concede that this can also be taken too
far.

Now, together with the Deputy President, I ask: What has become of our
ubuntu? When are we once again going to consider the children in our
communities as our own children? If all the children in the community are
also mine, then I also have the responsibility to protect them. We must
also convey the message in the schools, so that children everywhere know
how to say no. Children must know that if they are abused, they can tell
someone about it. Someone who will listen to them. We must also enable
teachers to recognise patterns of abuse and enable them to do something
about it. This is very important, because often a teacher or minister in
the community sees that a child is being abused, but they feel that their
hands are tied. It is essential that we have people who they can go to to
report the abuse of children. For that we need social services, but we know
that most of the small towns do not have access to such services. We must
vote money to support social services run by volunteer organisations and by
churches. For that reason we must also ensure that the institutions which
the Government has put in place to allocate funds are functioning well.
Often funding is available, but the application forms are so complicated
and the procedure so difficult that the organisations - particularly the
smaller ones in our disadvantaged communities - struggle to obtain funding.
There are enough people who are prepared to work. We must not make it
unnecessarily difficult for them. I have a short poem here:


     Die gehuil, gekreun van 'n kind deur geweld
     Daar is 'n gejaag na geld
     Mag en verdrukking in ons gemeenskap
     Ek het nie gevra om gebore te word nie
     Ek het nie gevra vir mishandeling nie
     Waarom doen jy dit aan my,
     Pa? Ma? Suster? Broer? Tannie? Oom en my bure?
     Ek vra net liefde aandag en beskerming van almal
     As jy dit nie vir my kan geen nie
     Waar moet ek dit kry?
     Moet my nie seermaak nie
     Want ek kan nie sê waar dit seer is nie
     Moet my nie verkoop
     Vir drank of geld nie
     Beskerm my teen alle geweld.
     Jesus het my lief
     As jy nie liefhet nie
     Laat ek liefde, aandag en beskerming
     By iemand wat oorloop van goeie dade
     Kerke en skole
     Dis julle kinders ook
     Beskerm hulle teen die uitheemse geweld
     Wat ons kinders, vroue en oumense tref.

[Applause.]]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, when South Africa was called the rape
capital of the world a few years ago, the rape of children was not a major
issue, but today, in some areas, it seems more children are being raped
than adults. Young girls are no longer safe in their own homes, communities
and even in their schools.

It is unacceptable that fathers rape their own daughters, grandsons rape
their grandmothers, uncles rape their nieces, and school teachers and
principals rape their students in classrooms and offices. The rape of a
nine-month-old baby by six men in the Northern Cape brought shame to the
nation of South Africa.

To remedy the situation, we have to find out what is wrong with such men.
We have to find out what the contributory factors are and then take bold
and decisive action against the perpetrators of such heinous crimes. I
believe this Parliament made a mistake by legalising pornography, which
inflames the passion and lust of men. For as long as we have so much
pornography in this country, including on television, the incidents of rape
of children will keep on increasing. Pornography is the theory but rape is
the action. An eleven-year-old child who rapes his baby cousin must have
seen this being done somewhere before, either on television or in
pornographic literature. This kind of abuse is learned behaviour, and not
just something that they can make up in their own heads.

Rapists and criminals in general do not fear the soft arm of the law. Men
who rape children should lose their right to life. The six men who raped
the innocent nine-month-old baby must be sentenced to death. When this
Parliament amends the Constitution early next year to allow members of
Parliament to cross the floor without losing their seats, the ACDP will
also call for amendments to sections that outlaw the death penalty because
rapists do not respect women's and children's rights. Government and courts
should not respect their right to life.

The ACDP says: Stop the rape of women and children. Stop the availability
of drugs and pornography and bring back the death penalty. We love our
children and must therefore take urgent drastic measures to protect them.
Let us make South Africa a safe haven for our children, and not a country
where they are raped and abused. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, when I was elected to Parliament, I never
thought that there would come a day when I would have to participate in a
debate in Parliament on the alarming incidents of child rape and abuse.

Die skrikwekkende voorkoms van kinderverkragting - wat 'n skande! Wat 'n
absolute verleentheid! Dit is 'n skande en 'n verleentheid dat die
Adjunkpresident van Suid-Afrika en die hoogste wetgewende liggaam van
hierdie land 'n debat moet voer oor die skrikwekkende voorkoms van
kinderverkragting. Wat 'n skande! Wat moet die wêreld van Suid-Afrika dink?
Wat sê dit van ons gemeenskappe; wat sê dit van ons gesinne? (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follow.)
[The alarming occurrence of child rape - what a shame! What an absolute
disgrace! It is a shame and a disgrace that the Deputy President of South
Africa and the highest legislative body of this country must have a debate
on the alarming occurrence of child rape. What a shame! What must the world
think of South Africa? What does this say about our communities; what does
it say about our families?]

The hon Deputy President quoted and referred to the traditional slogan
``Any child is my child''. I am sorry to say to the hon the Deputy
President that I think that not even that slogan will solve this problem
because, in some cases, these children are raped by their own family
members and they do not treat the children like their own in that sense.

Hierdie probleem sal nie deur die Departement van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit
of deur die Minister vir Justisie of deur ander wetgewing of ander
maatreëls opgelos word nie; glad nie. Hierdie afskuwelikheid sal slegs
opgelos word as daar normaliteit in die gesinslewe van gesinne in hierdie
land intree, as kinders opgevoed word om respek te hê vir ander, as daar
deur elke man 'n voorbeeld aan sy kinders gestel word oor hoe om kinders,
maar ook alle vroue, met waardigheid en respek te behandel. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[This problem will not be solved by the Department of Safety and Security
or by the Minister for Justice or other legislation or any other measures;
not at all. This abomination will only be solved once normality enters the
family life of families in this country, when children are raised to have
respect for one another, when every man sets an example to his children
about how to treat children, as well as women, with dignity and respect.]

The FF will support any action or any measure to rid our society of this
terrible and unspeakable scourge. [Applause.]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, South Africa, however beautiful this country
is, it is, in many ways, not a home for children. It is a home for adults,
for people who are over the age of, I can say, at least 16, because this
category would be less vulnerable and are able to resist and fight back. If
one cannot resist and fight back against what seems dangerous, one might be
destroyed forever or bear the scars of an ill society. If a child finds him
or herself in South Africa today and looks in the mirror, then what I have
just said is what would stare back at him or her. In many ways, we can call
it an ill society.

The World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of
Children is very specific in clauses 2 and 3. I quote:


  The children of the world are innocent, vulnerable and dependent. They
  are also curious, active and full of hope. Their time should be one of
  joy and peace, of playing, learning and growing. Their future should be
  shaped in harmony and co-operation. But for many children, the reality
  out there of childhood is altogether different.

Instead any day could be the dark day of death when countless children in
this country are exposed to dangers such as rape, abuse, abandonment,
neglect, cruelty, exploitation, and as casualties of violence and, saddest
of all, such children are at the very mercy of the failing Government. It
is possible that the Government laws to protect children might remain a
dream.

What has this country got to offer for each child that is born today or
tomorrow? According to the national crime statistics and trends of 2000 and
2001, 51 200 rapes were reported in 1999 of which thousands were children.
There was an increase of 20,8% from 1994 to 1999. The DP believes that the
ANC Government is far too bureaucratic. We need to have imaginative
proposals and solutions. Although we have a horrible legacy left over from
the apartheid era, we must strive towards changing the attitudes of our
society.

Kom ons takel die oorsake en die feite van hierdie probleem. Dit is dan
juis die ANC wat voor 1994 disinvestering voorgestaan het om die NP-
regering op sy knieë te dwing. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit op sigself het
grootskaalse werkloosheid en hongersnood tot gevolg gehad. Sedertdien is
maatskaplike verval aan die orde van die dag, in so 'n mate dat weerlose
kinders feitlik van geboorte af - twee, drie maande oud - tot in hulle
tienderjare die slagoffers word van werklose mans wat hulle oorgee aan
hierdie sinlose, demoniese dade van geweld. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Let us tackle the causes and the facts of this problem. It was in fact the
ANC who advocated disinvestment before 1994 to force the NP Government to
its knees. [Interjections.] This in itself resulted in large-scale
unemployment and starvation.  Subsequently social decline has become the
order of the day, to such an extent that defenceless children have,
practically from birth - two, three months old - until they are teenagers,
become the victims of unemployed men who indulge in these senseless,
fiendish acts of violence. [Interjections.]]

Can a man ever be punished enough after he has raped a two-month-old or a
three-year-old child? The DP proposes that the responsible Minister
considers legislation that will provide for special professional
counselling services over a specific period of time that will enable such
child victims to have the best treatment and assistance for maximum
recovery. A special fund should also be available to assist the traumatised
families.

Ek vra vandag die Adjunkpresident om iets te doen aan die justisiewette van
hierdie land en om seker te maak dat hierdie barbaarse geweldenaars
behoorlik gestraf word en nooit weer die geleentheid kry om sulke dade te
herhaal nie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I ask the Deputy President today to do something about the laws of justice
of this country and to ensure that these barbaric, violent criminals are
properly punished and are never again given the opportunity to repeat such
acts. [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members, rape is such a heinous and
morally repulsive crime. It debases the victim and leaves her with
indelible psychological and emotional scars. There are some sex-pests who
do not qualify to be called human, who perpetrate this cowardly act even
against young defenceless babies. Such hoodlums deserve maximum sentencing
such as that imposed on the bestial teacher of Itsoseng in the North West
province.

While we respect the independence of the judiciary, it is not unreasonable
to speak out that some of the sentences meted out to these louts are
ludicrous. Imagine a judge of the High Court discharging a rapist on the
grounds of an eleven-year-old victim not having taken an oath, whilst in
effect she had been raped.

Because capital punishment is out of the question in this country,
consideration will have to be given to emasculating these sex offenders,
and even stigmatising them by registering them in a national sex offenders'
register. Efforts should be mounted to inform the community whenever a
paedophile moves around in the area.

It is argued in some quarters that such dastardly acts are committed while
the offenders are in a drunken stupor or under the influence of drugs. I
reject this argument with the contempt it deserves. If unaware of what they
are doing, why are they aware that they have to force what into what on
whom?

As public representatives, let us go out there and speak out against this
moral outrage. Sex offenders should not be given any room to move around in
civilised society. Let us remember baby Tshepang and others who are in a
similar situation with love, and hope that they will grow up to overcome
the ordeal. As for the infamous rapists, may they carry the curse and never
have peace in their lives. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the alarming incidents of child rape and
abuse reveal that this nation needs healing. It is a wake-up call that much
damage has been done to this country, not only politically and
economically, but also morally. It is not enough to quote statistics. They
will not bring back babies and children who have been raped. Some have died
or have now suffered permanent psychological damage. This problem is a
challenge to this nation to soul search itself.

This country has been subjected to foreign cultural values. The country
needs an Africanist cultural revolution. Africans must go back to their
cultural roots and to their high pre-colonial standard of morality. This is
a culture that gave meaning to our unique humanity, ubuntu. In ubuntu the
raping and abuse of children is unknown.

The PAC believes that stiffer sentences must be meted out to rapists
including chemical castration, seeing that we have become a nation where
criminals have more rights than law-abiding citizens, all with the false
notion of not being brutal to criminals, no matter how brutal they are to
society, including the raping of our babies, children and women.
To prevent this insane culture of rapists and murderers in our country, the
PAC proposes the following: Firstly, we must fight to remove drugs from our
society. Horrible crimes are being committed under the influence of drugs.
Drug dealers and traffickers are murderers of our nation. They should be
shown no mercy when convicted.

Secondly, there has been a superstitious belief spread by forces of
darkness that when an HIV/Aids male patient sleeps with a young female, he
can be cured of this disease. Lastly, the moral fibre of the nation has
broken down alarmingly. All religions in our country must play their role
in helping to heal this nation morally, and return it to its spiritual
values.

The PAC extends its condolences to all families in our country which have
been affected by these alarming incidents of child rape and abuse.

Mnr P J I BLANCHÉ: Mevrou die Speaker, ek hoop van harte dat hierdie
Parlement nou tot die besef gekom het, dat ons nie net met gereelde
tussenposes hierdie ``talk shop'' sonder om doelgerigte stappe te neem wat
mense daar buite sal beskerm teen barbaarse optrede van uitvaagsels in ons
gemeenskap nie. As ons onsself nie sien as leiers van die Afrika
Renaissance, dan moet hierdie Parlement nou stappe neem wat 'n einde sal
maak aan geweldsmisdade. Parlementslede moet besluit om die Grondwet te
wysig, sodat die doodstraf opgelê moet word vir sekere geweldsmisdade,
anders sal vroue en kinders nooit veilig wees in hierdie land, boere sal
ophou boer en polisiemanne en -vroue sal elke dag sterwe.

Ons ervaar reeds dat moordenaars hierheen vlug, omdat hulle hier die
doodstraf kan vryspring. In Botswana of enige ander buurstaat sal ses mans
nie waag om 'n 9-maandeoue baba aan te rand, wat staan nog van te verkrag.
Waar in die wêreld kry 'n mens 'n moordenaar tien jaar en drie jaar
opgeskort nadat hy 'n man vyf kilometer ver agter sy bakkie aangesleep het?
Ons kan nie met gereelde tussenposes mosies uitlees in hierdie Parlement en
in debatte soos hierdie ons afsku uitspreek oor wandade wat gepleeg word,
sonder om iets daadwerkliks daaraan te doen nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Speaker, I sincerely hope that this Parliament has
now come to realise that we cannot only have these talk shops at regular
intervals without taking decisive steps to protect the people out there
from the barbaric acts of the dregs of our society. If we consider
ourselves to be leaders of the African Renaissance, then this Parliament
must now take steps to put an end to violent crimes. Members of Parliament
must decide to amend the Constitution, so that the death penalty must be
imposed for certain violent crimes, otherwise women and children will never
be safe in this country, farmers will stop farming and policemen and women
will die every day.

We are already finding that murderers flee to this country, because they
will escape the death penalty here. In Botswana or any other neighbouring
state six men would not dare to assault a nine-month-old baby, let alone
rape her. Where in the world would a murderer be sentenced to ten years'
imprisonment with three of those years being suspended after dragging a man
behind his van for five kilometres. We cannot at regular intervals read out
motions in this Parliament and express our abhorrence at misdeeds that have
been committed in debates such as this one without taking some positive
action in this regard.]

The buck stops here. If our laws do not deter criminals, and if our policy
is going to provide a safe haven for terorrists, then we must move out of
the talkshop phase and into the action phase to protect our citizens. Every
one of the relevant parliamentary portfolio committees and every member of
those committees must stand up and be counted as a member of Parliament who
says that he or she has had enough of crime in this land.

We owe it to the hundreds of murdered policemen, farmers and farmworkers.
We owe it to thousands of terrorised children and women. We owe it to South
Africans who have been killed in armed hijackings and robberies. We owe it
to all these South Africans to put our mouths where we earn our money.

I only got two minutes to talk in this debate, but it is enough. I am much
better at working than at talking. I want to earn respect rather than a
salary. [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, dit het die verkragting van 'n
negemaandeoue baba gekos om ons met 'n skok te stel voor die afgryslike
realiteite van kinderverkragting en -mishandeling in Suid-Afrika. Die
kleine babatjie van Upington weet dit nie, maar daar waar haar geskende
liggaampie herstel, het sy die Nkosi Johnson geword in die stryd teen
hierdie onmenslike euwel. Baie waar en wyse woorde is vandag in hierdie
debat gesê. Politici vat hande teen verkragting. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, it took the rape of a nine-month-old baby to
face us, horrified, with the grim realities of child rape and child abuse
in South Africa. The small baby of Upington does not know it, but where her
small body is recovering, she became the Nkosi Johnson in the battle
against inhuman evil. Many true and wise words were spoken in this debate
today. Politicians unite against rape.]

The theme of my short message is: We must strengthen the moral fibre of our
country by strengthening civil society. Yes, Government has a role to play,
especially through education and, of course, its security and judiciary
services, but the upliftment of the moral fibre of a country lies primarily
with civil society.

I am afraid civil society in South Africa has deteriorated dramatically.
Black South Africans upheld vibrant civil organisations before 1994, but
these have stagnated since the gaining of power. White South Africans on
the other hand tend to privatise their lives in a desperate effort to
escape the realities of losing power. All of us must work together for the
upliftment of a community life.

In this regard, religion and the church have a pivotal role to play. May I
assure members that the mere preaching of generally accepted human values
is not enough; because that will merely be moralising and will have little
impact on the lives of the people. No, people do find their anchors in a
specific religion with specific beliefs, rituals, communion, ceremonies
and, above all,  a personal vertical relationship, not with an unknown God.

Ons moet kennis neem van die feit dat in die breë gesien, kan die algemene
grootste gemene deler godsdiens goed klink vir vrede en harmonie, maar dit
kan leeg wees, hol en kragteloos en geen bron vir nuwe lewe nie. Getroue,
lojale gelowiges wat ook wil toesien dat hulle kinders in hul besondere
geloof opgevoed word, is nie fundamentaliste, maar die hart en die kern van
'n gesonde gemeenskap. Die owerheid moet hulle nie as 'n bedreiging sien
nie, maar as die belangrikste en voorste vegters in die loopgrawe teen
morele verval, as die belangrikste instrument om te verhoed dat mense erger
as diere word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We must take cognisance of the fact that taking a broad view, religion can
sound good as the biggest common denominator for peace and harmony, but it
can be empty, hollow and powerless and not a source of new life. Devoted
and loyal believers that also want to see to it that their children are
brought up in their particular religion, are not fundamentalists, but the
heart and soul of a healthy community. The authorities should not regard
them as a threat but as the most important and foremost fighters in the
trenches against moral decline, as the most important instrument in
preventing people from becoming worse than animals.]

Let us all work together to make every South African not a lonesome lost
individual, but a person secured and anchored in a family, a community, and
a living congregation. [Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, Deputy President and hon members, throughout
history it has been the inaction of those who could have acted, the
indifference of those who should have known better, and the silence of the
voice of justice when it mattered most that has made it possible for evil
to triumph over good. In those words, members of Government must begin to
recognise themselves, for they have either failed to act decisively to
prevent child abuse or ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Ah! Go and sit down.

Mr M WATERS: ... acted indifferently towards the issue by not giving it the
priority or the budget that it deserves and through their ill-conceived
policies created a state where justice is merely a word.

The result is a state of evil, because surely a nine-month-old baby who has
been gangraped, a three-year-old who has been chopped up and left in a
bucket, and 13-year-olds who have been prostituted by their own family
members, is evil. But, what is worse? The sick perpetrators of these
hideous acts or a Government that sits idly by, watching the children of
South Africa suffer?
I want this House to know that child abuse goes beyond opposition politics.
I am not standing here merely as an opposition MP, but as a truly disgusted
citizen who is outraged by the Government's totally inadequate response to
this crime being committed against our children. As a citizen I know
precisely the anger and frustration that prompted Dr Heather McCabe to
write letters to everyone she could think of and to start an e-mail
campaign, expressing the extreme anger and frustration that every decent
South African is feeling throughout the country.

In order to understand the extent of the problem, I ask members to
visualise a packed Ellis Park Stadium which has a capacity of 55 000
people. Now overpack that stadium with 10 000 additional people, convert
those 65 000 people, that is the sport fans, to  65 000 babies, infants and
children, and what one is seeing are the numbers who were reported abused,
raped and murdered in the year 2000 alone. It excludes unreported cases.

Of those 65 000 children, only 7 000 received justice through the courts,
meaning that 10,7% of all reported cases ended in a successful conviction.
In other words, a child rapist, batterer or murderer has nearly a 90%
chance of getting away with it. Lives are literally being destroyed while
members of Parliament live in their sheltered offices putting other things
first. [Interjections.] I want to tell the Minister that this is the
perception out there.

We do not need more diatribes, we need action. [Interjections.] For a
start, this House needs to insist on the implementation of its own laws,
and in this case, the Criminal Law Amendment Act, which provides for
children's courts in every magisterial district, thereby better
facilitating the process of giving evidence for these already traumatised
children.

In reply to a question I asked, the Minister for Justice admitted that a
shocking 201 magisterial districts were still without children's courts,
and that it would cost just over R14 million to install all these
children's courts. Yes, only R14 million, which is nothing when one
considers that it will go a long way in securing more convictions and
making our communities safer places overall. But, of course, the Government
claims that it does not have this R14 million, while it does have R90
million for a racism conference and R1,5 billion to bail out the Post
Office. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Sit down. Go back to the
kindergarten. [Interjections.]

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, it does not have R14 million to bring rapists
and murderers to justice. Is this due to the fact that children have no
political voice or merely because the Government has other priorities? I
would like to leave the House with one thought for today - there is no
excuse for child abuse. [Applause.]

Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon members, I will
resist the temptation to respond to some of the remarks that have been made
here and rather take the advice of the Speaker that we must approach this
debate in a positive manner.

The first time that I was called to make an intervention in a child rape
and abuse case was some years back in the mining town of Welkom, when I was
called by a local parents' organisation to try and rescue a 14-year-old
girl who had been abducted by men to a men's hostel. She was kept there
against her will and repeatedly raped, and we only managed to rescue her 25
hours later.

I will never be able to begin to imagine the trauma and suffering that this
young child experienced during her ordeal, particularly because her
powerlessness was compounded by the fact that she was voiceless. She was
unable to speak. She was extremely defenceless and helpless in the presence
of the aggressors. To this day, the question has always remained with me:
Why do men have to exert their misguided, perceived powers so violently
against vulnerable children and women? What is it that makes some men want
to prove their manhood through a forceful and excessive display of
misguided violence?

We often talk about rape and abuse in a particular way and talk as if
everybody understands the gravity of the actual act, but do men really
comprehend its meaning? Perhaps we should talk about child abuse and start
talking about a child. The Child Care Act defines a child as a male or
female person between the ages of 8 and 18 years. And the Oxford Dictionary
describes a child as a young human being below the age of full physical
development.  This put simply means that it is a young and growing human
being who is embarking on a journey through a process of transformation
from innocence, defencelessness and incapability to one that is, hopefully,
informed, capable and responsible and to assist this young person through a
healthy development and transformation process into adulthood. It needs a
loving, nurturing and a caring adult, whom this young being can feel
connected to, cared about and protected.

The dictionary says that abuse is: ``Used to bad effect or purpose, to
treat with cruelty or violence, to assault sexually, to address in an
insulting or offensive way''. It is an intended action that brings into
play the element of power, on the one hand, and helplessness on the other.
It is often expressed through various forms such as mistreatment, cruelty,
maltreatment, violence, neglect and exploitation.

And, if one were to take a situation where a child has fallen victim to
rape and abuse, then most often, it would be expressed through aggressive
violence to the point of brutality and this against the pureness and
innocence that we all, at one stage in our lives, experienced. The known
aggressors and violators of such innocence are almost always adult males -
men. And the question still is: Why?

If we as leaders and protectors of this nation have to move or remove this
huge unsightly thorn from the moral flesh and fibre of South African
society, then we need to trace the roots of this evil, which has now
embedded itself almost to the point where it has become a commonality and
part of our daily lives. In recognising the need to rectify this, we need
to ascertain and acknowledge its root causes.

Today's youth are the offspring of the old ones of the past era, most of
whom have grown up without a role model to guide them in their development
because some of their fathers were involved in the liberation struggle,
some were building the new South Africa, and some were active in mining as
migrant labourers. This resulted in the youth of the new millennium, when
spoken of, conjuring up images of crime, HIV prevalence, poor academic
performances, and a total lack of interest in politics and society in
general.

Reflecting on this passage of transformation we also have to acknowledge
that the advent of gender equity within the new South Africa has caught men
unaware and unprepared, and literary pulled the rug out from under their
feet. Men primarily believed and lived with the notion that they own and
have power, and therefore perceived themselves to be powerful. Men
understood real power to mean being in control of any given situation on
the one hand, and controlling the destiny of one's own domain and those
within it on the other. Where they confront barriers to the exercising of
their power, physical force is used as the next resort to enforce and
instil their power. It never occurs to them that power can be and should be
shared and negotiated, even within the domestic domain.

However, whilst we progress in the empowerment and development of our
women, our men, as a parallel route of empowerment, were not taken along in
a similar process that would enable them to understand the new concept of
sharing power with the opposite sex. So is it perhaps not that this is a
much-needed supported form of transformation and development for men of
today, and the missing piece when seeking the answers behind the cruelty of
child rape and abuse.

The current affirmation of the female identity as equal is evident in the
employment market, the continuing independence of women and the confidence
with which they display their day-to-day lives in activities. Do real men
feel threatened by this achievement? Is it causing them to feel insecure to
the extent that they have become so vulnerable that they need to resort to
situations where they are creators of illusions where they perceive
themselves to be powerful beings? And is it not that now that gender
equality and empowerment have become a part of our lives, the next best
victim to receive and express this perceived power within a most abusive
and aggressive manner is the young and innocent child? Is it not time to
identify, within the modern South Africa, irrespective of culture, creed
and social status amongst ourselves as men, what constitutes a real man,
more specifically within this changing culture of gender and role
transformation?

It is of much concern that it had to take another victim of child rape and
abuse to bring men together in this House to talk about, debate and discuss
the issue in the open. But is it not time for us men to inwardly reflect on
our own perception of power and acknowledge without reservation that we
have to learn to understand and accept our new role within shared power in
this new and young democracy of ours? We have to acknowledge that we need,
as a first step to redress, to start with ourselves here in this
Parliament, as the much-needed role- models to men and the youth out there,
and that we need to set an example and participate in the campaign titled:
"Real men do not rape’’.

It is our collective responsibility to find within the real man and bring
him to the fore, as part of setting an example, and in doing so, embark on
a new passage of healing, guiding and sharing. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:  Madam
Speaker, hon Deputy President and hon members, we have, all of us, been
shattered by the recent spate of rape and abuse against our children.
Public comment has been angry, emotional, confused and strident in its
condemnation of these appalling assaults. Let us not, in our anger, lose
sight of the central issue. Rape is not a sexual act, it is an act of
violence perpetrated by the powerful over the powerless. These incidents
highlight in stark and shocking detail how race, class and gender conspire
to rob the most vulnerable of their human dignity, and speak centrally to
the perceived and actual power and balances that hold sway in our society.

In respect of this specific incident in Upington, the Director for Public
Prosecutions in the Northern Cape has assured my Minister, Dr Penuell
Maduna, that the matter will be handled by an experienced senior prosecutor
and will be heard in a High Court. The accused will remain in custody until
23 November. The Upington community in particular, expressed anger about
last week's postponement of the case. We need to remind ourselves that our
Constitution guarantees every person a fair trial and the accused must be
given time to secure legal representation.

In circumstances such as these, anger is understandable, but it is time for
us to do something positive, thoughtful and meaningful, something that
makes a difference. I believe that this onslaught against children and
women will not cease until men become part of the solution. Each one of us
has a father, a husband, a son, a brother or an uncle.

On the 25th of this month, the 16 days of activism for no violence against
Women begins. Let us embrace this opportunity to recommit ourselves to
making our women and children safe and free from fear of violence. These 16
days provide the ideal opportunity to sensitise and involve men and boys
proactively in the fight against violence and abuse.

Just this morning, I attended a workshop organised by the Gender Advocacy
Programme. The theme of the workshop was "Building Peace in the Home:
Integrated Strategies for Change". Two of the items on their agenda were
particularly relevant to today's debate. They discussed ``Life-skills
development programmes with youths to impact on changing gender roles'',
and ``Working with men to change the prevalent attitudes and perceptions
that lead to violent and abusive behaviour''.

These two topics, I believe, speak to the very heart of our debate, and the
challenge, both for the Government and civil society, will be how to reach
and interact with the maximum number of boys and men within manageable and
realistic timeframes. As indicated by the Deputy President and other
speakers here today, the promotion and protection of our children's rights
enjoy priority status in our governance structures and in the Justice,
Crime Prevention and Security Cluster in particular.

Recognising the need for fundamental transformation in our society and
changing particularly the way in which that society views and treats its
most vulnerable, law reform has provided a powerful instrument for
effecting change and protecting the rights of our citizens, children, women
and men. In this we are guided by our Constitution, which lays down the
principles for change and transformation, including a special reference to
children and their best interest. It does so by entrenching far-reaching
provisions to protect them from abuse, all forms of exploitation and any
other action that may infringe upon or compromise their rights in any way.

We are further guided by our accession in 1995 to the UN Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child. The world community has underlined the importance of ensuring
that children's human rights are given special attention by the almost
universal ratification of the UN Convention.

We have an exceptional body of laws to combat violence and restore the
dignity of those whose rights have been violated. The Child Care Act and
the Sexual Offences Act specifically prohibit sexual abuse and exploitation
of children. These Acts are currently under review to make them even more
comprehensive and effective. The host of special legal instruments,
approved by this Parliament since 1994, have empowered law enforcement
agencies to act against the perpetrators of violence against children and
women.

I believe that when we look at children we see our future. They are our
most precious asset, and as such, they deserve to be cherished, nurtured
and allowed to develop in the best possible circumstances that we as a
society, can provide. Historically, though, the majority of our children
have experienced oppression, loss of dignity, terrible suffering, and all
too frequently death resulting from social and economic deprivation, not to
mention political persecution. Lack of access to education, health
services, protection from the elements and adequate nutrition has left our
children, particularly African children, in dire straits.

While the Government dedicates itself to the enormous challenges that face
it in this specialised area of our law, it is important to note that the
conspiracy of silence that surrounds incidents of domestic abuse and
violence continues to undermine effective law enforcement. All too often
violence in the home is regarded as a "family or private matter", and in
such cases friends, neighbours, social workers and the police are reticent
to intervene. Whether at home or on the street, whether behind closed doors
or in a public place, violence is violence, and failure to act further
imperils those most at risk.

In today's world of altered family structures and the ever-increasing
pressures of urbanisation on the one hand, and rural impoverishment on the
other, the state has an increasingly significant role to play in the
protection of our children. And this protection becomes increasingly
important when the perpetrators of domestic violence are shielded by a
devastating social irony - that this violence is more often than not meted
out by persons related or known to the victim and often in the sanctity of
their own homes.

Critical to the successful implementation of this legislation is the
integration of services provided by the participating departments. The
cluster approach to cross-sectoral matters has proved a useful tool in
managing the rigorous demands of this legislation.

The President, Mr Thabo Mbeki, has accorded this issue the importance and
status it deserves. The Office on the Status of the Child, situated in the
Presidency, provides the essential leadership and guidance in accordance
with the activities of the various line departments. Regular contact with
that Office has added a new dimension and efficacy to the cluster process.
This work process has set new standards for co-operative and integrated
task management.

The effectiveness of this legislation, though, is also dependent on other
aspects of law and legal processes. In this regard we have developed
legislation that places a particular onus on the courts in respect of
conditions of bail in these matters. Perpetrators of violent acts will not
be granted bail unless the courts find exceptional circumstances exist for
not applying the prescribed provisions. Legislation that regulates
sentencing has also been passed, and this ensures that judicial offices in
serious cases have to apply extremely strict minimum sentences unless
substantial and compelling reasons not to apply them prevail.

In terms of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, the maximum sentence for the
sexual abuse of a child could be life imprisonment, but the decision to
impose the maximum sentence lies ultimately with the judiciary. Measures to
sensitise a judicial officer to the very special circumstances that prevail
in domestic violence and sexual abuse cases, form a major part of the
justice college's ongoing training and education programme. Recently, a
judge in the Pretoria High Court sentenced a man to life imprisonment after
he was convicted of raping a seven-year-old girl. The deterrent message
carried in this sentence is unequivocal, and it is not an isolated case. By
September this year 69 convicted offenders had been handed life sentences
for crimes committed against children.

While in the past testimony by children was subject to rigorous
interrogation, often to the detriment of the victim, the SA Law
Commission's investigation into process and procedure will further regulate
and simplify testimony of child victims in our courts. The establishment of
specialised sexual offences courts has made it easier for children to give
evidence in court in a child-friendly environment. Separate testimony
rooms, closed-circuit television facilities and separate witness waiting
rooms are but some of the facilities that feature in this unique court
environments. Children and women are turning to these courts in increasing
numbers, because they stand a real chance of obtaining effective remedies
against sexual and domestic violence. In these environments dedicated
investigating officers, specifically trained prosecutors and forensic
medical practitioners combine their skills to support victims and survivors
as they make their way to the criminal justice system.

A partnership between a National Prosecuting Authority and the Department
of Health at the Jooste Hospital in the Cape Flats has managed to sustain
their prosecution rate of over 80% since soon after its inception. This is
extraordinary, even by international standards. On the train-the-trainer
basis similar units have been opened at the Somerset West and Mdantsane
hospitals. We acknowledge that until the programme for sexual offences is
rolled out to all parts of the country, especially the rural areas, access
to these specialised services will be limited over the short to medium
term.

Due to funding constraints, the process has, of necessity, to be
incremental. Demand for these services far exceeds the parameters of
currently available resources. We are in the process of creating decision
packages that will compete for funding on the basis of capacity, to add
value to service delivery. In short, we are designing a delivery framework
that will be reflected appropriately in our budget and in our actions.

However, reducing the level of violence in our society cannot be the sole
responsibility of the state or Government. Unless communities act
positively and proactively to stem the tide, the impact of our efforts
would continue to be compromised. Failure to report the sexual abuse of
children and the withdrawal of cases after they have been reported,
frustrate our best efforts to make meaningful inroads in this area of law
enforcement. Failure to report sexual offences impacts negatively on the
overall safety and security of vulnerable groups such as women and
children. If rape is not reported, it cannot be responded to. And
withdrawing cases after they have been reported reinforces the belief
amongst perpetrators that they can act violently and with impunity. It also
increases the potential for further acts against other victims if the
perpetrators are not brought to book.

Owing to a combination of factors, not all reported rape cases result in
prosecution. We have established these specialised courts to eliminate
those factors that militate against prosecution and to provide an
empowering environment that addresses the fears and concerns of victims and
survivors of rape.

Encouraging results are already emerging from all our sexual offences
courts. Consolidated and improved prosecutorial services and the user-
friendly court environment have been pivotal in the campaign to combat
violence against women and children. It has also become a key to improving
the interface between victims and the different facets of the criminal
justice system.

We must, as a community, eradicate abuse and violence by encouraging
victims to report violations, and then stick with the processes and they
progress to the court system. We understand that the court process can be
frightening, and we appeal to friends and relatives to support victims and
survivors who find themselves in these circumstances.

Before I conclude, I must caution members that in the clamour for harsh
action against the perpetrators of sexual offences against women and
children, we might lose sight of the very people that really need our help
- the victims and survivors of these acts. The focus on what action we take
against sexual crime offenders should never overshadow the restorative
processes we provide to address their plight. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                HIGH INCIDENCE OF RAPE AND ABUSE OF CHILDREN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby move
without notice that the House-


  That the House -


     (1)    notes the shockingly high incidence of rape and abuse of
         children and babies across our country;


     (2)    also notes that South Africa is not only a signatory of the UN
         Convention on the Rights of the Child, but has also passed some of
         the world's most progressive laws aimed at promoting and
         protecting those rights;


     (3)    believes that each incident of rape and abuse of children is not
         simply an isolated event, but an intrinsic part of the historic
         abuse of children that has manifested itself over the centuries in
         -


         (a)     child slavery;


         (b)     child labour;


         (c)     child pornography;


         (d)     the child trade;


         (e)     hunger, poverty and disease;


         (f)     abuse; and


         (g)     rape;


     (4)    agrees to take the fight to the perpetrators by -


         (a)     holding public hearings on child rape and abuse to analyse
              its causes, and inform our counter-strategies appropriately;


         (b)     mobilising all our communities and the public sector to
              fight and expose this scourge; and


         (c)     campaigning for the harshest punishment permissible under
              the Constitution;


     (5)    reminds South Africans that this unacceptable social behaviour
         goes against the grain of the cultural traditions of all our
         people; and


     (6)    calls on all South Africans, as individuals, sectors and
         communities, to unite in the fight against child rape and abuse.
Agreed to.

[Applause.]

                    WELCOMING OF DELEGATION FROM NAMIBIA

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before I go on to the next item on
the Order Paper, I would like to recognise the delegation from Namibia
which is led by the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee of their
parliament and also accompanied by the Auditor-General. We would like to
welcome them to this Parliament. [Applause.]

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr R J B MOHLALA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  reports of the Taliban retreat from the city of Kabul in
           Afghanistan as Northern Alliance forces march through the city;


       (b)  that the news of the fall of the Taliban regime was received
           with joy by the masses of the people of Afghanistan; and


       (c)  that the United Nations is preparing for a transitional
           government to govern the country;


  (2) calls on the masses of the people of Afghanistan to work towards -


       (a)  the restoration of human rights which were eroded as a result of
           the deliberate disregard of such rights by the oppressive and
           repressive Taliban government; and


       (b)  ever-lasting peace, democracy and national unity; and


  (3) calls on the international community to mobilise resources to assist
       the people of Afghanistan in the implementation of the post-war
       recovery programme and the building of a sovereign state based on a
       universal Bill of Rights.

[Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  despite the ANC's publicity stunt in the form of the overpriced
           and pretentious ``imbizo’’ campaign, depressed places such as
           Bizana in the Eastern Cape are crying out for relief and
           substantial delivery in return for the votes given to the ANC;
           and


       (b)  the ANC's neglected and inefficient governance makes a mockery
           of the so-called ``the people have spoken mandate’’; and


  (2) calls on the ANC to deliver to Bizana before delivering to Burundi,
       even though it is ``neighbourly’’ to do so, because charity should
       really begin at home.

[Interjections.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) received with shock the sad news that an Eastern Cape police station
       commissioner, Captain Andries Japhta, 34, shot dead his wife,
       children and himself early yesterday morning;


  (2) wishes to extend its condolences to the next of kin of both the
       husband and the wife during their period of mourning;


  (3) believes that there may be really serious emotional or other problems
       experienced by the members of the SAPS, as revealed by the spate of
       suicides and family murders; and


  (4) appeals to the Ministry and the Department of Safety and Security to
       commission a holistic investigation into this matter with a view to
       remedying the situation.

Mr M U KALAKO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  reports that former President Nelson Mandela berated US
           President Bush for agreeing to meet Ariel Sharon and yet
           refusing to meet President Arafat; and


       (b)  that ex-President Mandela has proposed that attempts to resolve
           the ongoing conflict in the Middle East be handled by a
           mediation committee composed of a number of countries, not a
           single country;


  (2) believes that the proposals made by Comrade Mandela will go a long
       way towards achieving a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
       Middle East; and


  (3) expresses its full support for the proposals made by former President
       Mandela.

[Applause.]

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Voorsitter, hiermee gee ek kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met skok kennis neem van die tragiese gesinsmoord gister in
       Jansenville, toe die stasiekommissaris, inspekteur Andries Japhta, sy
       vrou en drie kinders doodgeskiet het voordat hy ook sy eie lewe
       geneem het;


  (2) kennis neem van die uiters stresvolle werksomstandighede van
       polisielede en dat navorsers bevind het dat die gemiddelde aantal
       selfmoorde onder polisielede in Suid-Afrika 130 per 100 000 is, die
       hoogste in die wêreld, terwyl dit in oorsese lande nagenoeg 18 per
       100 000 is; en


  (3) 'n beroep doen op die Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit en die
       Polisiekommissaris om dringend aandag te skenk aan -


       (a)  die emosionele welstand van die SAPD deur te verseker dat hulle
           toegang het tot die nodige professionele sielkundige dienste; en


         b) ander faktore soos personeeltekorte en swak betaling wat lei
            tot beroepsmatheid en emosionele spanning.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) takes note with shock of the tragic family murder committed in
       Jansenville yesterday, when the station commander, Inspector Andries
       Japhta, shot and killed his wife and three children, before taking
       his own life;


  (2) takes note of the extremely stressful working conditions of members
       of the police and that researchers have found that the average number
       of suicides amongst members of the police in South Africa is 130  per
        100 000, the highest in the world, while in countries abroad it is
       approximately 18 per 100 000; and


  (3) appeals to the Minister of Safety and Security and the Police
       Commissioner to give urgent attention to -


       (a)  the emotional wellbeing of the SAPS by ensuring that they have
           access to the necessary professional psychological services; and




       (b)  other factors such as personnel shortages and poor remuneration
           which lead to occupational fatigue and emotional stress.]

Mr D G MKONO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the Glazewski report which severely criticises the deal
       between the National Botanical Institute and the Chicago-based Ball
       Horticultural Company, and confirms the UDM's concerns by stating
       that the deal is not beneficial for South Africa, and recommends that
       it be renegotiated;


  (2) notes -


       (a)  that this is in line with the concerns expressed since April
           this year, during which the party called for intervention on the
           deal; and


       (b)  the concerns raised regarding the impact of this deal on
           floriculture, ecotourism, potential economic opportunities and
           pharmaceutical and related industries; and


  (3) urges the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs to intervene and
       suspend this deal, pending further negotiations, and thereby act in
       the best interest of all the people of South Africa.

Mr G C OOSTHUIZEN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the massive outcry against the light sentence passed on Piet
       Odendaal for killing his employee, Mr Mosoko Rampuru;


  (2) believes that -


       (a)  racially inclined acts of violence should be met with the full
           might of the law; and
       (b)  the brutality of Piet Odendaal's actions warranted a stiffer
           sentence; and


  (3) welcomes the standpoint of the National Director of Public
       Prosecutions to seek a stiffer sentence in the event of Piet
       Odendaal's appeal against his piecemeal sentence.

[Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern and outrage that reports indicate a clear increase
       in child rape cases in South Africa;


  (2) notes that the Government has been slow to act in addressing the
       urgent problem of child abuse and rape;
  (3) further notes that it is ironic that the Government is now moving
       towards proper protection for children, when this kind of crime
       perpetrated against children has been occurring for a long time;


  (4) calls on the Government to provide all child rape victims with
       immediate access to antiretroviral drugs, with compulsory HIV
       testing;


  (5) notes that the family is the foundational building block of society
       and that it is the Government's responsibility to protect it and
       create an environment in which families can grow and flourish; and


  (6) calls on the Government to commit itself to ensuring that, with each
       case of reported child abuse or rape, the perpetrators are convicted
       and receive harsh sentences without the option of bail.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, hiermee gee ek kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die AEB sal voorstel:

  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met kommer daarvan kennis neem dat die Parlement se Staande Komitee
        oor Openbare Rekenings bevind het dat die Departement van Justisie
        en Staatkundige Ontwikkeling se finansiële kontroles in 'n
        chaotiese toestand is;


  (2) met kommer kennis neem dat die gebrek aan kontrole betrekking het op
        die departement se depositorekening vir trustgelde, met 'n omset
        van R3,7 miljard per jaar;


  (3) daarop let dat die betrokke finansiële beheerbeampte die situasie
        beskryf as 'n "nasionale krisis" en 'n "nagmerrie";


  (4) die verskoning van die direkteur-generaal dat hierdie toestand te
        wyte is aan die gebrek aan opleiding tydens die apartheidsera
        verwerp, aangesien agt jaar reeds intussen verloop het;


  (5) meen dat hierdie onbekwaamheid eerder toegeskryf moet word aan die
        onoordeelkundige toepassing van regstellende aksie en ander optrede
        van die Regering wat gelei het tot die uitvloei van bekwame
        personeel en onmisbare ervaring; en


     6) aanbeveel dat onmiddellike stappe gedoen word om die onbevredigende
        situasie reg te stel, waaronder die heraanstelling van ervare
        personeel wat uit diens gestel is.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the AEB:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that Parliament's Standing Committee on Public
       Accounts found that the financial controls of the Department of
       Justice and Constitutional Development are in a chaotic state;


  (2) notes with concern that the lack of control refers to the
       department's deposit account for trust funds, with a turnover of R3,7
       billion per annum;


  (3) notes that the relevant financial control officer describes the
       situation as a ``national crisis'' and a ``nightmare'';


  (4) rejects the excuse of the director-general that this state of affairs
       is as a result of a lack of training during the apartheid era, since
       eight years have already passed in the meantime;


  (5) is of the opinion that this incompetence should rather be attributed
       to the injudicious application of affirmative action and other
       actions of the Government which led to the departure of competent
       personnel and indispensable experience; and


  (6) recommends that immediate steps be taken to rectify the
       unsatisfactory situation, including the reappointment of experienced
       personnel who were dismissed.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, can you please show
respect to those members who are reading the motions. You are sitting right
behind a member who is reading a motion and making a noise so that we
cannot even hear what he is saying. Can we please respect each other!

Mr R P ZONDO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  stolen goods worth R5 million have been recovered since the
           start of Operation Thunderstorm in Johannesburg; and


       (b)  the National Crime Prevention Strategy is proving to be a
           success as it is turning the tide against gangsterism in the
           Western Cape;


  (2) believes that the recovery of stolen goods reflects the commitment of
       the Government to working towards a crime-free society; and


  (3) commends members of the South African Police Service for reducing
       levels of crime in our society.

[Applause.]

Mnr S E OPPERMAN: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die DA sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -
  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat die stryd om die premierskap tussen die Nuwe
       NP-leierskap en die ANC in die Wes-Kaap in alle erns begin het;


  (2) ook daarvan kennis neem dat die Nuwe NP-leierskap se aanbeveling
       gegrond is op die veronderstelling dat hulle kandidaat groter bruin
       steun geniet en volgens hulle 'n Christen is, en dus meer aanvaarbaar
       is, in teenstelling met die ANC-kandidaat wat 'n Moslem is;


  (3) glo dat dié verdelende en selfvernietigende benadering van die Nuwe
       NP nog steeds ooreenstem met die benadering van die ou NP; en


     4) 'n beroep doen op die amper gewese Nuwe NP om die speletjies met
        rassisme en godsdiens te staak en die basiese beginsels van die
        Grondwet, waartoe hulle hul met hul inhuldiging as lede van hierdie
        Parlement verbind het, te eerbiedig.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the DA:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the battle for the premiership between the New NP
       leadership and the ANC in the Western Cape has begun in earnest;


  (2) also notes that the New NP leadership's recommendation is based on
       the presumption that their candidate enjoys greater coloured support
       and is, according to them, a Christian, in contrast to, and therefore
       more acceptable than, the ANC candidate, who is a Muslim;


  (3) believes that this divisive and self-destructive approach of the New
       NP is still in accord with the approach of the old NP; and


  (4) appeals to the almost defunct New NP to stop the games involving
       racism and religion and to respect the basic principles of the
       Constitution, to which they committed themselves upon their induction
       as members of this Parliament.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Mr Opperman, we have ruled in the
past that you can only move a motion in the name of your own party and not
in the name of another party which is not in this House. Please, do
remember that.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) express its concern about the murders and the safety of the members
       of the SA Police Service, despite their goodwill in ensuring the
       safety and security of the public at large;


  (2) notes that there are safety precautions that they should also follow
       to ensure their safety, such as wearing bulletproof vests, but that,
       in most cases, they neglect to do so;


  (3) further notes that, in combatting criminal activity,  there is no
       100% absolute safety but these safety precautions have a positive
       impact on the reduction in police deaths; and


  (4) resolves that the senior management of the SAPS should regulate the
       wearing of bulletproof vests as an obligation on all police
       officials, especially those who deal directly with crime.

Ms F HAJAIG: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  children from Laudium schools organised by Lamwa have collected
           food and clothing for distribution to adults and children who
           suffer from HIV/Aids and tuberculosis; and


       (b)  this food and clothing will be distributed in Ivory Park, Ebony
           Park, Phomolong, Kanana and other informal settlements in the
           area;


  (2) commends the patriotism and solidarity displayed by these
       schoolchildren and women; and


  (3) calls on all people, young and old, to emulate this important
       example.

[Applause.]

Mnr F J VAN DEVENTER: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op
die volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem -


       (a)  van die welslae wat die personeel van Operation Neptune behaal,
           asook die moeilike omstandighede waaronder hulle werk ten einde
           Suid-Afrika se mariene bronne te beskerm teen stropers en
           smokkelaars;


       (b)  dat sedert Operation Neptune in Augustus 2000 aanvang geneem
           het, is 1 226 verdagtes in hegtenis geneem, afkoopboetes van
           R189 000 uitgereik en 59 voertuie gekonfiskeer is;


       (c)  dat 12 bote en sleepwaens en perlemoen ter waarde van R12,9
           miljoen ook gekonfiskeer is;


       (d)  dat personeel van Operation Neptune hulself dikwels onder skoot
           bevind tydens gewelddadige konfrontasies met stropers; en


       (e)  Operation Neptune daarin geslaag het om hierdie welslae te
           behaal ten spyte van 'n tekort aan personeel en hulpmiddels; en


     2) 'n beroep doen op sy lede om almal wat betrokke is by Operation
        Neptune, te bedank en geluk te wens met die toewyding waarmee die
        manne en vroue Suid-Afrika se waardevolle bronne soos perlemoen
        beskerm.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr F VAN DEVENTER: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes -


       (a)  the success achieved by the staff of Operation Neptune, as well
           as the difficult conditions under which they work to protect
           South Africa's marine resources from poachers and smugglers;


       (b)  that since the inception of Operation Neptune in August 2000, 1
           226 suspects have been arrested, spot fines of R189 000 issued
           and 59 vehicles confiscated;


       (c)  that 12 boats and trailers and abalone to the value of R12,9
           million have also been confiscated;


       (d)  that staff of Operation Neptune often find themselves being shot
           at during violent confrontations with poachers; and


       (e)  Operation Neptune has managed to achieve this success despite a
           shortage of staff and resources; and
  (2) appeals to its members to thank and congratulate everyone involved in
       Operation Neptune on the dedication with which these men and women
       protect South Africa's precious resources like abalone.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that President Mbeki neglected to address some very important
       issues in his statement in the NCOP yesterday, such as that South
       Africa is not the crime capital of the world and that there are worse
       international examples;


  (2) acknowledges that President Mbeki also neglected to admit that the
       wide variety and incidence of violent crime in South Africa places us
       in the company of societies where justice and the rule of law have
       completely disintegrated; and


  (3) acknowledges that South Africa's collective responsibility does not
       absolve President Mbeki and his Government from their constitutional
       responsibility to protect the safety of person and property of every
       South African.

                              BABEL-OUED STORMS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I move without
notice:

That the House -


     (1)    notes that hundreds of people have lost their lives in storms
         that devastated the Bab El-Oued district in Algeria over the past
         weekend; and


     (2)    extends its deepest sympathy to the bereaved and the people of
         Algeria.

Agreed to.

                     REVENUE LAWS SECOND AMEMDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Ms B A HOGAN: Mr Chairperson, the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement this
year has a very useful quotation in it. It is as follows:


  Against the background of the tax reforms undertaken in the past two
  years, the 2002 Budget will herald a period of consolidation

I think everyone in this House and particularly in our committee will
welcome that commitment. I wanted to bring this Bill to the House to show
it to members, but there was no wheelbarrow strong enough to carry that
Bill into this House.

However, it has been a period of considerable tax reforms that we have gone
through in these last two years and this Bill, in a sense, is a culmination
of much of the tax reforms that have been taking place in the last two
years. In particular, it deals with capital gains tax. The final remaining
issues to be dealt with regarding capital gains tax relate to company
restructuring and how capital gain will be dealt with in that way. The Bill
also covers amendments to previous Bills we have passed relating to capital
gains tax and refines those clauses as well.

The Bill also amends 14 previous taxation laws. So it is a Bill which
covers a wide range of issues. The speakers that will follow me, no doubt,
will speak to some of the most important parts of it. Let me just mention
that the secrecy provisions relating to matters that come before the
commissioner, such as dealing with money-laundering, are being dealt with.
I know that someone will be speaking on that. We are refining the process
of the way objections and appeals can be lodged with the SA Revenue
Service. Extensive research was done on that and it is also going to be
improved.

There are various matters relating to Siyakha, which is the restructuring
of the SA Revenue Service. One bears in mind how vigorous and resolute that
restructuring has been. This Bill deals with major components of that. It
also deals with amendments to the VAT laws, and to customs and excise ...
[Interjections] ... taxation of controlled foreign entities and a number of
other more minor issues.

However, it is not to these issues in particular that I want to speak.
Firstly, there are just a couple of issues that I think, from the
committee's perspective, we would want raised. The issue of consolidation
is very important. I am inundated by people who are constantly phoning and
writing to me saying that the plethora of tax laws that have come through
have inundated them and they are unable to cope with the amount of tax laws
coming through.

That is correct. The amount of tax reform that we have undertaken has meant
that a large amount of tax legislation has come through. That has left tax
advisers and ordinary taxpayers in a difficult position because they have
to cope with the new legislation. Many of them are battling to deal with
these changes. So this period of consolidation will be very welcome so that
people will be able to familiarise themselves with the considerable changes
that have taken place in the tax policy. I certainly do hope that this will
be a period of consolidation. [Interjections.]

In addition, there are one or two other matters. The one is the taxation of
the retirement fund industry. This has been put on hold for quite some
time, and has been promised. We have to balance the necessity of getting
this overview over and done with, with the requirements of quality
legislation. I know that we did set a timeframe of more or less two years
to look at the overhaul of the taxation of the retirement fund industry,
yet I appeal that we do not stay too closely to those timeframes because I
do believe that we need time to look at this comprehensively and
holistically, and manage a very good quality Bill when it comes before
Parliament.

The taxation of the public benefit organisations has gone a considerable
way. There are still refinements that have to be added to the lists of
those public benefit organisations that will benefit. I am hoping that this
will come through in the next year so that NGOs will have a better
understanding of their tax dispensation. The review of tax on banks is in
the pipeline and that is certainly going to take up a lot of the SA Revenue
Service's energies.

Another issue is the simplification of the Income Tax Act. We need to
address it. I do bear in mind the load that tax officials are carrying, but
we do need a simplification of the Income Tax Act. It is very complex, very
comprehensive and we do need it to be simplified. We also need it to be put
into plain English. I think it is, at this stage, very difficult for most
people to understand the particular Income Tax Act.
The reforms that have taken place in the last two years have not been the
only reforms that we have seen. Yes, they have been mighty reforms. I was
looking at the 1994 Budget Review and the Katz commission that reported in
1994, and it is astonishing to realise how far we have come in achieving so
many of the reforms that were mooted at that stage.

The reforms of personal income tax have been considerable. We have narrowed
and lessened the income tax brackets. The thresholds at which people come
into the income tax system have been increased, making it far easier for
people earning low salaries to deal with income tax. The reduction in the
gradation of the marginal rates schedule has been considerably improved.
Adjustments for inflation have gone ahead very well in the last two years.
We have seen considerable tax relief, particularly in the last two years
and particularly to the lower and middle-income groups, which has been very
beneficial. It has acted as a stimulus to the economy. We have seen tax
relief for company taxes as well.
What is often overlooked, too, is that, within the first 18 months of us
coming to Parliament, we removed all gender discrimination in tax laws,
which was a considerable achievement at the time if one looks back to the
complexities related to that. It is astonishing that those gender
discriminations remained within our taxation system.

If one looks at how the revenue service has managed to reform itself from
an institution which was regarded by the Katz commission and the Margo
commission as an institution that was in dire need of reform and virtually
on the point of collapse, and how under this Government the necessary
mechanisms have been brought into place to overhaul the tax administration
system, the changes are absolutely phenomenal. Those changes have, no
doubt, led to what Judge Dennis Davies referred to as Sars ``glittering
performance'' in collecting tax over the last couple of years.

It has also been because the taxation basis of this country has changed.
Not only have we been able to bring more and more people, who previously
did not regard themselves as legitimate taxpayers because they believed
that the government was an illegitimate regime, into the tax net, but we
have also expanded the tax base whilst reducing the individual burden of
individual taxpayers. We have expanded the base and reduced the individual
burden. This means that we have been able to collect revenues previously
unanticipated.

I would like to congratulate Sars and the Ministry on performing in a very
dedicated and resolute way to overhaul not only the system of our revenue
collection, but the entire basis of our taxation system, which has brought
us into a new, globalised world as well. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Barbara Hogan, I hope that
you were not planning to extend the tax base to cover the local customs and
physical exercises. [Laughter.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Mr Chairman, it is always a pleasure to follow the hon Ms
Hogan, and I am pleased that she has survived the year and is still able to
keep standing for 10 minutes.

In the time available, there are a few important issues that I would like
to cover. The first is the problem of civil society not being given enough
time to prepare their comments for the committee hearings. In the past, we
in the DP have simply registered our concern, but today I want to elaborate
a little.

The submissions and evidence of the private sector and civil society are
critical to the work of the Portfolio Committee on Finance, particularly in
the area of taxation. Much of the legislation that we deal with is
extremely complex and one requires the input of experts to be able to
evaluate it. For example, one of the 190 clauses in this Bill amends part
of the Income Tax Act, and the part it amends is section 9D(9)(h)(ii)(bb).
One can imagine how easy that is to follow for people who are not tax
experts, which is the case with most of us who are on the committee.

Private sector organisations have complained repeatedly over the years, to
little avail. As our tax legislation has become dramatically more complex
over the past two years, the problem has worsened. Let me quote from a
submission from Saica, the SA Institute of Chartered Accountants:


  Saica has been requested to furnish comments on the various budgets of
  the legislation, which comments were forwarded directly to the
  commissioner of Sars. The one concern that must be raised relating to the
  budgets of legislation made available to Saica is the fact that we are
  only supplied with copies of the draft amendments, and are not privy to
  the underlying rationale of the commissioner seeking the specific
  amemdments proposed.


  As has been pointed out to this honourable committee previously, the
  commissioner allows a reasonable time for comment in respect of the
  earlier budgets and as a deadline for finalising the amendment
  approaches, so the time to comment is reduced.
  We wish to place on record our concern on the extreme deadline placed
  upon us to submit proper and written comments to this committee on
  legislation comprising 233 pages.


  Saica only received the composite version on 10 October 2001, therefore
  it was not possible for Saica to submit written comments to the committee
  before the deadline imposed on us.


  The difficulties that must be noted are that certain sections which were
  contained in the draft legislation made available to us have now been
  removed from the composite Bill. Furthermore, certain new sections have
  now been inserted.


  It becomes very difficult to comment properly on a Bill of 233 pages
  where one is unable to readily ascertain which sections are new and which
  ones have been amended from those previously seen by us.

They are not alone. Virtually all the private sector bodies share that
view. The consequences of rushing into taxation on foreign dividends,
residence-based taxation and capital gains tax have been seriously harmful
to our economy. The DA warned about the problems likely to be caused by
ramming through CGT legislation earlier this year. But, what has happened?
I quote again from Sica referring to Schedule 8 of the Act:


  The CTG was introduced by way of the Schedule 8 in Act 5, promulgated on
  28 June 2001. The schedule originally comprised some 86 paragraphs. That
  schedule was subsequently amended by Act 19 on 27 July 2001. Act 19
  amended 11 paragraphs in the Schedule 8. The current Bill under
  consideration by this committee seeks to amend 52 paragraphs out of the
  86 originally contained in the Act.


  We, as an institute, requested that the date of implementation of the tax
  be postponed to 1 March 2002, so as to ensure that the legislation would
  be finalised by the date on which it took effect. We believe that it is
  unfortunate that 52 of the 86 paragraphs dealing with the tax are now
  being amended, and that such amendments will clearly only be promulgated
  after the date of implementation on 1 October 2001.

In just five months there have had to be three amendments for every four
paragraphs in that schedule. On average, 75% of the law has had to be
amended in just four months. I do not know whether it is a fuss or a
disgrace, or both.

What harm has been done by this plethora of new taxes? Firstly, South
Africa has become less attractive to skilled foreigners. People we
desperately need are being discouraged from settling in South Africa.
Retirement funds will once again be adversely affected and small business
is being harmed by the introduction of increasingly complex tax
legislation.

We need to recognise that the best way to raise the most revenue, while
reducing individual taxes, is to grow the economy. The sad fact is that the
combination of new taxes introduced over the past two years will be
extremely harmful to our economy. What is sadder still, is that by the time
Government wakes up to that fact, much of the damage would already have
been done.

One may ask: Does Government not see this danger? The answer may well lie
in the response given by Sars. Submissions were made to the committee that
the starting dates for valuing shares for CGT purposes should be changed
because of the negative impact on markets after the 11 September 2001
terrorists attacks. Otherwise, Government would receive an unwarranted
windfall of CGT amounting to billions of rands.

The response from Sars was that the JSE all-share index is not
significantly lower than it was on 1 April 2001 - it is only 6% lower in
six months. Only somebody who has a mind-set which says that all
shareholders, including pension funds, are rich and should not complain
about being fleeced, would suggest that a 6% drop in six months in an
individual's capital or retirement savings is not significant.

That is the mind-set which we are dealing with. That is the mind-set which
will deter investors, shackle entrepreneurs and destroy many small and
medium enterprises. It is the opposite of the mind-set which South Africa
needs to address poverty and unemployment. The DA will be opposing this
Bill.

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill is more
than a mouthful. In my 20 years of political representation I have never
seen a Bill as thick, long and detailed as this particular one. I wonder
whether the Minister wants to confuse us with paperwork. More than 250
pages with 189 amendments to the income tax or revenue laws have been
effected. The IFP is in agreement with many of these amendments, but of
course, certain concerns will remain with regard to a limited number of
these clauses. On the whole, however, we are supportive and the IFP will
vote for this Bill.

Regarding the Bill, I will, in the limited time at my disposal, refer to
the following aspects of the amendments - the relaxation of the secrecy
provisions in income tax, customs and VAT laws to facilitate prosecution of
offenders, particularly drug traffickers and money-launderers. A proviso is
that the secrecy provisions could be breached only in the case of a serious
offence. A possible legal challenge regarding the right to privacy has been
overcome by the insertion of two clauses to protect this particular aspect.


The confidentiality of information supplied by taxpayers remains a
fundamental principle of taxation. However, Sars should be able to pass on
information obtained which reveals evidence of a serious non-tax offence or
of an eminent and serious public safety or environmental risk. This is also
in line with international trends and in the general public interest, as
such disclosure outweighs the potential harm to the taxpayer's concerns,
and the IFP is in full agreement with this.

The Bill also enables Sars to make regulations about dispute procedures in
order to prevent costly litigation. In this regard, the Bill allows for pre-
trial conferences to establish the issues and to reach a settlement before
the matter is referred to a court for taxpayers and tax practitioners. The
Bill further provides for tax relief for corporate restructuring, but has
come in for heavy criticism regarding the fact that the provisions will
apply retroactively from 1 October, although companies will be given until
1 December to take advantage of existing legislation.

The Bill makes further amendments to capital gains tax provisions. Some 52
of the original 86 clauses are to be amended. This has led to strong
criticism from practitioners because the amendments will only come into
force after the tax becomes effective, and that is on 1 December 2001.
Furthermore, it could be argued that all capital gains legislation should
be consolidated to ensure easier compliance and understanding for taxpayers
and tax practitioners.

The provision dealing with the weighted average training price of listed
shares for capital gains tax has also come in for considerable criticism.
The argument has been raised that using the five days before 28 September
had a distorting effect because of the 11 September attacks on the United
States. The terrorist attacks in America led to a general decline in share
prices in the latter half of September. Capital gains tax, of course, took
effect on 1 October.

As of 28 September 2001, the JSE all-share index reflected a 6% decline
since 1 April 2001. This represents a significant decline in the rand value
of South African shares. With regard to the top 10 shares on the all-share
index, this could potentially represent a R2,5 billion windfall for the
Minister and Sars. In theory, the decline has presented Sars with an
abnormally low base in respect of investors as it represents the difference
between the published Sars value and ruling price. Sars indicated that a
small investor in unit trusts could utilise his R10 000 annual exemption to
counter the effect of the artificial gain.

The prices of major shares have continued to increase in value since 28
September and, as a result of changing market value on valuation date of
listed equities, it will probably benefit Sars to the extent that I have
mentioned before. Theoretically, if the terrorist attacks had taken place
after 1 October 2001, the contrary, of course, would have been applicable.
We understand that the Minister must juggle and play the odds of the shares
market. This time he has again won.

The IFP nevertheless supports the legislation and we will vote for the
Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill.

Dr P J RABIE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the Second Revenue
Laws Amendment Bill is a very complex piece of legislation, and I think
some of the speakers have referred to the fact that it is more than 233
pages long. It is also very complex and an example of the complexity of
this particular Bill is the numerous amendments that were made to this
Bill. In terms of the current legislation, the taxpayer may lodge an appeal
against an assessment or certain decisions of the Commissioner to the
specially constituted court for hearing income tax appeals.

The present procedures followed in the special court are basically those
followed in the magistrates' courts. The present procedures have
shortcomings, however, with reference to the discovery of documents
defining the issues and disputes, etc. This Bill will provide for tax
courts, provide for the registrar of the court and grant specific powers to
the court to make orders, etc. Provision is made for settlement of
disputes. This Bill also provides for an extended Bench when the amount in
dispute exceeds R50 million or where the taxpayer and the Commissioner
agree thereto that the case may be heard by a component with three judges.

The Bill also refers to the writing off of taxes, duties and levies,
especially if the recovery of the debt will be uneconomical to the state.
In line with international best practice, the secrecy provisions are
amended so that employees of Sars will be allowed to share information that
is in the national interest with other organs of state. I think some of the
other speakers, such as the chairperson Ms Barbara Hogan, referred to money-
laundering and so forth, and I think that if we want to retain our credit
rating, it is very important that we apply this particular Act.

Allow me to thank the officials of Sars and the Treasury for allowing all
interested parties to respond during a number of public hearings. Their
submissions really gave us insight into the complexity of this Bill. A
number of valid arguments were raised during the hearings and again I think
the Life Offices Association made a very worthy contribution when they
specifically referred to paragraph 29 of Schedule 8 where they state that
the time-based apportionment and method may preclude the use of the
weighted average bases for all listed financial instruments.

This Bill also allows for capital gains tax relief in respect of
transactions between group companies or between founding shareholders and
their company. Again, we know that capital gains is very controversial and
we feel that some of these regulations referring to capital gains tax will
have to be amended in future.

The Bill provides for unbundling transactions and transactions relating to
the liquidation, winding-up and deregistration of a company. Section
9D(9)(b) were also amended and refer to capital gains in respect of foreign
subsidiaries. In a submission during the public hearings of the Portfolio
Committee on Finance, it was mentioned that a capital gain may accrue over
a number of years. It may be wise, again, to amend this subsection in as
far as only the number of whole years and not parts thereof could be taken
into account when the capital gain is calculated.

In essence, this Bill enables South African business to participate within
the global economy, and sections 9D and 9H provide for participant
exemption where this controlled foreign entity holds more than 25% of the
equity share capital in that other foreign entity. This clause will also
help to distinguish between active management interest in a foreign company
and passive portfolio investment. The New NP supports this Bill.

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, one is really quite flabbergasted at the
behaviour of the DP on this occasion. Here is a Bill which in print is 132
pages long, with massive detail, and what does the DP do? It opposes the
Bill. I would say that it is clear to me that the motive for the opposition
is totally political. [Interjections.] It is totally a political manoeuvre
because they are going to go to the public and say that the DP defends the
interests of the private sector and the Government does not. That is their
reason for the objection. [Interjections.]

When one listens to the hon Andrew and the petty objections that he raised
here, one can see no reason in principle why the DP should object to this
particular Bill. It is a massive Bill, let us accept that. It is very
complex too, and we have really been through wringer in respect of
discussions, assessment and evaluation in the committee. One had hoped that
having been through all that, we would all agree that this is a necessary
Bill - complex yes, but necessary.

One wonders whether the hon Andrew is not being a little disingenuous when
he complains about the short timescale in which people could raise
objections. We were given to understand by officials and experts that some
of the objections and complaints of the short time for response, were
actually merely to repeat the arguments which we have been through many
times.

And in some cases - I will not say all - there was clearly a stalling
element in the objections about the time given to people to respond. So I
would say that we have been through a very thorough process. The Bill is
understood by the committee, that is by those who attended regularly at
least, which was not always the hon Andrew, and the Bill must proceed.
Mr K M ANDREW: He is a liar.

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, on a point of order, I want to ask for your
protection. I am being accused of lying, which is unparliamentary.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Andrew, I heard that and I
would like you to withdraw it.

Mr K M ANDREW: Certainly, I withdraw. I am sorry, I thought the hon member
was still on the ...

Prof B TUROK: Let me say to the hon Andrew that it is a blatant ruse to
accuse someone of lying and then to withdraw. This is rather petty and
should not happen in this Parliament. [Interjections.] Chairperson, I am
not going to be harassed by this gentleman because he has no sensible
arguments ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Turok, once a member has
withdrawn, one may not refer further to that remark. That remark is
withdrawn. Order! Let us listen to this point of order.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I accept that,
but then the member must not follow it up with another unparliamentary
comment by saying that the hon member Turok is telling an untruth.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, the point is
upheld because it is in the best tradition of Parliament that one keeps the
decorum and dignity of Parliament. It is not honourable, having withdrawn a
comment, to repeat it. If it is withdrawn, it must be withdrawn. And as for
the speaker at the podium, the remark that has been withdrawn may not be
referred to. So it is applicable to all sides and I trust that hon members
will honour the best traditions of Parliament.

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, I think the best way that I can honour that is
to say that I will not refer to the hon Andrew in any debate again. Is that
acceptable? [Applause.] Can I proceed with my speech?

In our discussions on taxation in this House, the focus has often been,
especially at Budget time, on the rate of taxation that is being applied;
who is going to gain and who is not going to gain and so on. The rate of
taxation has been the focus. From that flowed a consideration about the
South African tax base, and it has been made clear to this House that what
is very important for the survival of South Africa and for its efficient
running is for the tax base to be maintained and protected.

Recently we have had a lot of discussion in the finance committee and in
this House about the importance of broadening the tax base. We have had
discussions on whether people are paying more. Who is paying more? Are
there dodgers? Is there tax evasion or tax avoidance? How does that affect
the broadening of the tax base?

This Bill takes a slightly different approach, and the essential point made
in our discussions and briefings is that what is critical is that we need
to protect the tax base - not only to broaden it, but to protect it against
people who manipulate taxation in many ways. What has also been indicated
to us is that this becomes particularly important in the period of
globalisation and in the integration of South Africa into the world
economy, because this is providing opportunities for people to erode the
tax base. Therefore, Sars, rightly, has put this Bill on the table with one
of the reasons being that we need to protect the tax base in the period of
globalisation.

We were informed, as many of us know, that there are countries which give
certain concessions in order for them to compete against each other and to
compete against South Africa. What is happening is that in some countries
there is a race to the bottom of taxation by providing concessions in order
to attract foreign investments. We were told that the OECD is, indeed,
targeting harmful tax practices which fall in this area of eroding taxation
in a variety of countries, particularly emerging market countries, which
enables other countries to compete for capital investment. They give
concessions which, in fact, undermine the tax base of South Africa and
other countries. That is what is happening.

Of course we are anxious to get foreign investment. This is basic policy
and we are doing that. But the principle that has been followed is that if
one earns money in South Africa, one should pay tax here before one leaves.
This protects the tax base. Because what some fly-by-night businesses are
doing is that they come into the country and leave without paying that tax,
and so this undermines our tax base. Taxpayers, we are told by Sars, cannot
reap the economic benefit of the South African infrastructure and then
depart from the country with this accrued benefit without paying their fair
share of tax.

So what we are saying to the world business community is that by all means,
it should come into South Africa, do its work here and accrue the benefits,
but it should pay its tax and not leave here before it has done so. This is
essential, as I say, to protect our tax base. But, of course, foreign
investors are also protected in other ways. There are mutual agreements
between different countries which give relief abroad so that they do not
have to pay twice.

I want to refer to the fact that South African taxpayers themselves
sometimes behave in an undesirable manner because they have a great deal of
liquid capital. The press is often referring to the fact that South African
capital flows outside in a way which is unhelpful to the economy. Sometimes
funds are shifted abroad to a subsidiary in a tax haven, and at other times
the headquarters of a company shifts abroad to a lower tax area. The
Treasury has said to us that if we are too restrictive in our taxation, the
headquarters will go offshore, if we are too liberal, the companies send
their assets offshore.

What Sars is trying to do is to have a balanced system, and this is what
this Bill is about, to ensure that there are incentives for South African
companies to stay onshore, to remain here, so that we have the benefit of
not only the economic investment, but also the taxes that they pay. Time
restricts me from elaborating developing furtheron the issue. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson and hon members, with the length of the
Bill and its explanatory memorandum, the final Bill amounting to 218 pages,
it is unrealistic to discuss it comprehensively in the three minutes
allocated to me.

Let me therefore highlight four issues that we view as important. Firstly,
we applaud the removal of the secrecy provisions regarding the Income Tax
Act, the Value-Added Tax Act and the Customs and Excise Act. It is fair
that the Commissioner for the SA Revenue Service will now be able to
disclose information to the National Commissioner of the SA Police Service
and the National Director of Public Prosecutions where such information
relates to a serious offence or an imminent and serious public safety risk.
Such information can only be disclosed through an order issued by a judge
in chambers.

Secondly, corporate rules in this Bill provide for group relief measures in
respect of transactions between group companies or between founding
shareholders and their company. These measures cover corporate formations,
corporate share-to-share takeovers, corporate liquidations, unbundlings and
asset transfers within a single corporate group.

Thirdly, there is now a finality regarding the method of determining the
market value of shares listed on a securities exchange on valuation date.
Not all role-players and people may like this method but at least it will
be difficult to manipulate. Fourthly, a new subclause in the Bill aims to
permit supplies of goods to industrial development zones, to be made at
zero-rate tax. We are in favour of investigating the feasibility of export
processing or industrial development zones, and therefore support this new
subclause.

In conclusion, with the introduction of the complex capital gains tax six
weeks ago, together with scores of highly technical amendments since then,
the situation with regard to the implementation of capital gains tax has
become very confusing and complicated. In Afrikaans we say ``dit is 'n
deurmekaarspul''. I want to suggest to the Minister and the commissioner
that they should consider producing, as soon as possible, a consolidated
version of the Schedule 8, dealing with capital gains tax, and distributing
it as widely as possible to all stakeholders. Following such a consolidated
document must be a layman's guide to capital gains tax, which can become a
reference document and must be easy to understand by taxpayers.

The UDM supports the Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson, the Minister of Finance is always at pains
to make life easier for the people of this country and has consequently won
the hearts of the international community and ordinary South Africans for
the masterly manner in which he handles his portfolio. After he laid down
ways and means of bringing poverty to its knees in the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement, he is now calling on us to allow him to reform tax laws.

The Bill seeks to address shortcomings in tax laws on the basis of which
the Commissioner for the SA Revenue Service has lost court cases. The
current objections and appeals procedures against the SA Revenue Service
are roundabout and take a long time to reach a solution. The amendment
seeks to bring about a quick process from problem to solution. The new
procedure will demand of the Minister to make rules in respect of time-
limits that had to be adhered to in dealing with objections. The
commissioner will be empowered to write off debts, depending on reasonable
steps that are presented to him or her.

The fact that to this end the Bench consists of a retired judge, will be
improved by having three judges instead. Whatever decisions will be arrived
at will be taken by the three judges - a measure that will obviously cut
down on the number of appeals to the High Court or even the Supreme Court
of Appeal, as is always the case.
In keeping with our democratic order and our determination to be
transparent, the secrecy clauses in the Value-Added Tax Act, the Income Tax
Act and the Customs and Excise Act are being toned down in order to allow
the SA Revenue Service to disclose information if it is of public interest,
as in the event of criminal offences. We appreciate that the release of
information will still be controlled as the Minister will still have to
give permission on the advice of a judge regarding the need for the release
of such information. Information can still be released for statistical
purposes and when needed by the SA Reserve Bank.

The UCDP supports the Bill.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, could you conduct
your business in whispers.

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, hon members, when this House passed an Act on
capital gains tax, it was made abundantly clear that there would be
subsequent amendments that would enable us to facilitate implementation.
The Bill before us today takes us well into the realisation of our dream of
a just, fair and equitable tax system.

This Bill introduces amendments to about 14 Acts in total, ranging from the
Marketable Securities Act of 1948, the Transfer Duty Act of 1949, the
Estate Duty Act of 1955, through to the Revenue Laws Amendment Act of 2001.
As we have heard from the previous speakers how wide-ranging these
amendments are, let me confine myself to some aspects which I feel require
some emphasis.

After considerable and extensive research, some ways and means have been
found to streamline and fast-track the processes around dispute resolution.
In terms of the proposed amendments, the legislation will allow for court
rules to be made on the procedures for purposes of noting an objection and
lodging an appeal. These rules will deal with the time-periods within which
and the manner in which an objection and appeal must be noted, as well as
the processes to be followed up to the hearing of the appeal in the tax
court.
This legislation will also establish the tax courts which will provide for
the Registrar of the Court and grant specific powers to the court to make
orders, such as the granting of costs, etc. Currently, the court may not
make an order as to costs unless the claim of the commissioner is held to
be reasonable or the grounds of appeal are frivolous, or where the decision
of the special board is substantially confirmed.

Proposals are made that in addition to the above provisions, the following
be added: If the appeal is withdrawn or conceded by one of the parties
after the date of hearing has been allocated by the registrar, then costs
may be awarded. Also, if the hearing of the appeal is postponed at the
request of one of the parties, then again costs may be awarded.

The regulations will provide for a mechanism to be put in place in order to
facilitate the settlement of disputes between the taxpayer and the
commissioner. This entails the pre-trial meetings which are made possible
by the insertion of section 107B in the Income Tax Act of 1962, which
empowers the Minister of Finance to prescribe the circumstances under which
the commissioner may, for purposes of the settlement of any dispute between
the commissioner and a taxpayer, waive a claim against that taxpayer in
whole or in part. Disputes in excess of R50 million - a lot of speakers
have highlighted this - will be dealt with by an extended Bench of three
judges.

The secrecy provisions have also been touched upon, where taxpayers are
currently protected by the secrecy provisions that prohibit Sars from
disclosing any information that has come to its knowledge, in order to
encourage taxpayers to make full disclosure and to protect the individual's
fundamental right to privacy. We have heard how this is being addressed.
Sars may disclose information to the Treasury, the Department of Trade and
Industry and the Reserve Bank in relation to imports and exports and may
also release information to the National Director of Public Prosecutions
and the SAPS for law-enforcement purposes. The conditions under which these
disclosures may be applied are also explained. It can only be disclosed if
the safety of the public and the environment are at risk. Also, the public
interest must outweigh any potential harm to the taxpayer concerned.

There is also a programme called Siyakha, which is intended to make Sars
more efficient. We have spoken about this programme in this House on a
number of occasions. It has already commenced and is registering tremendous
success, both in terms of service delivery and efficiency. Some of the
transformation in this initiative is meant to improve capacity to
administer capital gains tax. Allow me to invite members and society at
large to take advantage of Sars's website and the media advertisements that
have been splashed in almost all our print media recently. This has a lot
of information on capital gains tax, including how evaluations will work
and how this will affect all of us.

Internationally capital gains tax regimes provide for varying degrees of
relief in respect of transactions between group companies and founding
shareholders and their companies. This is based on the view that where
groups or shareholders retain a substantial interest in the asset
transferred, it is appropriate to permit a tax-free transfer of assets.
This is, unfortunately, commonly abused for tax avoidance purposes. The
proposed legislation, therefore, strikes a balance between the breadth and
the concessions and the potential for tax avoidance.

Equity has always been at the heart of the introduction of capital gains
tax and the consequential amendments only ensure that this ideal is
achieved as enshrined in our Constitution and our Freedom Charter. It has
also been interesting to note how the opposition has always tried, in this
debate and elsewhere, to demonise capital gains tax under a number of
pretexts, such as the non-readiness of Sars, the complex nature of the tax
and that it will stifle investment. Nothing could be further from the
truth. These amendments only serve to finetune that, and we shall continue
to review and evaluate these Acts in this Parliament led by the mighty ANC.


I would like to thank Sars' and the Treasury's officials under the able
leadership of the commissioner and the Ministry, respectively, for the
commitment and dedication they have demonstrated in producing this piece of
legislation under enormous pressure and time constraints. The ANC supports
the Bill and commends all who support it, and urges those that do not, to
change their minds. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, I think we must start by
just reminding ourselves that the area of tax law that we are dealing with
is always going to be a complex one. This is not about big policy changes,
but about trying to deal with practice. And, in dealing with practice,
there are always issues. Those who overcomplicate the practice of tax law
are always first in the queue at the committee to lobby the changes not be
implemented.

It is a bit disingenuous for Saica to come along and say that we must
please not implement those changes when, at the end of the day, it is their
members who are at the opposite end of the debate on a day-to-day basis.
And so, clearly, it is not a desirable position to bring 190 amendments
before a committee, especially at this time of the year, but I really
appeal that members of this House should understand that it is an
unbelievably complex area, because one is trading off and dealing on a day-
to-day basis with the representatives of taxpayers whose one objective is
not to pay tax and a receiver charged by law and by this House, in
particular, with the task of collecting it. So, it is in that context that
these issues arise.

In respect of the changes to CGT, firstly, one must go back to the
announcement on 21 February last year, and the very intensive and
exhaustive negotiations and participation that took place between then and
1 October. But, as the roll-out started, it became clear that there would
have to be some adjustments, some of them at the request of the
organisations on the other side of the deals. I think it is correct to say
that the changes that we are effecting here are largely textual, refining
those that provide certainty and, in one instance certainly, the provision
of further relief.

The issue of share values on 1 October was raised and the fact that they
were 6% lower than on 1 April. That was only one of the reasons. But it is
important that, in the same way as we can see at the other end where there
has been manipulation, any manipulation here will be punished.

I am sure that many of the organisations who complained about the
difference in evaluation, which clearly was not as bad as they suggested
that it would be, would not necessarily tell us what the losses were from
their global equity funds, which were substantially more than 6%. People go
abroad and act with gay abandon, but when it comes to the taxes that must
be paid, certainly it becomes an issue. We know that when they tell us that
the gold price was 27% higher on 1 October than it was on 1 April. These
are issues and I think they arise in the context of a stand-off between the
need to collect taxes and the refusal to pay taxes.

The request raised by the hon Koornhof for simple legislation that is
readily available should be considered. The problem is, of course, that
what we are talking about is not the big policy issues. The Revenue Law
Second Amendment Bill deals, in the main, with the practice issues, and so
tends to become dated. But, a simplified and consolidated piece of
legislation will be available on the Sars website shortly.

Let me again express appreciation to the members of the Portfolio Committee
on Finance. They have worked exceedingly hard this year. They brought this
final legislation here to this point, and it is the nature of the beast
that there would be disagreements about this. I want to thank them very
much for the exceedingly hard work in considering this Bill. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time (Democratic Pary dissenting).

                              DISABILITY EQUITY

                                 (Amendment)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, before I proceed
with the next Order, I want to bring to your attention a publication by the
DPSA parliamentary office on the Disability Equity. This is an empowerment
tool. It is a book that I would like to commend to you and to your
constituencies.

                     REVENUE LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time.

                  UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE CONTRIBUTIONS BILL
                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, the unemployment ...
[Interjections.] I think the sound technicians are on strike.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Can you hear the hon the
Minister? Not yet?

The MINISTER: Chairperson, I trust that the House can hear me now.

The Unemployment Insurance Contributions Bill is the other part of the
Insurance Fund Bill. It allows for collections of unemployment insurance
contributions, and it is all about trying to improve on the health of the
Unemployment Insurance Fund.

The Unemployment Insurance Contributions Bill will address the deficiencies
that we have noted in collections and payouts and the real difficulties
encountered in balancing the books there, but it will address this
deficiency by imposing a stricter compliance regime on employers and by
transferring the bulk of the collection function to the SA Revenue Service.
The link between contributions made by employees and benefits claimed will
also assist in detecting defaulting and employers and unwarranted claims.
The information required to establish and maintain this link will be
collected and held by the Unemployment Insurance Commissioner.

I know that we have the interest of members here, and I am told by certain
chairpersons of committees that there is a big party and that I should not
be too long. So, let me move the Unemployment Insurance Contributions Bill.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I am not sure
what you are applauding - whether it is the party or the resolution that
was adopted earlier on.

Bill referred for consideration and report to the Portfolio Committee on
Labour in accordance with the resolution adopted by the House today.
           JUDGES' REMUNERATION AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted and Bill agreed to.

                                  GAS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted and Bill agreed to.

                    INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted and Bill agreed to.
                      MERCHANDISE MARKS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted and Bill agreed to.

                     LAND AFFAIRS GENERAL AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted and Bill agreed to.

              MARKETING OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted and Bill agreed to.

                     CULTURAL LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill agreed to.

                          HOURS OF SITTING OF HOUSE

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I wish to inform hon members
that the House will sit at 14:30 tomorrow.

The House adjourned at 19:04.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:
1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The Unemployment Insurance Contributions Bill [B 85 - 2001]
         (National Assembly - sec 77) was introduced in the National
         Assembly by the Minister of Finance on 14 November 2001. In
         accordance with a resolution passed by the National Assembly on 14
         November 2001, the Bill has been referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Labour. The Bill has been referred to the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule
         160.


     (2)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 14 November 2001: To be
         submitted to President of the Republic for assent:


         (i)     Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Bill [B
                 83B - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75).


         (ii)    Gas Bill [B 18D - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75).
         (iii)   Industrial Development Amendment Bill [B 32D - 2001]
                 (National Assembly - sec 76).


         (iv)    Merchandise Marks Amendment Bill [B 33D - 2001] (National
                 Assembly - sec 75).


         (v)     Land Affairs General Amendment Bill [B 71D - 2001]
                 (National Assembly - sec 75).


         (vi)    Marketing of Agricultural Products Amendment Bill [B 26D -
                 2001] (National Assembly - sec 76).


     (3)    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


         Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 14 November 2001 and transmitted for consideration
         of Council's proposed amendments:
         (i)     Telecommunications Amendment Bill [B 65B - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
              Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 1282).


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications of the National Assembly for a report on the
         amendments proposed by the Council.


        (ii)     Pension Funds Second Amendment Bill [B 41B - 2001]
                 (National Assembly - sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
                 Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 1377).


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance
         of the National Assembly for a report on the amendments proposed
         by the Council.


         (iii)   Unemployment Insurance Bill [B 3B - 2001] (National
                 Assembly - sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
                 Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 1378).


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour of
         the National Assembly for a report on the amendments proposed by
         the Council.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Public Works:


     Written explanation, dated 12 November 2001, from the Department of
     Public Works in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance
     Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), setting out the reasons why
     the department could not table its Annual Report and Financial
     Statements for 2000-2001 in time:


     Dear Mr Mfenyana


     This Memorandum serves to inform the Parliament that the Department of
     Public Works is unable to table the 2001 annual report as per
     provisions of section 40(1)(d) of the Public Finance Management Act,
     1999 and Regulation 111J of the Public Service Regulations, 1999 (as
     amended).


     National Treasury Guidelines for Annual Reporting (December 2000)
     directs that the annual report should include audit reports. Due to
     outstanding issues, of material nature, the Auditor-General has not
     finalised the Department of Public Works' audit report.


     In view of the above, the tabling of the report during the current
     sitting of Parliament is not possible.


     We hope for the Parliament's indulgence in this regard.


     Regards,


     TAMI SOKUTU
     DIRECTOR-GENERAL

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Trade and
         Industry for 2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Trade and
         Industry for 2000-2001.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
         for 2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2000-2001 [RP 150-2001].

3.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.691 published in Government Gazette No
         22495 dated 27 July 2001, Regulations relating to additives for
         use in food in general in accordance with good manufacturing
         practice, made in terms of section 15(1) of the Foodstuffs,
         Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of 1972).


     (2)    Government Notice No R.723 published in Government Gazette No
         22549 dated 10 August 2001, Regulations regarding processed
         foodstuffs, made in terms of section 15(1) of the Foodstuffs,
         Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of 1972).


     (3)    Government Notice No R.747 published in Government Gazette No
         22563 dated 17 August 2001, Amendment of regulations governing
         microbiological standards for foodstuffs and related matters, made
         in terms of section 15(1) of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and
         Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of 1972).


     (4)    Government Notice No R.911 published in Government Gazette No
         22694 dated 28 September 2001, Regulations governing certain
         solvents in foodstuffs, made in terms of section 15(1) of the
         Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of
         1972).


     (5)    Government Notice No R.765 published in Government Gazette No
         22584 dated 24 August 2001, Regulations relating to the conduct of
         enquiries into alleged unprofessional conduct, made in terms of
         section 61(1)(h) read with section 61(4) of the Health Professions
         Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (6)    Government Notice No R.887 published in Government Gazette No
         22673 dated 21 September 2001, Regulations relating to the
         suspension of practitioners, made in terms of section 61(1) read
         with section 15B(1)(a) of the Health Professions Act, 1974 (Act No
         56 of 1974).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Report of the Investigating Teams into the Arms Deal.


     (1)    Referred to the -


         (a)     Portfolio Committee on Defence for consideration of
              matters falling within its portfolio, and in particular
              Chapters 3-7 and 10-12, and for report on the relevant
              findings and recommendations;


         (b)     Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration of
              matters falling within its portfolio, and in particular
              Chapter 9, and for report on the relevant findings and
              recommendations;
         (c)     Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
              Development for consideration of matters falling within its
              portfolio, and in particular Chapter 13, and for report on the
              relevant findings and recommendations;


         (d)     Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration
              for consideration of matters falling within its portfolio, and
              in particular Chapter 10, and for report on the relevant
              findings and recommendations;


         (e)     Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry for
              consideration of matters falling within its portfolio, and in
              particular Chapter 12, and for report on the relevant findings
              and recommendations;


         (f)     Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration of
              matters within its area of competence and for report on the
              relevant findings and recommendations; and


         (g)     Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests in so far
              as it relates to members of Parliament.


     (2)    The committees to report by not later than 6 December 2001.


     (3)    The report is also forwarded to the Executive for such action as
         necessary.


     The report is also available from Parliament's website
     http://www.parliament.gov.za

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated
     31 October 2001:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having heard and considered
     evidence on the Report of the Auditor-General on the financial
     statements of Vote 15 - Health for the year ended 31 March 2000 [RP 124-
     2000], and certain papers referred to it, reports as follows:


     A.     Financial management and PFMA


         1. Fraud Prevention Plan


              The Committee took cognisance of the process to develop a
              Fraud Prevention Plan, and also of the establishment of a
              fraud hotline.


              Nevertheless, the Committee recommends that everything
              possible be done to implement the proposed Fraud Prevention
              Plan by 31 December 2001 and to report back to the Committee
              on the successful implementation of the Fraud Prevention Plan.




         2. Audit Committee


              The Committee took note that the Audit Committee is fully
              functioning in the Department.


              The Committee, having been made aware of the investigation
              into the UNISA Board, recommends that the Department consider
              the appropriateness of members of the Audit Committee when the
              membership of the Audit Committee is reviewed during 2002.


         3. Internal audit


              The Committee noted that, after revision of the Internal Audit
              structure, the staff establishment of the Internal Audit Unit
              comprised of 13 posts, of which only five are filled at
              present. Furthermore, the Committee also took note that the
              Head of the Internal Audit Unit of the Department is involved
              in the Internal Audit Unit of the Department of Public Service
              and Administration and in a project with the Internal Audit
              Sections of all other government departments and provinces.


              It came to the attention of the Committee that the Internal
              Audit Unit lacked capacity and that the Department's major
              problem is the recruitment of staff. Whilst supporting the
              notion of best practice sharing between departments, the
              Committee wishes to register that this practice should not be
              allowed to impact on the effectiveness of the principal
              department.


              The Committee further took note of the Accounting Officer's
              concern about the limited financial management expertise
              available in the public sector. Given the implementation of
              the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), this expertise is
              becoming available only at a premium that may not be
              affordable in terms of the public sector salary scales.


              The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer:


              (a) Persevere with the actions aimed at improved financial
                  management, specifically in bringing the Internal Audit
                  Component up to full strength and ensuring continuation
                  of professional training for relevant staff.


                  The Accounting Officer should seek advice from the
                  Monitoring Unit: Internal Audit and Audit Committees,
                  established within the Office of the Accountant-General,
                  on the adequacy of the staffing of the Department's
                  Internal Audit Unit in terms of generally accepted
                  benchmarks, and should report to the Committee in this
                  regard by 31 December 2001.


              (b) Ensure that staff of the Internal Audit Unit be utilised
                  only at other departments if there is no lack of capacity
                  in their own auditing environment, both in respect of
                  auditing and supervision.


         4. Asset management


              After considering evidence presented by the Department, the
              Committee took cognisance of the fact that the National
              Treasury is reviewing the current systems to address the needs
              of departments.


              The Committee therefore recommends that the National Treasury
              increase resources to speed up the process and that the
              Department of Health implement interim measures to improve the
              other control measures.


     B.     Sarafina II


         The issue has taken a long time to be satisfactorily resolved - it
         started in 1995. However, it is the Committee's view that
         appropriate measures should be taken to bring this issue to a
         close.


         After giving due consideration to all the information on the
         matter regarding the unauthorised expenditure emanating from the
         Sarafina II saga, as well as considering a comprehensive report
         from the Accounting Officer, as requested during the hearing of 29
         August 2001, and consulting with the Parliamentary Law Advisers,
         the Committee wish to note the following:


         1. From the unauthorised amount of R10 519 202,30 that was paid,
              an amount of R2 211 138,79 was recovered and a further amount
              of R8 308 063,51 remains outstanding.


         2. As some form of services were rendered, it is important to
              determine the approximate amount which should be regarded as
              either fruitless or wasteful expenditure and which has to be
              recovered.


         3. The findings of all the investigations indicate a serious lack
              of financial discipline and control, amounting to negligence,
              on the part of the two individuals concerned.


         4. Action could have been taken by the Accounting Officer to
              prevent, or at least reduce, the extent of the unauthorised
              expenditure.


         5. Until the date of adoption of this Report, an amount of R576
              595,59 has already been spent on legal costs in an attempt to
              recover the loss suffered by the State.


         6. Work conducted by investigating agencies such as the Public
              Protector, the KPMG Forensic Auditors and the Special
              Investigating Unit was of great help in identifying serious
              irregularities and unauthorised expenditure.


         7. Sufficient measures and actions were not taken by the
              Department to recover the money from the two individuals
              concerned.


         8. Directors-General are appointed as accounting officers, and as
              such have a very specific and direct responsibility to act as
              custodian of tax-payers' money.
         9. Parliament is tasked with the responsibility to authorise
              unauthorised expenditure if sufficient grounds exist and
              evidence indicates that the circumstances which gave rise to
              the unauthorised expenditure, were both urgent and
              unavoidable.


         10.     The asset base of those responsible for the expenditure
              might be insufficient to recover the full amount lost.


         11.     In the opinion of the Parliamentary Law Advisers, grounds
              exist, on the merits, to obtain a judgement against the
              individuals responsible for the unauthorised expenditure.


         It is the Committee's firm belief that Parliament does not only
         have a mandate to oversee financial management compliance, but
         must be seen to be guarding the best interest of tax-payers and
         the most effective and efficient use of limited state resources.


         The Committee therefore recommends that:


         (a)     The Department immediately proceed with legal steps with
              the objective of securing judgement against the individuals
              concerned.


         (b)     The type of judgement provide the State with an extended
              period of right to recover the money from the individuals
              concerned, as was the case with the GCIS recently.


         (c)     The State attorneys endavour to secure a cost judgement.


         (d)     The Department proceed with the above action within the
              shortest possible timeframe,and report back to the Committee
              by notlater than the end of February 2002.
     C.     Protein Energy Malnutrition Scheme


         The Department has been involved in various projects to alleviate
         malnutrition and improve nutrition among South African children
         since 1991. The Auditor-General has been reporting on weaknesses
         in the programmes since 1994. Problems identified included the
         following:


         1. A lack of supporting vouchers.


         2. Inadequate monitoring procedures.


         3. Failure to comply with standards prescribed by the Department.


         On 1 August 1995 the President appointed a Commission of Inquiry
         into the Protein Energy Malnutrition Scheme. The Commission
         consisted of three persons and was appointed specifically to look
         into the allocation of contracts, expenditure on contracts and the
         supervision of the Protein Energy Malnutrition and other related
         schemes. The Committee is, however, disturbed about the costs
         incurred in respect of the Commission that amounted to R9 156 377
         as at 31 March 2000, as well as the failure of the Department's
         adherence to the recommendations of the Commission.


         Having received the "Summary of the report by the Commission of
         Inquiry into the Protein Energy Malnutrition Scheme and other
         Nutrition Programmes and Feeding Schemes administered by the
         National Department of Health", and given its awareness of
         problems experienced currently with the implementation of
         nutrition schemes, the Committee recommends that it be informed
         about the implementation of the recommendations made by the
         Commission with regard to:


         (a)     The efficient handling of all matters of fraud or
              mismanagement in each province.
         (b)     The blacklisting of individuals who were incriminated in
              the programmes and a register to be kept preventing them from
              conducting business with any programme in any province.


         (c)     Programmes on strengthening human and institutional
              capacity to reduce the unacceptably high levels of childhood
              malnutrition in South Africa.


         The Committee requests a report on these matters by the end of
         January 2002.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated 31
     October 2001:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having heard and considered
     evidence on the Reports of the Auditor-General on the financial
     statements of Vote 37 - Welfare for the year ended 31 March 1999 [RP
     161-99] and Vote 36 - Welfare for the year ended 31 March 2000 [RP 145-
     2000], and certain papers referred to it, reports as follows:


     A.     Unauthorised expenditure


         1. 1998-99 financial year, R173 551,50


              Unauthorised expenditure amounting to R173 551,50 was incurred
              during the 1998-99 financial year, and comprises the
              following:


              (a) An amount of R135 859,50 was paid during August 1998 to a
                  company for a radio advertising campaign to introduce the
                  new Child Support Grant without adhering to tender
                  procedures.


              (b) An amount of R37 692 was paid for the extension of the
                  contract, without prior approval from the State Tender
                  Board, for a consultant to assist the Department with the
                  re-registration and clean-up process with regard to the
                  Social Security function.


         2. 1999-2000 financial year, R223 969


              Unauthorised expenditure totaling R223 969 was incurred and
              comprises the following:


              (a) An amount of R187 375 was paid from donor funding in
                  respect of contracts concluded with individuals from non-
                  governmental organisations, who were involved in
                  developing quality assurance pilot projects within
                  residential care facilities during the period January to
                  December 1999. Proper tender procedures had not been
                  followed and the State Tender Board declined a request
                  for ex post facto approval.
              (b) An amount of R36 594 was paid for catering services at the
                  National Conference on Victim Empowerment. Although the
                  State Tender Board granted ex post facto approval for the
                  expenditure, proper departmental procedures had not been
                  followed.


              Although the Committee is satisfied with the explanations
              provided by the Accounting Officer regarding each instance of
              unauthorised expenditure reported and the efforts of the
              Department to train staff to deal with matters according to
              the correct procurement procedures, the Committee express its
              dissatisfaction at the Department's disregard for State Tender
              Board directives. It is unacceptable that rules and
              regulations are contravened, even in cases where the projects
              achieve a desirable objective.


              In expressing the above sentiments, the Committee notes that
              with regard to the unauthorised expenditure for the years
              mentioned, the following issues need to be borne in mind:


              *Technical non-compliance.


              *Services/goods were rendered/received.


              *Value for money was received.


              *The State suffered no loss.


              The Committee therefore recommends that the unauthorised
              expenditure for the 1998-99 financial year (R173 551,50) and
              for the 1999-2000 financial year (R223 969) be authorised by
              Parliament.


     B.     Financial management


         The Committee wishes to commend the Department on the drastic and
         dramatic improvement in the general and financial management of
         the Department.


         Nevertheless, the Committee wishes to report on the following
         matters dealt with during the hearing, which the Accounting
         Officer should attend to:


         1. Fraud Prevention Plan


              The Committee took note that the policy document was submitted
              to the Audit Committee during May 2001 and that the Department
              is awaiting their comment.


              It is recommended that the Department report back to the
              Committee by 31 December 2001 on comments by the Audit
              Committee and implementation of the Fraud Prevention Plan.


         2. Risk assessment


              The Committee took note that consultants were contracted
              during September 2000, as part of the existing Financial
              Management Expert Contract, to conduct a risk assessment for
              the Department.


              The Committee recommends that a comprehensive report be
              submitted to it by 31 December 2001 on the outcomes of the
              risk assessment and the measures implemented.


         3. Financial Management Expert Contract


              The Committee is encouraged by the establishment of the
              Steering Committee to oversee the contract, and by the fact
              that the consultants have to report every six weeks on
              progress made. The Committee also noted the measures already
              implemented on national as well as provincial level on
              recommendations by the consultants.
              However, the Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer
              ensure that:


              (a) The contract be revised according to the requirements of
                  the PFMA.


              (b) The requirements regarding the skills transfer are adhered
                  to.


              (c) The matter regarding the capacity constraints in the
                  provinces, as a matter of urgency, be addressed to
                  prevent the undermining of the effectiveness of the
                  contract.


              (d) The process and progress made by the consultants in the
                  Western Cape be properly monitored and that the norms and
                  standards, as set by the national department, be adhered
                  to.


     C.     Asset management


         The Committee took note that the Department only implemented the
         LOGIS system during May 2000, and is in the process of finalising
         specification for the appointment of a service provider to number
         all individual assets of the Department with item control numbers.
         The Committee would like to bring to the attention of the
         Accounting Officer that, since the implementation of the PFMA, the
         responsibility, should there be any deficits or surplus stock, is
         that of the Accounting Officer.


         The Committee therefore recommends that:


         1. The Accounting Officer adhere to section 38(1)(d) of the PFMA
              and Treasury Regulation 10.1.


         2. A comprehensive report be submitted to the Committee by the end
              of the 2001-02 financial year on the progress made with regard
              to the safeguarding of all departmental assets.


     D.     Unspent funds


         With regard to the unspent funds, the Committee notes the
         following:


         1. During the 1998-99 financial year, the overall underspending in
              the Department was 78,5% and underspending regarding poverty
              relief funds, was 97%.


         2. During the 1999-2000 financial year, the overall underspending
              in the Department was 24,1% and underspending regarding
              poverty relief funds, was 15,3%.


         Having noted this, the Committee is acknowledging the improvement
         in the ability of the Department to spend the budgeted amount in
         the financial year. However, the Committee remains concerned
         whether the money actually reaches the intended beneficiaries and
         that value for money is received.


         The Committee further took note that the Accounting Officer has
         recognised that it is critical to exercise appropriate control
         over these payments and that such control should not be obviated
         by the autonomy of the receiving institutions.


         The Committee therefore recommends that:


         (a)     The need for training in financial management and project
              management with communities be addressed as a matter of
              urgency.


         (b)     The envisaged monitoring system be put in place and that
              the process of evaluation include mechanisms to assess whether
              value for money is received from the funds made available for
              poverty relief.
         (c)     A comprehensive report be submitted to the Committee by
              the end of the 2001-02 financial year on the matters raised in
              the above paragraphs.


     Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on Illegal
     Zimbabwean farm labour in Soutpansberg, dated 13 November 2001:


     1.     A delegation of the Committee undertook an oversight visit to
         the Soutpansberg agricultural area on Monday, 5 November 2001. The
         delegation, under the leadership of Mr A Mokoena (ANC), included
         Chief K W Morwamoche (ANC), Mr W M Skhosana (ANC), Mr M M Chikane
         (ANC), Mr G A J Grobler (DP), Prince N E Zulu (IFP) and Mr J
         Vermeulen (Committee Secretary).


     2.     The aim of the visit was to get a better understanding, with a
         view to offer possible solutions to the problem of illegal
         Zimbabwean labourers working on farms in the area between the
         Limpopo River and the Soutpansberg.


     3.     On Monday, 5 November, the delegation met with the following
         members of the Soutpansberg District Agricultural Union: Mr
         Joubert, Mr Klaf, Mr Langley, Mr Meiring, Mr Combrink, Mr Vos and
         Mr Hoffman. Mr M V Mabunda: Regional Representative: Home Affairs
         in the Northern Province, chaired the meeting.


     4.     The delegation had very open and fruitful discussions with the
         farmers, who handed our delegation a memorandum. The main points
         were:


         (a)     The farmers had the impression that there was an implicit
              agreement between the government and the Soutpansberg District
              Agricultural Union to allow Zimbabwean workers in a controlled
              way to work on farms in the area, because of the fact that,
              owing to the demographics of the population in the area, there
              are no South Africans to work on the farms.


         (b)     At the end of 1999, a moratorium was placed on the renewal
              and granting of permits to Zimbabwean labourers. This
              signalled the start of problems between the farmers and the
              government.


         (c)     The assumption by the Department of Labour that there are
              enough local people who would like to work on the farms, has
              never been tested in practice.


         (d)     Most attempts by farmers to secure local labour was costly
              and unsuccessful. Local labour should be attainable and
              sustainable, and farmers must be able to count on them. Until
              now, this has not been the case, as especially local women
              traditionally work their own crops in respect of subsistence
              farming. The women also find it difficult to be away from home
              for long periods of time, as they must raise their children.


         (e)     The Soutpansberg District Agricultural Union recorded its
              willingness to form part of a committee to investigate real
              solutions to the problems.


     5.     The Committee recommends that a task team comprising organised
         agriculture, the Department of Labour, the Department of Home
         Affairs, the Security Forces, organised labour, local
         municipalities, district councils and the Provincial Government be
         established to find common solutions to farm labour crises in the
         area north of the Soutpansberg and south of the Zimbabwe border.


     6.     The Committee will exercise oversight over the entire process.
     Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on Study Tour to Cuba,
     dated 6 November 2001:


     A.     Introduction


         A delegation of the Portfolio Committee on Education undertook a
         study tour to Cuba from 6 to 16 July 2001, with the following
         mandate:


         1. Objectives of tour


              In a meeting on 3 April 2001, the Committee unanimously agreed
              that a multiparty delegation undertake a study visit to Cuba,
              with the following objectives:


              (a) To investigate factors that allow the successful
                  implementation of already developed education policies in
                  manners that ensure success at institutions on the ground
                  and later in the workplace and in the country's economy.


              (b) To identify manners in which the two countries can
                  overcome the challenges that globalisation brings to
                  their common ideological and economic goals.


              The visit to Cuba was not only one that intended to observe
              and learn from one's hosts, but also to engage with them about
              problems faced during the incredibly difficult and complex
              phases of implementing transformative policies.


         2. Specific interest


              As far as the development of implementable transformative
              policies is concerned, Cuba stands out above the rest of the
              world. It has thus been earmarked by the Committee as the best
              example of how well implemented transformative education
              policies can ensure that a poor or developing country can make
              an educational, technological and scientific impact that
              places it on an equal or, in some respects, higher level than
              most advanced countries of the world, despite the problems
              that globalisation may pose to it.


              The Committee was aware that such a visit would not only be in
              line with the existing "Agreement of Educational Collaboration
              between the Ministries of Education", signed in Havana on 8
              April 1997, but intended to strengthen that bilateral link
              with our Cuban counterparts. Again, the Committee needed to
              observe what it is that enables higher participation rates for
              all learners in Cuba and hasten to make our Adult Basic
              Education, Early Childhood and literacy initiatives a reality
              in South Africa through serious scrutiny of its
              implementation.


              The agreements signed after the first democratic election in
              1994 included:


              (a) The Declaration of Intent on Co-operation in Health: 463
                  medical doctors from Cuba have since been assigned to
                  work in the most rural and previously unserviced areas.
                  About 185 students are currently studying in Cuba.


              (b) An announcement made by the Minister of Education in April
                  2001, that Cuba would be sending their teachers to South
                  Africa to help the country in the areas of mathematics,
                  science and technology.


         3. Delegation
              The multiparty delegation, under the leadership of the
              Chairperson, Prof S M Mayatula (ANC), included Ms P K
              Mothoagae (ANC), Mr S B Ntuli (ANC), Ms D G Nhlengethwa (ANC),
              Mr A M Mpontshane (IFP), Mr R S Ntuli (DP) and Ms N C Manjezi
              (Committee Secretary).


              An attempt was made to obtain a valued balanced view, with
              inputs from various sources, like the Minister of Education,
              Minister of Higher Education, Minister of Foreign Relations,
              senior officials from the university sector, executive
              management, directors in various institutions of higher
              learning and teachers.


              On arrival on 7 July 2001 at Jose Marti International Airport
              in Havana, the delegation was warmly welcomed by Ms A Hanslop
              (First Secretary) and Ms P Rapudi (Administrative Attaché)
              from the South African Embassy.


     B.     Education system in Cuba


         The key element identified by our "Tirisano" policy document is
         the eradication of illiteracy. The success of Cuba is lauded
         worldwide as an incredible phenomenon - the education system forms
         the foundation on which its success in science, technology and
         medical education is based. After its revolution, 50% of Cuba's
         children did not attend school; 72% of the 13- to 19-year-olds did
         not reach intermediate levels of schooling, and there were more
         than one million people who were illiterate, In the mid-1990s
         there were 241 000 illiterates out of a population of 11 million.


         Right through all phases of its education system, Cuba has placed
         a high value on relating study and work. In a classically Marxist
         formulation of praxis, education emphasises the holistic
         development of the "new human being" to be achieved by relating
         study and work through lifelong education programmes that involve
         students, youth in working and workers in study and reflection.


         Cuba's education system has goals directly related to the economic
         development of the nation. The education system was called upon to
         prepare a technically proficient population capable of drastically
         altering the traditionally hostile attitudes toward science,
         technology and modern agricultural methods. They have successfully
         implemented a policy to ensure that school management is guided by
         the principle that education is everybody's responsibility, and
         participation is an important means of addressing problems of the
         school. They strongly believe in their slogans "Read and write to
         defend the revolution" and "We won't tell you to believe but we
         will tell you to learn".


         Although Cuba is one of the poorest countries in Latin-America, it
         is accredited for its high literacy around the world. Despite
         crippling trade embargoes imposed by the USA, the country has
         managed to keep the illiteracy rate at very low levels.


         Students receive education, food, learner support materials,
         clothing and transport free of charge. At university level
         students receive an additional allowance for personal expenditure.


         The results of mathematics and science of the latest UNESCO
         comparison of mathematics and language test scores in Latin-
         America found Cuba's third grades to have an average of 83,1% in
         respect of mathematics and 87,4% in respect of the language
         examinations, compared with the next highest national scores
         (Argentina), at 47,3% and 60,7 in respect of the same
         examinations, respectively. Central to the country's aim to ensure
         the African Renaissance is policy guidelines aimed at improving
         achievements at schools and universities in mathematics, science
         and technology.


         Science and technology are highly prized in Cuba today. Due to its
         high quality of medical services, neighbouring countries (like the
         Dominican Republic) are travelling to Cuba for medical treatment
         or surgery. This also bears testament to the achievement of its
         higher education sector.


         University majors in the sciences, including the health sciences,
         require the most competitive examination scores for entering new
         students. This is consistent with aims set out in South African
         education legislation and policies. The importance of mathematics
         teaching as a prerequisite to the advanced study of science and
         technology cannot be overstated as forming the backbone of Cuba's
         excellent record in the medical, veterinary and pharmaceutical
         fields.


     C.     Visit to Museum of Literacy Campaign - official view by
         Professor of History, Prof L Campos


         Despite doubts cast by numerous personalities and organisations
         abroad, the Revolutionary Government embarked on campaigns to
         eradicate illiteracy in one year: From January to December 1961.
         In January 1961, a call was made to the young population and
         workers to learn to read and write.


         When Pres Fidel Castro made his call in the UN headquarters, they
         were prepared to eradicate illiteracy. Fidel Castro wrote a
         manifesto, specifying all the programmes and problems in
         education, including housing and unemployment, as a great number
         of children did not attend school. Private teaching and education
         was made compulsory for all.


         When the campaign ended on 22 December 1961, they called for
         education for workers in Cuba.


         Of a population of seven million, approximately 100 000 teachers,
         the youngest seven years old, volunteered to go to all corners of
         the island to teach people to read and write as most illiterates
         were from the rural areas. The basic principle was to be a
         volunteer, to teach or to learn voluntarily, and everything was
         done for free. Most teachers had to be trained, because the
         majority of them were not really teachers. Basic education was up
         to Grade 9.


         There were counter-revolutionary forces, and some teachers were
         killed, but this did not deter the Cubans, and campaigns continued
         as planned.


         The voluntary teachers were organised in detachments, which later
         became known as the "Conrado Bernitez" Brigades, in honour of the
         youngest teacher (a seven-year-old), who had been assassinated by
         counter-revolutionary bandits. These brigades were with another
         120 000 ordinary Cubans and 12 700 young workers, who also
         volunteered to go and teach - an educational force that was
         trained and pedagogically supervised by close to 35 000 certified
         teachers. This singular effort mobilised nearly 300 000 people.


         The museum is the largest in Cuba. Today, they are celebrating 40
         years of country literacy. If a person does not have Computer
         Sscience, then according to Pres Fidel Castro he or she is
         illiterate.


         The mission of the voluntary teachers demanded a great deal of
         understanding, sacrifice, will-power and resistance, both from
         young educators and from their parents. Many of the adolescents
         who took part in the campaigning had never been away from their
         homes. Now they found themselves living in remote rural areas,
         having to spend the whole year among people they did not know and
         who generally had lifestyles and customs different from theirs.
         They had to share the poverty in which many of their hosts lived,
         and in some cases helped them, after class, with the daily work.


         Adults provided labour during the day and went to school in the
         evening. Children attended during the day.


         Although there was a huge reaction from people joining the
         campaign, unions played a very vital role.


         Today, one per cent of illiterate people in Cuba are those who did
         not learn during the campaign.


         They have educational programmes broadcast on television - Cuban
         History, Cuban Geography, Science, Spanish, etc, and children are
         always encouraged to watch these exciting programmes.


         Support


         During the year of the campaign, there was solidarity and great
         help from the Chinese and German governments, and the Cuban people
         gave huge support. The German government donated spectacles to
         those with eye problems, and those needing health care were
         identified. The Chinese government contributed paraffin lamps for
         evening classes, as there was no electricity then. They also
         received support from the Balkan States (human and material
         resources). This showed that Cuba was not alone.
         They also received students from different countries like Spain,
         France and Russia, to teach in Cuba, although Cuba was regarded as
         a socialist country.


         Tour around museum


         At the main entrance there is a big picture of Commander-in-Chief
         Fidel Castro, taken in 1960 at the headquarters of the UN. The
         delegation also saw documents, letters and personal belongings of
         the teachers who were participants during the campaign (letters
         are kept for records and research to help children who want to be
         teachers); a photo, identity document and a shirt of the seven-
         year-old assassinated during the campaign; letters which were sent
         to Pres Fidel Castro, literature (samples of learner curricula,
         guides and letters to the President, thanking him for the
         opportunity to read and write).


     D.     Visit to School for Disabled Children, "Abel Santamaria" -
         official view by Director of School, Ms L D Carballo Gonzalez


         There are 427 special schools in Cuba, 14 schools for deaf
         children, schools for those with impaired hearing, schools for
         retarded children and one school for handicapped children. All
         these schools are transit schools, except the one for retarded
         children. This was the only school until 1990, and at present
         there are 14 more of them in different provinces.


         The school is a brick structure, with 69 teachers and 220
         students. Before the revolution, they had to admit these disabled
         students up to the age of 33 years, but now they have a limited
         average of 13 years of age. All teachers are college graduates,
         and eight of them have Masters Degrees in Education. They are all
         trained in the teaching methods they should use. Teachers in the
         public schools are not trained for special education.


         The basic aim of the school is to give diagnostic therapy in
         preparation for entry in ordinary schools. Special schools are
         aimed to train teachers to achieve social integration for disabled
         people. Although the integration theory is handled worldwide,
         children at these schools need specialised help. These schools
         need an integral teacher who can use sign language and apply
         psychology when encountering behavioural problems.


         The Department of Health's Diagnosis Team is composed of
         dieticians, psychologists, physicians assessing learners for
         albinism and determining extent of deafness, blindness, physical
         disability and make recommendations.


         They diagnose every child's achievements, the community in which
         the child lives, the families from which the child comes, and
         family support for the development of their children.
         Psychologists and language therapists do all the work, as well as
         family doctors trained in that field.


         In the school they diagnose the learning process and problems
         during the learning process, as the parents should know the
         characteristics of their children's disabilities. If the
         retardedness is severe, they receive family protection and social
         security.


         There is great support from parents in this process - they teach
         them to learn and communicate with them in their communities. They
         also communicate with hospitals to educate parents and to give
         proper care for those at home unable to attend school.


         Once they complete special education, they are transferred to
         ordinary schools, but this depends on the nature of the
         disability, and some are kept back until ready for university.
         They can go to secondary schools and universities and pursue
         technical careers. At present, five of their students are studying
         at Havana University, pursuing a career in psychology.


         Learner material used to be bought overseas and was very
         expensive, but now Cuba is producing them locally at a cheaper
         price. Students are given these educational learning materials
         free of charge at all levels, including special schools. Computer
         literacy is a high priority, as they are given computer lessons.


         Although they have difficulty in teaching blind and deaf students,
         they conduct special physical rehabilitation, language therapy,
         technological and physical programmes as well as psychological
         treatment. Most of them are involved in sport like swimming, chess
         and golf for the blind.


         In Cuba, all the children have the right to education, and all
         parents want their children to be educated. It is against the law
         not to send children with special needs to school. Parents are
         fined if found guilty by the Council of Education of the People's
         Power or the Police.


         Tour around school


         The delegation was given an opportunity to tour the school to see
         the classrooms for blind children, where there are brail material
         manufactured in Cuba.


     E.     Meeting with Commission on Education, Science and Culture (or
         People's Power National Assembly) - official view by Chairperson
         of Commission, Hon L C Fabelo


         The People's Power National Assembly is the supreme body of State
         power, and it embodies and expresses the sovereign will of the
         people at large. It is the only body with constitutional and
         legislative powers in the Republic. The unicameral Parliament of
         Cuba is composed of 601 deputies, directly elected for a term of
         five years.


         Among its powers is the power to pass partial amendments to the
         Constitution of the Republic; pass, change or repeal laws; revoke
         Decree Laws that have been passed by the Council of State; adopt
         national economic and social development plans and the State
         budget; declare a state of war in case of military aggression and
         approve peace treaties; appoint the Council of Ministers; elect
         the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justices and other Justices of
         the People's Supreme Court and the Attorneys-General of the
         Republic.


         Workings commissions of People's Power National Assembly


         The National Assembly creates working commissions that work all
         year round and are made up of deputies and whose function is to
         assist it with the supervision of State and government bodies;
         with the writing of draft law agreements and with taking decisions
         on the drafts that are put for their consideration, as well as
         doing the studies they are commissioned to undertake.


         Furthermore, the Assembly can create temporary commissions, taking
         into account the specific interests in various spheres of the
         country's social and economic life.


         The Commission on Education, Science and Culture is constituted by
         education, arts, science and culture, and a range of professors
         (teachers) are also represented in the Commission. It sits twice a
         year and plays a vital role in respect of the functions of the
         Assembly. Every year, this Commission plans activities to fulfil
         its objectives; suggests budgets and implements its work and
         finances; looks at legislation and take decisions on all bodies of
         the old Commission. They also invite the Ministers of Economic
         Planning and Finance to look at the impact of the Budget on the
         National Assembly.


         They also have public hearings and involve different sectors to
         discuss issues and to carry out tasks and define legislation.


         Cubans do not claim to have achieved a level of democratic
         development that cannot be surpassed. On the contrary, various
         important innovations have been introduced to the system, to its
         methods and mechanisms, and they are making constant efforts to
         improve it. Achieving full, true and systematic participation by
         the people in the management and control of society - which is the
         essence of democracy - is a goal which should be strived for
         incessantly.


         Status of Commission


         The Deputies and members of the Commission are elected candidates
         who must obtain more than 50% of the valid votes. At present there
         are 601 deputies elected in their territories. The National
         Assembly elects 31 Council of State members and the Presidency of
         the Assembly. After the election, they propose the committees, who
         all consist of elected deputies (in the South African context,
         Members of Parliament), and the committees elect specialists to
         conduct the work.


         Candidacy Commission


         As appointed at national, provincial and municipal level, the
         Candidacy Commission have the function of preparing and presenting
         the draft of candidates for delegates to the provincial assemblies
         and for deputies to the National Assembly, as well as those who
         will hold posts they are elected for by provincial and municipal
         assemblies.


         In all cases, the commissions are made up of representatives from
         social organisations - workers, peasants, students, women's
         organisations - and they are appointed by these organiaations at
         the request of the relevant election commissions. The
         representative of the National Trade Union of Cuba always chairs
         them.


         Relationship of Commission with Ministry of Education


         The Ministry of Education and Ministry of Higher Education are
         part of the government of the Republic of Cuba. Between the
         sessions, the Council of State approves the preliminary laws. The
         Council of State and the People's Power National Assembly agree to
         the education laws. Technical work is done by the Commission or
         Ministry and passed by the National Assembly.


         All education levels are financed by the State. Higher education
         conducts research activities in State companies, and companies
         finance those activities. Human Resources have the power to create
         a great labour force in the frontier.


         National budget


         Because of the economic situation in Cuba, 22% to 25% is allocated
         to education. 40% of the budget is allocated to senior high school
         and the rest to technical and higher education.


         Teacher-Pupil ratio


         At present the teacher-pupil ratio is 29:1; the Ministry of
         Education hopes to have 20:1 and in high school less than 30:1 per
         classroom. In the rural areas there are 3 000 schools with only 50
         students each and 38 schools with one student and one teacher
         each. They provide the classroom, blackboard and teacher in all
         rural areas.


         Official view by Ms M Josefa Mederos and Mr P Berguez


         All provinces have deputies to the committees to control the
         duties under their power. They visit different research
         institutions and cultural centres and exchange workers in these
         centres; an entire population is taken care of by these centres.
         They exchange deputies in those territories so that they can be
         aware of the interests of the population.


         Once a year, they visit the most remote areas, and problems in
         those areas are discussed with the Ministries. They also visit
         home-based schooling, where you find one teacher and one student.
         These visits are regarded as important. Education reaches every
         place in the country, and this work has been done in Cuba for 40
         years.


         Official view by Ms M Torres


         The work of the Commission is supervised at all times, taking care
         of all activities at grassroots and municipal level. Main
         activities include popular control, and to know the opinion of the
         citizens relating to education, sport and culture.


         They also visit the different councils, and control strategic
         objectives of the city, taking care of all the activities in
         education, culture and sport - researchers are attached to those
         activities. Timeous feedback is received from the population on
         those activities.
     F.     Visit to "Republic of Angola" Senior High School - official view
         by Director, Mr J R Cucelo


         This is a boarding school which was officially opened in 1997 and
         offers Grade 10 to 12. There are 574 students and 32 teachers.
         More than 97% of the students come from the municipality in
         Havana, with one student from Angola. The students work in
         brigades, and education is based on equity and "revolutionary".
         The school management has rules and students keep a schedule in
         respect of their work at all times.


         Sport and cultural programmes are included in their curriculum.
         They also have labour training programmes, and they link them with
         agricultural activities, depending on the potential, which is
         linked to the fieldwork.


         Teaching the students Cuban history and other political events are
         regarded as very important in order to support their knowledge
         nationally and internationally.


         Streams of subjects offered


         They have a unique education system - General Science with three
         Departments: Department of Humanities - Ideology, Marxism and
         Socialism; Department of Exact Science - History, Biology and
         Geography; Department of Natural Sciences - Mathematics, Physics
         and Biology. The curriculum is divided into these three main
         streams.


         Board of Directors


         Seven teachers and the Parents Board, which participates in all
         school activities, represent the Board of Directors. They meet
         monthly to debate/discuss the interests and problems of the school
         and propose methods of solving the problems.


         There are no cases of severe illnesses (like HIV/AIDS) among the
         student population. There are no dropouts; they work with them to
         be at the school, not to drop out.


         Youth Brigade


         Learners work during school holidays and are given an incentive to
         do that. The school has a farm attached to it for food production,
         and access is given to neighbouring schools and co-operatives.


         As their education system is based on "work and study", students
         work during the school holidays in the nearest agricultural areas
         in different entities that serve the consumption of the school.
         They are paid for work they do during their school holidays. The
         entire production comes to the school, none is sent to the market.
         If there is over-supply, they give it to the nearby schools.


         The Young Communist League agreed to this idea.


         System of examination


         They plan their system of examination, and it depends on the
         programme given to each subject. All subjects are divided into two
         semesters. In the semesters, they take partial control of
         examination and evaluate students continuously.


         For entry at university, each student must pass an aptitude test,
         depending on the specialty he or she selects. Universities offer a
         number of studies due according to their capacity. Mathematics,
         Spanish and History are compulsory.


         Role of student representative on management of school


         The student representatives represent the students' needs,
         problems, political and cultural activities to the management
         board of the school.


         They also represent students at grassroots, municipal and
         provincial level. They have the voice and vote in the National
         Assembly of Students.


         In the Municipal Assembly, there is a committee that directly
         deals with all the schools' problems. This committee is in charge
         of visiting schools, making suggestions to teachers and presenting
         reports to the municipality.


         Failure rate


         The failure rate is minimal in Grade 12, and if they fail, they
         can repeat their grades in the same school.


     G.     Visit to Nursery School "Semillitas del 2000" - official view by
         Director, Mrs M C C Tabares and Subdirector, Mr T D Denis


         On arrival, the three-year-old drum majorettes warmly welcomed the
         delegation.


         This municipality nursery school is a formal centre and has 14
         teachers and 115 children, ranging from less than one to four
         years old.


         The highly secured double-storey infrastructure used to be a
         house, and it was converted to a nursery school.


         They are taken care of by well-trained workers and college
         graduates. They have two family doctors and two nurses who are at
         all times present at the nursery school and diagnose any illness.
         If a child is sick, he or she is taken to hospital for proper
         treatment.


         Formal schooling starts when a child is five years old. Those
         children who are not taken care of in the nursery are looked after
         in their homes.


         It operates from Monday to Friday, from 06:00 to 18:00. They have
         programmes and activities on a daily basis, and parents access
         these programmes at any given time. As the child grows older, the
         activities become more complex. The minimum class group is 24 (for
         one-year-olds), and the largest group is 36.


         The relationship between parents, families and the nursery
         management is good.


     H.     Visit to Nursery School of Jesus Menendez Co-operatives -
         official view by pre-school teacher, Ms O Miranda
         This is an informal centre, and was donated by a farmer.


         Ms Olga Miranda is a volunteer teacher who takes care of the pre-
         school children in this rural community, the children ranging from
         two to four years. Because of her love for the children, she
         offers her services without any salary. The pre-school children in
         this community do not attend day-care centers in the cities; they
         train non-working mothers and relatives how to work with children.


         As all mothers are unemployed, they meet twice a week and spend
         time to train them in respect of all the preliminary skills. As
         they come twice a week, they are given tasks to do at home, on
         which they must then give feedback.


         The parents bring their children to orientate them on the work
         when they are at home. There is great support from these non-
         working mothers, as they do great work in helping and assisting
         the teachers to do all the activities relating to teaching and
         learning.


         There are 18 children and one teacher, who always work with the
         mothers. She teaches them skills to work with their families.


         Although children in this pre-school receive non-formal education,
         they have the same educational status and training programmes as
         those in the day-care centres. The government monitors all these
         activities.


     I.     Visit to Ministry of Higher Education - official view by
         Minister of Higher Education, Hon Dr Fernando Vecino Alegret


         Higher Education in Cuba: Experiences, Challenges and Perspectives


         The education system in Cuba has two different Ministries, headed
         by the Minister of Education, Hon I Gomez, and the Minister of
         Higher Education, Dr Fernando Vecino Alegret, respectively.


         There are 52 higher education centres and 700 000 university
         graduates. The main aim is to reach the heart of the people and
         not only instruct them but also educate and train them.


         The commitment of the government is to give students a career
         related to their studies, and this is a serious commitment nobody
         can find in any other country.


         The Commander-in-Chief, Pres Fidel Castro, is leading programmes
         of development in social fairness, and they have the commitment to
         train more teachers to work on the programmes.


         The Minister also mentioned that he has recently visited three
         South African Universities - WITS, the University of the North
         West and UNISA - and he was very much impressed by UNISA on the
         work it developed. In South Africa they send their students to
         WITS and Vista University (Soweto branch) for scientific research
         and for other education-related matters.


         The Minister expressed a wish for a closer relationship with South
         African institutions of higher learning and the doors are open to
         any South African delegation to visit Cuba.


         For the Cuban society, the university is the social institution
         par excellence, which is bestowed with the responsibility of
         preserving, developing and spreading culture, the practical and
         concrete function of which is to ensure the training and
         development of citizens who, with rigorous scientific and
         technical qualifications and with solid moral and ethical values
         as agents of economic and socio-political processes and of
         intellectual and material goods production, will allow humanity to
         continue its development. The university has a moral and social
         obligation to direct all its intelligence and action to facilitate
         the reality of a world made for all, instead of a world made for
         just a few; a world in which many languages are spoken, instead of
         a world in which one language replaces all the others; and a world
         proud of its enriched culture made up of many cultures, instead of
         a world of one single culture impoverished by one and only one
         overwhelming crushing vision and influence.


         Cuba has co-operated and actively participated in the fully-
         fledged development of Cuban society and its growing integration
         into the congress of nations, and it has contributed to the
         development of other peoples, mainly in Latin-America and the
         Caribbean, in an environment of open and sincere co-operation.
         With this in mind, Cuban higher education has been working in the
         past 40 years in the academic field and in university research,
         services and outreach to the community, and Cuban universities
         project their vision into the new century.


         In the history of Cuban higher education, the need to have close
         ties between university and society has been reflected since the
         end of the 18th century, when Father Agustin Cabarello advocated
         the modernisation of higher education.


         Cuban institutions of higher learning are clearly aware that the
         interaction of university and society - the impact of what they do
         in the communities and of what they receive from the community -
         are essential elements for consolidation of the ongoing socio-
         economic transformation in the country and for the future demands
         created by development. The improvement of curricula in
         undergraduate programmes is an inherent component of the rendering
         of account of universities to society.


         43 years ago, they had 14 000 to 15 000 graduates, one million
         illiterate people, three official universities and a number of
         private universities which were only meant for the rich.


         At present there are no private entities in education, except
         schools belonging to diplomatic bodies, and no Cuban sends his or
         her children to private and religious schools.


         There are two top priorities of the Ministry - massive and basic
         education and higher education, and both have different budgets.
         They do not need any help from any country in relation to
         education.


         Every year they send 800 university professors abroad. While they
         are abroad, their families are taken care of. They also have an
         opportunity of self-financing students, and encourage that
         countries should send their students to study at institutions in
         Cuba. Among the foreign students, they have 200 South Africans
         presently studying in Cuba, more than 100 pursuing a career in
         medical sciences.


         In his view, economic contribution becomes very important because
         students are trained for free.


         Statistics


         61% of the students are women; 40% of the engineers are women; 70%
         of the women are doing medical sciences; 30% of the women are
         doing pedagogical studies; 45% of the students in universities are
         women; and there are few women chancellors and Rectors at
         universities.
         This statistics show that women are highly motivated and see
         education as the key to their success. The number of women
         studying in universities is increasing, and these figures have
         also increased in respect of research studies.


         Distance education and learning


         More than 15 000 students are distance learners. They are provided
         with books, but do not have enough computers, no resources, videos
         and other forms of communication, like e-mail. The Ministry has
         created research centres for training PHDs. Cuba is ready for the
         jump to distance learning within four to six years, based on the
         experience in South Africa.


         Higher education centres


         There are 52 institutions of higher learning in Cuba. The main
         university, established in Havana in 1978, is still regarded by
         Cubans as a very important institution of higher learning.


         How to manage number of students and jobs


         The three Ministries - Labour, Economy and Social Security - have
         to provide jobs to graduates, as these Ministries know the sources
         of the country's qualified labour force. The Ministry of Economy
         works jointly with the Ministry of Labour in the joint venture of
         training students. The enrolment plans are supported by demands of
         these Ministries.


         Funding universities


         Education in Cuba is 100% financed. The budget is allocated in
         Cuban pesos. As the budget is always a problem, they have a dual
         currency - US dollars and pesos. Both Ministries are still
         experiencing problems with purchasing scientific material with
         their currency. Having the dual economy, everything negotiated in
         education with Cuban entities is paid in pesos and have
         limitations.


         Additional funding is still needed to buy more learning material.


         Scientific research


         Scientific research refers to science, technical and cultural
         sciences. Research is done to meet the needs of the grassroots
         people in the country, and pedagogical research is perceived as
         one of the main research topics in social sciences.


         40% of students are conducting research with university
         professors. Their main interest is the development of technology
         and scientific research.


         Globalisation


         During capitalism, prostitution was high. There were countries
         that used to send groups of men to abuse women there.


         At present, there are no drugs, no casinos, no gambling and no
         brothels, and tourism is strong.


         In every municipality, children attend school. There are 20 000
         schools, of which 29 have only one student. "Where you find the
         student, you find the school".


         19 000 schools are now electrified with solar power, and have
         televisions and video machines. They train teachers to create
         values for students.


         As education was part of the revolution, the country spends lots
         of money on education.


         Disabled people at universities


         Disabled people are cared for by the rest of the students, who
         help them and take care of their interests. Blind people carry
         their sticks, and everybody knows that they are blind. The number
         of disabled people is very small.


         HIV/AIDS


         No child has been born with HIV/AIDS in the last three years. A
         child born disabled is given proper health care. Women are trained
         in how to control the birth rate. The HIV/AIDS centres are there
         for the infected, and care for them.


     J.     Visit to historical city centre of Old Havana and Africa House


         Historical city centre of Old Havana


         This museum, in front of the historical city centre, was built in
         1776 and in 1781. It was officially opened as a House of
         Government. It is a palace in the capital of Cuba. In 1967 it
         opened its doors as a museum of the city.


         Today, it is still regarded as one of the most important buildings
         in the history of Cuba. The museum is situated in a very important
         street which links the models of that time and in front of the
         armed square used by the military during the colonial era.


         Africa House


         This House was established on 1 June 1986 with the objective to
         promote African culture and integrate African and Cuban cultures.
         There are 3 000 pieces of African art represented by 38 countries.
         The Nigerian artist, Mr Bisi Fayeke, made the beautiful woman
         sculpture displayed in the main entrance.


         Among the African artwork displayed were:
             *Escultura (Ti Jwara) Utilizana en Ceremonias - Mali.


             *Caxadores Tallados end Madera - Congo.


             *Three pieces of sculptures made in the 13th century - Angola.


             *Four pieces of art, portraying slavery.


             *Five pieces of art - Mozambique.


         Various diplomatic missions donated some of the artwork. There is
         no artwork from South Africa.


     K.     Meeting with Minister of Education - official view by Minister,
         Hon I Gomez


         The Minister of Education, the Hon I Gomez, the Director of
         International Relations, warmly welcomed the delegation and the
         President of the Commission on Education, Science and Culture at
         the working dinner hosted by the Ministry of Education.


         The Cuban education system is different from the South African
         system. The Minister of Education has limited power to schools,
         but is in charge of legislation. The Committee of the National
         Assembly suggests to the National Assembly what is needed.


         Schools do not belong to the Minister; they are run by the
         People's Power at municipal level. The municipalities appoint the
         teachers, manage and control the budget, distribute the resources
         according to the size of the schools.


         All students are encouraged to obtain a university degree.


         The Ministry appoints the Chancellor and Deans, and manages
         approximately 16 universities in respect of general profile. The
         Ministry of Health Care manages five medical universities and
         schools of medicine; the Ministry of Sport manages art schools;
         and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs manages specific universities
         with specific activities.


         Most of the Ministers are not Deputies (MPs). Parties do not
         nominate Ministers. Municipalities elect the Deputies. In
         Parliament, the Hon I Gomez does not represent the Ministry of
         Education, but the interest of his nation.


         The Ministry of Higher Education draft policies for higher
         education. The 16 pedagogical universities are under the umbrella
         of the Ministry of Education.


         The Minister is aware of the education system in South Africa, and
         he has visited Pretoria when Prof S Bhengu was our Minister of
         Education.


         Prof K Asmal also met him during his visit to Cuba in June, and
         they agreed on two objectives: Advice for the literacy campaign,
         and Mathematics and Science under the new general condition from
         the economical and financial point of view: 60 teachers are to
         travel to South Africa; an action plan will be adjusted according
         to the agreement; and the delegation from the Ministry will
         interview the teachers priorto  departure in September 2001.


         Pres Fidel Castro gives all his support for education in South
         Africa, and the government will continue to give quality education
         and experience in respect of South Africans, as South Africa offer
         co-operation and experience.


         The literacy campaign played a vital role in eradicating
         illiteracy amongst Cubans. Pres Fidel Castro recommended
         inexpensive ways and methods, like the radio, to eliminate
         illiteracy in one year. His methods were very efficient and
         successful.


         Not everybody has a television set; radio is regarded as the most
         important form of public broadcast in Cuba, to use language that
         is understandable to the masses is of vital importance.


         For the national campaign to be successful, one need to do it in a
         language that people speaks and understands.


         Programmes on Information Technology


         They have programmes broadcast in the morning and afternoon, aimed
         at educating millions of people. They have manuals in French and
         they have now prepared to do programmes in Portuguese.


         Programmes to train Mathematics and Science teachers in South
         Africa have been agreed upon by the Cuban government. They have
         already trained 130 teachers in English and are now ready to go to
         South Africa. They will prepare them and convey teaching skills in
         respect of Mathematics and Science. Better training for South
         African teachers does not mean taking their jobs.


         The government is aware that South Africa has teachers without
         jobs, but in Cuba there are no extra teachers. They still need
         more teachers closer to the children, hence the need for another
         15 000. Education in Cuba is acknowledged worldwide, including the
         USA.


         There are sets of conditions recognized by UNICEF that
         acknowledges the system the country has in managing the education
         system. Research was carried out by UNISESCO on work developed in
         early learning, qualification of teachers, devotion of teachers to
         their work in school environment, control of quality of teaching
         profession, and availability of teaching aids and books.


         Most professor/teachers in pedagogical universities earn more than
         the Minister.


         Early learning centres


         There are 800 000 children (less than one to five years old), and
         the government is taking care of them. There are 1 115 day-care
         centres. They all enter day-care at the age of one year - this was
         agreed on in congress. These children are given a certain level of
         education before they start formal schooling. Because most of the
         parents are not working, the government subsidises and trains them
         in taking care of their children. Their health is in the hands of
         family doctors.


         Staff members are college graduates.


     L.     Visit to International Sport University - official view by
         Director of International Relations, Mr F A D Alfonso


         This is the youngest university in the country, sponsoring free
         education to non-Cubans. It was inaugurated by Pres Fidel Castro
         on 23 February 2001 and formally opened in June 2001.


         Although there are four South African students presently studying
         at the university, the delegation only had an opportunity to meet
         with two, both from the North West - Tebogo Miriam Kgwathe and
         Eleanor Estelle Daniels. The other two, Tebogo Thebehae and
         Vincent Mfundisi, both from the Free State, were on holiday in
         South Africa during our visit to the institution.


         At present, there are 662 students from 57 countries. As the
         medium of instruction is Spanish, non-Spanish students are taught
         and trained to speak Spanish. Their mission is to train students
         to be trainers, so that they can transform physical education and
         sport, and to take the knowledge and apply it in their respective
         countries.


         Students here are devoted to professionalism, efficiency and
         competitiveness, and are also permanent innovators and creators.
         They have a sense of belonging - they must feel what they are
         doing and where they belong.


         As students come from diverse cultures, they strongly value their
         cultural values, and activities are based on solidarity. Students
         do not stay together according to countries, but according to
         academic years. They are only grouped together in respect of
         cultural activities, and as a result they learn to maintain their
         cultural roots.


         As students come from different regions of the world, their
         countries are solely responsible for their airfares to Cuba, and
         on arrival they are given the necessary requirements, uniform,
         toiletry and a monthly allowance of 50 pesos, which they use as
         pocket money. This allowance does not cover any needs of the
         school, and no payment for schoolbooks. Everything is taken care
         of by the Cuban government until completion of their studies.


         Requirement for admission


             *The age limit is 25 years.


             *Students must be physically and mentally ready for school.


             *Students must present certificates to prove that they are free
              from any illnesses or HIV/AIDS.


             *Students must submit their birth certificates.


             *They must submit certified mid-summer school marks.


             *Girls must not be pregnant (pregnancy is incompatible with the
              training).


         Enrolment


         At present, there are 662 students and 75 teachers. The student
         population comprises 50% boys and 50% girls, with countries
         represented as follows: African - 29, Latin-America - 16, Asian -
         1, and Caribbean - 11. In Latin-America, there is only one country
         (Cororica), which is not represented. They have a maximum number
         of students in respact of any given country, and they work on
         allocations based on the capacity of each country, depending on
         the capacity of enrolment every year. Foreign Affairs is directly
         responsible for distribution through the Cuban Embassy in a
         particular country. Fair distribution is taken into account for
         all countries.


         The duration of the course is five years; each year is divided
         into two semesters. Towards the end of their studies, they must
         present a thesis, and on completion, they obtain degrees in
         Physical Education and Sport. The teachers teach sport according
         to the Olympic programme and all teachers are university graduates
         and have ample knowledge of physical education and sport.


         Characteristics of Programme


         The entire university programme is of a pedagogical nature; they
         do not train athletics but athletic trainers and professionals.
         They match the subjects to the characteristics of the programme.
         At university level, they do not train specialists but
         professionals. During their studies, they participate in
         recreative activities to be able to participate in physical
         rehabilitation. As they teach different groups of subjects,
         students can work in rehabilitation centres in hospitals. Other
         subjects include:


             *Spanish - Spanish-speaking students take English as a second
              language.


             *History and Sociology.


             *Computer Science - they can apply their training in a working
              environment.


             *Cuban students take Cuban History while other take universal
              studies.


             *They do not teach political subjects.


             *Optional subjects - sport that they would like to be coaches
              in.


         All the subjects are directed to their professions.
         Sports Facilities


         As this used to be a military school, the school management is
         reconstructing it, in three phases. There are no sporting
         facilities, but by the end of the reconstruction process, they
         will have 30 of them, including swimming pools and two multi-
         purpose rooms. By the time we visited the university, they were
         finishing the second phase of reconstruction.


         Other Services


         They have a large kitchen, a lounge accommodating 400 students, a
         bakery, telephone and television services operating 24 hours per
         day, a coffee shop, a post office, a primary care hospital with 20
         beds (eight for girls and 12 for boys), a laboratory, X-Ray
         facilities, a pharmacy, physiotherapy facilities, a library which
         opens daily from Monday to Friday and is accessed by students
         themselves, access to e-mail and the Internet, and three computer
         laboratories with 12 computers each.


         Communication channels


         Students use telephone cards, sold at 1US$, to call home. They are
         also given full support by means of access to e-mail in order to
         communicate with their families, as well as on Internet.


         Allocation of Students


         They have separate boarding rooms for boys and girls, and they
         only mix in class, in the lounge and during school activities.
         Classes are mixed groups from different countries, and it is
         normal to find mixed love relationships from cross-cultural
         countries among students.


         Prevention of pregnancy and other diseases


         The school conducts a strong programme of sex education not only
         to prevent pregnancy but also sexually transmitted diseases. The
         management of hospital takes this into account. Students have
         access to free condoms available in the hospital. When students
         return from the school holidays, they do periodical medical check
         ups and test on chloroquin (treatment used to treat malaria).


         When they detect HIV status from any student, he/she is taken to
         the centre to conduct necessary medical tests and take measures to
         send the student home.


         After the discussions, the delegation had an opportunity to tour
         around the university.


     M.     Visit to Latin-American School of Medical Sciences - official
         view


         The Latin-American School of Medical Sciences had previously 3 432
         students from 24 countries: 20 Latin America and Caribbean
         countries and 4 African countries. The idea of the school came
         from Latin America and Caribbean countries with an aim to bring
         the student around the world to train them as doctors and not
         specialists, and not to preserve medicine as merchandise, to see
         human being as a client.


         The school is located in the facilities of what used to be a Naval
         Academy for the formation of Army and marine higher officers. It
         has 82 buildings with 28 laboratories in an area of 1 200 000
         square metres, which were donated by the Cuban Ministry of the
         Army to the Ministry of Public Health on 31 December 1998.


         This project was created after the devastation caused by George
         and Mitch hurricanes, which resulted in more than 7 000 deaths and
         desolation to thousands of people at the end of 1998.


         Out of its spirit of solidarity the Cuban government immediately
         sent hundreds of doctors in medical brigades to help the affected
         people who are mostly still in the poorest populations in the
         rural areas of each country.


         Together with this collaboration, President Fidel Castro, had an
         idea of offering a more long-lasting help to these fraternal
         peoples. That is why only 3 months after the natural disaster the
         Cuban government gave the opportunity to Central American
         youngsters with a bachelor degree - mainly from poor families in
         the rural areas, to receive scholarships to study medicine in
         Cuba.


         The number of students in the first group was increased due to
         requests of the Latin American countries and thus instead of the
         approximately 700 students that were expected from Central
         America, 1 929 students from 18 Latin-American countries arrived.


         During the first quarter of this year a second group joined this
         initial group, which is now in the second year of studies.


         Today, there are 5 000 students registered with the school from 60
         countries with 600 indigenous people, with approximately 300 to
         400 professors. They admit 1 500 to 2 000 foreign students every
         year.


         Amongst the nations represented in this institution are Mexico,
         Belize, Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Panama, and
         the Dominican Republic, Venezuela, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia,
         Ecuador, Chile, Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina; and the African
         nations of Equatorial Guinea, Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau.


         56% of the registrations are girls, with more than 50 ethnical
         groups. All lessons are delivered in Spanish. For the students of
         this school, just as for Cuban students, the lessons, lodging,
         books, toiletry, teaching materials and other facilities are
         gratuitous. They are in boarding regime and finish their teaching
         activities on Friday afternoon. Each student receives an allowance
         of 100 pesos every month.


         In this campus they stay for two years six months during their
         Basic Sciences cycle, (six months - levelling course; two years
         for Basic Medical Science) and for the remainder of their studies
         they go to the 21 Medical Faculties all over Cuba where they link
         practice and theory. The medical doctor has to be trained for six
         years. If the student has been studying medical science in his or
         her country, the course takes lesser time, as medical science
         studies differ from country to country.


         To complement the comprehensive attention that they receive during
         the six years of Medicine studies, different recreational,
         cultural, and sports activities are carried out which favour their
         formation as doctors with a high scientific, technical, cultural,
         ethical and humanitarian level.


         The future doctors who graduate from the Latin America School of
         Medicine will be missionaries who will offer daily care to their
         patients to help alleviate the most devastating hurricanes that
         affect the Third World: those of economic and social character.


         It has been noticed with appreciation that most students are
         interested in studying both western and traditional medicine. They
         have developed green medicine (traditional medicine) and created
         teams of work formed by the psychologists to take care of patients
         to follow a kind of therapy to be given to patients with
         depression and stress etc. The flower therapy is very effective in
         Cuba, and the doctors in the army used green medicine, now it is
         believed that if there were no medicine, people would have gone to
         the mountain. This is seen to substitute western medicine.


         Cuban traditional medicine is scientifically and laboratory based
         taking into account the western-based culture in Cuba. This method
         of teaching traditional medicine was fully developed in 1991, by
         Cuba government and doctors at the medical institutes develop
         these medicines.


         Traditional healers are fully trained. Family doctors work on
         these programmes at the national level, and they have
         institutions, hospitals and clinics.


         The delegation noted that there is an outward international
         sponsorship to all countries in the Latin America and around the
         world.


         Legislation guarding activities of institution


         There is joint work of two Ministries, namely; Ministry of Health,
         which is in charge of content and Ministry of Higher Education,
         which is in charge of methodology and procedures to teach in
         class. The budget is under the control of Health Care Ministry.


         Criteria and requirements for admission


             *The student must be between 18 and 25 years old and should
              pass senior high school (Grade 12).


             *He or she must have a bachelor degree or similar level or
              education and in the leveling course, chemistry is compulsory.
             *He or she must come from the poor areas or rural areas.


             *He or she must have no addiction to drugs and alcohol.


             *Medium of instruction for all courses is Spanish.


        Programmes of study are the same for foreign and Cuban students and
         foreign students have to study harder because illnesses may not be
         the same in their communities, as a result they have to make great
         efforts to study those illnesses.


     N.     Visit to Social Workers School- official view by Director of
         School and President of Commission on Education and Culture, Mr A
         Benarides


         This school or youth-driven project is under the umbrella of
         Ministry of Education, taking care of students studying
         pedagogical science, special science and primary education. The
         school started in August 2000 and key objective is to solve social
         problems within the communities. This was an idea of the Commander
         in Chief, President Fidel Castro who developed one of the
         programmes of the revolution, taking care of social problems and
         social changes of all the masses in Cuba. It was mentioned that
         even after the revolution they still had historic problems, which
         they could not transform in a short period of time.


         As it is the only school operating in Cuba, there is an intention
         to open three more, one in the western and two in eastern parts of
         the country. There have been many requests to train social workers
         at universities, but in Cuba, they are trained in various
         institutions


         This school trains group of young people between 18 and 22 years
         who are Grade 12 graduates to become social workers and to train
         the youth to be socially productive. The students are trained to
         take care of impact in the young population, to look at families
         with social and economic problems. They have 180 teachers training
         7 000 students per semester, over a period of five-and-a-half
         months, 14 000 students are trained for this programme per annum.
         The number of teachers varies and is determined by the number of
         student enrolment. They also get assistance from university
         professors to lecture certain courses free of charge and with no
         costs involved and teaching certain subjects in the primary
         schools when needed.


         After this period they are deployed to the communities to look for
         those students who could not be in the system. They work jointly
         with other institutions of the government and young population on
         the impact of their family problems to address their needs. All
         families in Cuba can access social security.
         Only Cubans are trained in this programme and this is seen as an
         incentive for those who did not have an opportunity to go to
         universities to further their studies. They attend school from
         Monday to Friday and on Saturday; they do their practical work.
         Once they are admitted to the university as part time students,
         they attend once a week and the duration of the course is 5 years.
         The huge amount of work is done at home. They report to the Young
         Communist League and integrate study and work. Research is used as
         a tool to elaborate proposals to work on the solutions.


         As the Young Communist League leads all youth projects, they come
         back to school to report and feedback to this league and to their
         teachers once a week on the work done and needs of the people.
         Common problems they get as a form of feedback related to their
         studies are employment (orientate population into different jobs
         as they sometimes do not know options of employment); cases of
         young people who did not get an opportunity to study at the
         university; problems of families with low income; and taking care
         of persons with illnesses who need health care.


         When they are at the university, they attend regular courses on a
         part-time basis. They are trained to work with families and young
         people visiting them in their homes to study the environment and
         problems encountered by that environment and access young
         population to employment. Students do subjects related in working
         in psychological environment, and they propose solutions to the
         problems and information on the result of the revolution are also
         given to them. It was mentioned that there are various solutions
         to their problems, one of them is to give them food, give books to
         children in need and jobs to parents in need.


         Any person who is not employed, they immediately look for
         opportunities for one to study. They also talk to the people in
         the communities and look for different options to work and if
         unqualified, they are sent to training sessions in order to get
         jobs. The teachers at all times do promote possibilities and
         opportunities for their students.


         The problems they sometimes capture in the communities are of
         cultural nature, i.e. families of low intellectual and low school
         level. They then look for the opportunities for their children to
         access day care centres and to get jobs that are in line with
         their qualifications especially for those who are not qualified.
         They also do educational work, taking children to art schools, or
         any technical school to do other technical studies.


         On completion of the studies they are employed and come under the
         umbrella of the Young Communist League, which monitors the budget
         but they receive their salaries from different Ministries. This
         league offer studies to those students who were unable to further
         their studies. This is the call from Pres Fidel Castro and the
         Young Communist League that no person should be in prison. Such
         projects prevent youth to be imprisoned.


         They can access any university in Cuba without a test, as it is an
         entry requirement for admission in any university in Cuba. They
         can take humanities studies so as to specialise in doing social
         work. As according to the Director, university studies are seen to
         be more important because they become psychologists and
         sociologists, which enable them to work with any type of society.
         They can also work in the Ministries of Social Security and Health
         as well as the NGOs.


         The Cuban government strongly believes that all projects should be
         directly youth-driven to encourage them to see the importance of
         education.


         Although they have insufficient resources to solve the severe
         housing problem and poor living conditions in their houses, they
         are able to learn.


         The amount of grant as a form of assistance each family unit
         receives, depends on the type of problem they have which ranges
         from 50 to 200 pesos per month. The main objective of the
         government is not to give them grants but in the case where one
         cannot work because of serious illnesses like nervous breakdown or
         taking care of the elderly, the grant is permanent.


     O.     Visit to CINED Educational Film Centre - official view by Mr I
         Barreto and teachers


         This company which is under an umbrella of the Ministry of
         Education the only company of this kind in Cuba, co-ordinate and
         produces audio-visual, teaching and learning aids, videos, slides
         and leisure materials for children. It is in support of the
         Ministry and takes priority and needs of the Ministry, and
         transformation of curriculum of Ministry of Education, to provide
         needy materials on different levels of teaching to support work of
         the teachers/professors and not to substitute them. They also
         support the work with the research and opinion of teachers and
         professors.


         They do not do video work on their own but with the institutions,
         and they involve teachers and students. The video programmes
         support television programmes. Having 30 years experience in its
         work, they are able to provide these materials to all Cuban
         schools and other different institutions. Each school is supplied
         with a television set and video machine to enable them to access
         these materials.


         They have already distributed 40 000 cassettes to schools and to
         all different sectors in the country containing films with
         recreational materials approaching every subject in education.


         These educational programmes approach certain sex education,
         political and military instruction, preservation and environment,
         which are aimed and directed from day care centres to senior high
         school, for different age groups. They are also aimed at the
         teachers/professors to improve their cultural level.


         This company also provide computers to rural schools, which enable
         them to watch using the power and solar systems. These computers
         were bought through the agreement with the Republic of China to
         supply the computers to rural schools and given a priority also to
         those schools with five students or one student. As this project
         is run by the Young Communist League project, they mobilise the
         youth to be involved in such programmes.


         Programmes/project run by the Young Communist League include:


         *Audio Visual Programmes.


         *University for All (it is broadcast three times a week).


         *Video Halls.


         *Computing class.


         *Social Workers Programmes.


         *School of Art Instructors.


         *Distance Training (they videos and all  equipment for video
           conferring).
         They do research to make sure that these programmes are utilised
         properly by creating programmes to train educational professors to
         meet their needs and interests and for students to use these
         programmes. As they use a lot of technology, they control the work
         of the visual materials as it serves as an important tool or
         feedback source on how they are used in the classroom.


         There has been close working relationship with Venezuala regarding
         these programmes. They have signed agreements with Latin American
         Association of Educational Programmes, with Spain and Mexico to
         supply them with the materials to assist their schools. They are
         ready to help any country with these materials.


         Although they are self-financed, part of the project is funded by
         the State through Ministry of Education and Young Communist
         League.
     P.     Visit to Museum of Revolution


         This museum was the Presidential Palace before the revolution. In
         1957 it portrayed a very significant era where Batista killed a
         group of 50 people inside the building (bullets shots are still on
         the walls). In 1974 it was officially opened as a national museum.




         This is one of the historical palaces in Cuba. Personalities such
         as Fidel Castro, Enersto Guevara, Camilo Cienfuegos and Ravil
         Castro took part in the ordinary sessions on Tuesdays and Fridays.
         They adopted measures of wide popular benefits that characterize
         the programme of the revolution.


         The delegation was given an opportunity to tour around the museum.


         Pres Fidel Castro lighted the Flame of Freedom outside the museum
         in 1989 to attribute for all fallen heros of the nation.


     Q.     Visit to Varadero Beach


         A lunch was hosted at the Protocol House by the National Assembly
         of People's Power during the visit to the Varadero Beach.


     R.     Visit to Deputy Ministry of Foreign Relations - official view by
         Deputy Minister, Hon Jose Guerra Menchero


         The Minister congratulated Dr Rajoo for the report he presented to
         Cuba in 1999.


         There are 500 people working in the Ministry of Foreign Relation
         ranging from the Minister to personnel.


         In 1959 they had 26 embassies inside and 27 outside. Today, they
         have 99 embassies, 118 missions including the consulates. Cuba is
         isolated due to economic blockage. About 167 countries voted in
         favour of Cuba while 3 against and have best relations with South
         Africa.


         The members of ACP (Africa Caribbean Pacific) have to accept
         certain conditions to be the members of the European Union (EU).
         For Cuba, there is no need for conditionality to be the member and
         no need for paper condition. There are no conditions to any
         country, which have diplomatic relations with Cuba. They have good
         relations with Latin America.


         81% of Cubans are owners of their houses. The government employees
         are the lowest paid. The Deputy Minister earns US$27 per month
         (R216); an official, US$20 (R160), while the policeman receives
         US$1 (R8). There are no special benefits among citizens.


         Relations with foreign students


         The Ministry is directly in charge of giving and securing the
         scholarships; and there is a permanent unit dealing with this
         area.


         There are 9 000 foreign students studying in Cuba. Their
         respective governments only pay for their tickets and once the
         student arrives, everything is taken care of by the government
         except in postgraduate's studies.


         Out of 11,2 million inhabitants, they have 80 000 doctors. They
         are they compare with the best in medicine and have developed
         their medical profession and their pharmaceutical industry.


         Research on life-threatening diseases


         They do research on HIV and are working on the vaccine. They are
         free to work at any country that wants to collaborate, as they are
         ready to co-operate. HIV needs a lot of knowledge.


         Approximately 2 038 people in Cuba are HIV. The low average growth
         rate is 0,2%.


         The struggle for HIV is becoming useful for teenage pregnancy;
         figures are too high. There is still a big problem in the
         countryside regarding teenage pregnancy. Abortion is free and is
         done under the control of medical supervisor. Back street
         abortionists are severely punished.


         View change in communist work


         The parties in Soviet Union were separated to the masses.
         According to the Minister "to stay in power, people should support
         you". Public health and education are the benefits that cannot be
         stopped.


     S.     Visit to Agricultural Havana University - official view by
         University Management
         This university is the leading sector in agriculture under the
         umbrella of the national institute for agricultural health. There
         are 300 professors, 2 000 undergraduates, 4 000 post graduates and
         135 foreign students. 34 foreign countries are represented at this
         university and they continually sustain international work with
         these foreign countries. The professors work mainly with
         undergraduate students at the university and teach postgraduates
         during holidays.


         They are considering converting the university into international
         university because of cultural impact of students and teachers.


         None of the students receive salary, they are only given an
         allowance as part of their practice to enhance knowledge in labour
         and research. Postgraduate studies are more demanding in various
         specialities.


         Integration of studies and agriculture


         They train the students for them to have better performance in
         workplace. They spend less time in class; they work as technicians
         and devote more time to their research to give solutions to the
         problems in Havana province. They send students to companies
         independent to the university and co-operatives as part of their
         practice.


         Planning of curriculum and teach


         They specify teaching, research and productive subject each
         student should take. They support a lot of work in relations with
         production entities, sending them to farming and agricultural
         entities. The thesis is based on production problems.


         Since 1999, training of students on social and agricultural
         science aimed at community work. This is a new experience, study
         and research and transformation. The key principle is to train in
         the society for society and links that surrounds the community.


         Links with South Africa


         They had South African students prior 1994, but as to now none are
         presently studying at the university although they have agreements
         with South African universities. They are open to any visible
         exchange because they have strong basic material with universities
         abroad and have experience of work with Africa.


         The university would like to establish links and co-operation with
         South Africa.


     T.     Comments and recommendations


         1. The delegation envisages that youth of this country should be
              involved in the literacy campaigns linking it up along with
              the Constitution and guidelines should be clearly stated in
              that regard.


         2. There should be massive mobilization by SANLI, taking everybody
              on board including organizations, NGOs, churches and unions
              etc. in the literacy campaign.


         3. Involvement of media should be encouraged for promotion of the
              literacy campaigns.


         4. Inclusive in education system should be encouraged and
              continuous support system for those students who have been
              integrated at district level should be strongly emphasized.


         5. Preparatory work at educare centres and home based educational
              centres must be done to train necessary personnel before
              implementation, and where facilities do not exist, mechanisms
              should be created to train mothers to teach their children.


         6. South African education system should integrate school work
              with the world of work within the curriculum and this can
              honour their physical work in their schools.


         7. When schools close, students should be encouraged to provide
              assistance in HIV/Aids awareness programmes, assisting the
              senior citizen in pensions pay points and in the literacy
              campaigns in all provinces in the country.


         8. Schools should restore discipline and work ethics.


         9. There is a need for South Africa to have its own sport academy,
              which will train students in all sporting fields as well as
              the physical education, using the unused infrastructure i.e.
              teacher colleges.


         10.     There should be more links between South African
              universities with those in Cuba.


         11.     South African government needs to identify artistic
              articles that would represent South Africa and be displayed at
              the Africa House.


         12.     The Committee should have conscious link up with the
              Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, as they have
              visited the institution during their visit early this year.


         13.     There should be mass involvement of youth especially for
              those who cannot study through to Grade 12 in the management
              of social problems within communities.


         14.     There is a need for infrastructure to house youth to be
              trained for short courses, e. g 4 - 5 months programmes. They
              should be trained on day to day problems of the communities
              and on other broader context of other courses like brick
              laying, so as to build houses needed for social development.


         15.     There is a need to promote the spirit of voluntarism
              amongst the youth. The National Youth Commission should be
              driving the process to encourage the youth of South Africa.


         16.     Constant co-ordination between media and subject advisor
              and curriculum experts should be encouraged.


         17.     Students should all the time be encouraged to watch the
              educational programmes broadcasted by SABC, and the schools
              should market the programmes and they should be monitored.
         18.     Television and radio must be taken as a medium of
              instruction and awareness of these educational programmes must
              be encouraged.


         19.     There is a need for one common museum in all provinces
              which will depict history of South Africa including the
              apartheid era (1652 - 1959-1990 - 1994) and emphasis on the
              current history.


         20.     The Committee should discuss the issue with the Portfolio
              Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology on the
              establishment of the national museum specifically on the
              evaluation of the visit.


         21.     There should be closer link between the arts and culture
              and education portfolio committees.


         22.     Each department should be involved in each university's
              activities as in Cuba, they are directly engaged with the
              universities and are geared at enhancing community needs.


         23.     Universities and colleges of education should have
              physical practical work and production at the end.


         24.     There is a need to establish one college in each province
              to drive the rural development and national agenda forward.
              Youth should be directly involved in these programmes. There
              is also a need to establish agricultural colleges using the
              unused educational colleges, which have proper and usable
              facilities.


     T.     Conclusion


         The delegation as well and the entire Portfolio Committee on
         Education observed and was impressed with, inter alia, four
         important principles underpinning the Cuban education policy,
         namely:


         1. Generosity, which is reflected in their programmes offered to
              other developing countries despite their own economic position
              and their promotion of a spirit of giving among the youth.


         2. The encouragement of voluntarism among the people generally and
              the young people in particular, regardless of their own needs,
              reflected in their vacation programmes of voluntary services.


         3. The importance they attach to agriculture as being the very
              essence of life, reflected in their programmes for the
              promotion of agriculture enterprise.


         4. Their programmes are also geared towards building mutual
              respect between the young and the not-so-young people,
              reflected in the numerous projects they have for the youth
              meeting their diverse needs and creating the opportunities for
              the potential of the young people to be exposed.


         All their programmes promote these values. The Committee strongly
         recommends that in the midst of the exploitive, ruthless and self-
         centred ethos in our country, reflected in the violence against
         children and women, there is a strong need for these important
         values, which are also part of our own concept "Ubuntu", and also
         contained in the "Manifesto on values, education and democracy"
         document of the Department of Education, be actively promoted in
         our education system.


     U.     List of participants


         1. Mr R Sethlapelo, Charge d'Affaires a.i - Embassy of South
              Africa.
         2. Ms A Haslop, First Secretary - Embassy of South Africa.


         3. Ms P Rapudi, Administrative Attache - Embassy of South Africa.


         4. Ms E Segoapa, Head of Management - Embassy of South Africa.


         5. Mr T Molale, First Secretary - Embassy of South Africa.


         6. Prof L Campos, Prof of History, and staff, Museum of the
              Literacy Campaign.


         7. Ms L D Carballo Gonzalez, Director and staff for School for the
              Disabled.


         8. Mrs L C Fabelo, President of the Commission on Education,
              Science and Culture/People's Power, National Assembly and the
              Commission - Cuba.


         9. Mr J R Cucelo, Director and staff Republic of Angola Senior
              High School.


         10.     Mrs M C C Tabares, Director, Nursery School "Semillitas
              del 2000".


         11.     Mr T D Denis, Sub-Director and staff Nursery School
              "Semillitas del 2000".


         12.     Ms O Miranda, Teacher, and staff Nursery School of Jesus
              Menendez Co-operatives, Cuba.


         13.     Dr F Vecino Alegret, Minister of Higher Education, Cuba.


         14.     Staff, Old Havana and Africa House.


         15.     Hon I Gomez, Minister of Education, Cuba.


         16.     Mr F A D Alfonso, Director, International Sport
              University.


         17.     Latin-American School of Medical Science.


         18.     Mr A Benarides, Director, Social Workers School.


         19.     The Directors and staff - CINED Educational Film Centre.


         20.     Staff - Jose Marti Museum of Revolution.


         21.     Hon J G Menchero, Deputy Minister of Foreign Relations and
              staff, Cuba.


         22.     University Management and the Staff, Havana Agricultural
              University.


         23.     Ms D Delgado, English Interpreter - Cuba.


         24.     Mr S Castro Fernandez - Professional Staff, National
              Assembly of People's Power - Havana, Cuba.
         25.     All the drivers - National Assembly of People's Power.


         26.     All the communities visited.


     Report to be considered.

