---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 October 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-10-18
---

THURSDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M U KALAKO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House


  (1) notes the importance of -
       (a)  National Marine Day on Friday, 19 October 2001, and the
           commitment of the ANC-led Government to the sustainable use of
           our natural resources for the benefit of all South Africans; and


       (b)  the importance of black economic empowerment within the fishing
           sector in order to increase the standard of living of poor
           fishing communities, historically one of the most deprived
           sectors of our economy;


  (2) acknowledges the commitment of Government to root out corruption
       within the fishing industry in order to bring about normalisation for
       the even and equitable distribution of this resource across the
       board;


  (3) recognise the work of the department through its coast care programme
       for furthering the upliftment of the fishing communities along our
       coast, within its poverty relief programmes; and


  (4) takes note of the Communicator of the Year Award during National
       Marine Week to recognise exceptional efforts by individuals to
       communicate marine and coastal issues in their respective fields and
       congratulates all award recipients.


[Applause.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay reports that the President and Ministers of
       Finance, Defence, Trade and Industry and Public Enterprises have had
       privileged access to a draft report from the special investigation
       into the arms deal;


  (2) recalls a meeting between the Ministers and the Auditor-General at
       the start of the investigation which prejudiced the independence of
       the Auditor-General;


  (3) condemns any apparent attempt either to influence the three
       investigating agencies towards reaching uniform conclusions, or to
       intimidate them into supporting the Government's defence of its arms
       deal; and


  (4) calls on -


       (a)  Ministers not to intervene in the arms investigation in any way;
           and


       (b)  the Auditor-General to place on record whether there have been
           any other Ministerial interventions and, if so, how many and
           what was on the agenda for discussion.

[Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Minister and Department of Correctional Services are
           committed to placing rehabilitation of prisoners at the core
           their its activities so that a balance is struck between
           rehabilitation and safe custody; and


       (b)  the Department has developed individualised needs-based
           rehabilitation programmes that include provision of specialised
           treatment and development to prisoners in partnership with the
           community and the prisoner; and


   (2)      congratulates the Minister of Correctional Services on launching
       a prisoners' skills training exhibition in East London, a creative
       arts competition for prisoners in Durban and the Upington Training
       Centre for prisoners as examples of the rehabilitation programmes
       that are being implemented.

[Applause.]

Mr I M CACHALIA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  reports that South Africa and Algeria aim to boost trade between
           the two countries; and


       (b)  that President Thabo Mbeki and his Algerian counterpart,
           President Bouteflika, ordered their Ministers to develop a model
           for intra-Africa and south-to-south bilateral agreements;


  (2) believes that these developments reflect the commitment of both
       Presidents to the economic growth and prosperity of the African
       continent and building a better world; and


  (3) welcomes the announcements made by the two presidents.

Dr S J GOUS: Voorsitter, hiermee gee ek kennis dat ek sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -
  (1) kennis neem van die onaanvaarbare vermorsing van die belastingbetaler
       se geld, na aanleiding van die volgende:


       (a)  die departement van gesondheid in die Noordelike Provinsie het
           'n internasionale rekenaarmaatskappy R116 miljoen betaal om 'n
           inligtingstegnologie-stelsel te installeer wat nie gebruik kan
           word nie; en


       (b)  'n nuwe tender van R94 miljoen is toegeken aan 'n ander
           rekenaarmaatskappy om dié stelsel te verwyder en deur 'n
           splinternuwe stelsel te vervang;


  (2) aandring op 'n verduideliking wat die vermorsing van R116 miljoen sal
       regverdig; en


     3) glo die ondersoek wat geloods is, moet so spoedig moontlik
        afgehandel word sodat diegene wat hulself skuldig gemaak het aan
        wanbestuur tot verantwoording geroep kan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr S J GOUS: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move:


  That the House –


  (1) notes the unacceptable wasting of taxpayers' money, arising from the
       following:


       (a)  the department of health in the Northern Province paid an
           international computer company R116 million to install an
           information technology system that cannot be used; and


       (b)  a new tender of R94 million has been awarded to another computer
           company to remove this system and replace it with a brand-new
           system;


  (2) insists on an explanation that will justify the wasting of R116
       million; and


  (3) believes that the investigation which has been launched must be
       completed as soon as possible so that those who are guilty of
       mismanagement can be brought to book.]
Mr S ABRAM: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the disarray, havoc and problems of political alliances on both
       sides of the House;


  (2) notes that these tensions highlight the fact that these alliances are
       rooted in the past, based more on convenience and expediency than on
       principled considerations;


  (3) further notes that the South African political landscape remains
       littered with the baggage of the past and racial voting patterns,
       which hampers the development of a shared vision and real nation-
       building;


  (4) also notes that these alliances are the embodiment of this,
       irrespective of how often they have attempted to change their focus;
       and


  (5) urges politicians of principle from all parties who are committed to
       a new South Africa and real nation-building, to unshackle themselves
       from the racially defined politics of the past and to consider an
       invitation by the UDM to a convention of political leaders to achieve
       real and lasting realignment of the political landscape.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, could you please lower
your voices. You are talking so loudly that we cannot even hear what
members are saying ...

Mrs F MAHOMED: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the -


       (a)  suspension of all business by the United States House of
           Representatives in Washington DC; and


       (b)  numerous anthrax scares in various cities in the United States
           and recently in Cape Town;


  (2) strongly condemns the perpetrators of these heinous crimes and
       demands that they be prosecuted to the full extent of the law;


  (3) expresses solidarity with our US counterparts and hopes that they
       will be in a position to resume their work as soon as possible;


  (4) further condemns the irresponsible hoax callers and practical jokers
       whose morbid pranks can only spread panic and despondency amongst our
       own population; and


  (5) urges all South Africans to remain calm and not allow themselves to
       be panicked by the threat of chemical or biological attacks.

[Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:
  That the House -


  (1) requests -


       (a)  the Gauteng health department to clear up the uncertainty
           regarding the allegations that R654 000 a year is being lost to
           unscrupulous suppliers of bread to primary schools; and


       (b)  that the required amount of bread to the said schools be adhered
           to, namely 800 g instead of 700 g; and


  (2) calls on the Ministry of Health to institute an inquiry into this
       matter, especially that this malpractice has been going on since the
       scheme's inception in 1996, and that the supplier has been awarded a
       tender for a further two years.

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that
on the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes with sadness the developments in the Limpopo River region where
       workers from Zimbabwe are employed without legal documentation;


  (2) realises with sadness that unemployment in that region is
       disturbingly high and that this presents the Government with
       uncomfortable choices;


  (3) observes that this is a problem of land redistribution inherited from
       the days of racial segregation, as on both sides of the Limpopo River
       landowners, and therefore employers, are white and workers or
       workseekers are black; and


  (4) nevertheless feels that this is an excellent opportunity for SADC to
       come in and integrate the needs of the countries in the region and
       not leave it to one country to have to take the painful decision to
       evict and expel citizens of a neighbouring country.

Mr M T GONIWE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That this House -


  (1) notes with profound sadness the untimely death of Mrs Patricia
       Moferi, who for many years served members of this House with
       dedication as a chamber service officer and a service officer at the
       Good Hope building; and


  (2) expresses heartfelt condolences to her family, relatives, friends and
       colleagues, and assures them of our support and wishes them strength
       at this time of grief.

[Applause.]

Adv P S SWART: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) is horrified to note police statistics which show that more than 21
       000 South Africans were murdered last year;
  (2) recognises that even if these figures show a slight reduction over
       previous years, the murder rate in our country is unacceptably high;
       and


  (3) calls on the ANC Government to make a real commitment to protecting
       the lives of South Africans by making money available for -


       (a)  increased visible policing; and


       (b)  proper equipping of police officers to enable them to do their
           job.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) is shocked to read in the ICD Annual Report that 158 police have
       failed to perform their duties and responsibilities in the Eastern
       Cape;


  (2) is also shocked to read that there are 603 and 332 police in Gauteng
       and the Western Cape, that are neglecting their duties or performing
       their duties in an improper manner;


  (3) urges the SAPS management to investigate these matters and to fire
       the irresponsible culprits concerned; and


  (4) urges that harsh discipline be taken, which will bring back order in
       the police service, which is what is needed most.

Mr K A MOLOTO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that Israeli Prime Minister, Ariel Sharon, remarked that the
       Palestinian President was solely to blame for the assassination of a
       former Israeli Cabinet Minister, Rehavam Zeevi;
  (2) further notes the comments by an Israeli government spokesperson that
       the entire diplomatic and security situation needs to be reviewed;


  (3) condemns the assassination of the former Israeli Cabinet Minister and
       the killing of unarmed and innocent civilians, especially Palestinian
       women and children; and


  (4) urges all the role-players not to be distracted by the recent wave of
       violence and to work towards the peaceful resolution of the conflict
       in the Middle East.

[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with concern that the rand reversed all gains against the US
           dollar to 935, dragging the bond market down on Monday, 15
           October 2001; and


       (b)  the volatile market was not helped by the statement made by the
           Deputy Minister of Finance, Mandisi Mpahlwa, in Amsterdam, that
           interest rates were unlikely to be cut further this year; and


  (2) calls upon Deputy Minister Mpahlwa to note that the determination of
       interest rates is the prerogative of the Reserve Bank.

Mr J T MASEKA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its outrage at the report that a staggering 11 rape cases
       have been reported in Marico in the North West during the past 24
       hours;
  (2) calls on the Minister of Safety and Security to heed the warning by
       experts that rape has become a national emergency in South Africa;


  (3) expresses its concern that the increase in child rape is due to the
       myth that having sex with a virgin can cure HIV/Aids; and


  (4) calls upon the Government to intervene urgently to protect the
       children and women of South Africa.

Mr N M DUMA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the attacks by the DP on South African sports administrators;


  (2) rejects claims by the DP that sports administrators, other than in
       rugby and cricket, put their interests above those of sportspersons;
  (3) commends the sacrifices made by sports administrators in the
       interests of the country; and


  (4) calls on the DP to apologise unreservedly for this slur on South
       African sports administrators.

[Applause.]

                             SQUID BOAT DISASTER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I hereby move
without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the tragedy at sea when a squid boat, the Southern Reaper, sank
           off the St Francis Bay coast on Tuesday; and


       (b)  that seven of the crew are still missing, while one body has
           been recovered;


  (2) commends the sea rescue teams who assisted in the safe recovery of
       nine of the crew members; and


  (3) conveys its condolences and support to the families of those who lost
       their lives.

Agreed to.

    FINAL DECLARATION OF IPU MEETING ON ``ACTION OF PARLIAMENTS AND THEIR
 MEMBERS IN THE FIGHT AGAINST RACISM, RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, XENOPHOBIA AND
                            RELATED INTOLERANCE''

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The SPEAKER: Chairperson, I think I ought to remind the Chief Whip of the
IFP that from down here I cannot extend the time of his speech. [Laughter.]
Six weeks ago, members from over 50 parliaments met in Durban to consider
what roles parliaments should play in fighting racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. More than 300 members
of parliaments met in the shadow of the UN Intergovernmental World
Conference Against Racism. With a more modest agenda and largely ignored by
the media - and perhaps because we were - we agreed on a declaration that
had previously been circulated to over 160 parliaments around the world.

On behalf of the IPU I was privileged to present the declaration of
parliaments to the World Conference and also conveyed the commitment of
parliaments, including our own, to take an active part in the process that
began in Durban. I submitted to that World Conference and do so to this
House today, that the declaration and programme of action adopted by
governments will remain pieces of papers, mere declarations of intent,
unless we as parliaments intervene to ensure their implementation. This is
a heavy responsibility and today we must begin our consideration of how we
will discharge that burden.

We will have an opportunity on another occasion, when Government presents
its report to us, to consider the intergovernmental conference. I wish to
appeal to colleagues today that we desist from debating the detail of that
conference, its success and its problems, and focus rather on how we as
parliaments are going to address racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance.

The South African Parliament has a historic responsibility to lead in that
process. Each one of us in this Assembly has lived in that most
comprehensive and institutionalised form of racism known as apartheid. Each
of us experienced it differently, depending on our ancestry, pigmentation
and relationship to the power structure of the period. Seven years into a
democratic South Africa and in the light of the revelations before the TRC,
not one of us can dare deny knowledge of what that system meant to the
majority of South Africans and its consequences in our lives.

Apartheid was not simply racial discrimination as it prevailed - and still
prevails in so many countries, including our own. Rather, it was the total
organisation of society and all its institutions on the basis of a
predetermined and rigid relationship of inequality between black and white.
Into the foundations of institutions were built systems which served to
strengthen, entrench and perpetuate that founding assumption, hence the
imperative to remove these mechanisms from the institutions that are now
our common heritage. The entire edifice was maintained by a legal framework
that excluded the majority from access to both economic and political
power, as well as through repression, coercion and violence.

In 1994 the monopoly of political power was finally broken as our new
Constitution gave birth to this Parliament. It was thus incumbent on us,
and remains so, to effect all the other changes that are necessary,
including changes in laws, institutions and culture, to rid our society of
its racist heritage.

A member of this House described her feelings at the end of negotiations
when decisions were being taken to repeal a range of apartheid laws one by
one. ``It was like swatting flies,'' she said, ``as we called `repeal,
repeal, repeal.'' I regret the hon Patricia de Lille, who made that
statement, is not here today. But I am sure she will join in the
recognition that those flies died, but there were many left over and we
still have the task of eliminating the entire swarm and cleaning up the
debris.

In the last seven years this Parliament has passed over 700 laws, and our
Constitution protects us from any racist legislation on the Statute Book.
But can we as MPs honestly declare that in every area in which we have
enacted legislation, we have cleared away and eliminated all legal forms of
racial discrimination and established effective equality? Of course not.
Should we not perhaps provide that all committees examine not only a
particular Bill, but also the context in which the law will operate,
including social and economic circumstances, to ensure that no aspect of
racism still prevails?

I am not sure we would succeed totally, but would the very attempt not
raise our awareness of what remains to be done? We must do more than repeal
one or more old laws; we need to systematically and critically examine the
context in which every Bill before us will be applied and consider the
persons and institutions responsible for administering, monitoring and
enforcing the laws we enact. The entire legal and judicial system, the
police and security services and the Public Service need to be scrutinised.

Do they help to eliminate racism or do they perpetuate it, albeit
inadvertently? As all old institutions were based on foundations of racial
inequality, simply changing the laws is not enough. To take one example:
Notwithstanding the problems, we have achieved much in our education
system, including unifying it and opening schools to all.

Should we as Parliament and members of Parliament not monitor what is being
taught in the schools, in our various constituencies? Should we not open
the textbooks, read and assess them? There was an excellent report on
values we should be inculcating.

What can parliamentarians do to promote those values? Are the educators and
law-enforcement officers, for example, being trained to promote the values
of tolerance and diversity? To what extent do our own debates in this House
reflect tolerance, diversity and inclusivity? We have a unique opportunity
to demonstrate and promote these. What standards are we setting?

To what extent do we consider the impact of our example and occasionally
desist from scoring party-political points? How often do we curb our words
and refrain from addressing each other in disparaging language? It is not
whether a particular phrase is unparliamentary or not, or whether it leads
to disorder in the House, but rather of being sensitive to the message we
are conveying and the example we set.

At our meeting in Durban there was an excellent debate on the tension
between hate speech and freedom of expression, and also our responsibility
to promote a society based on tolerance. This raised many of the issues we
debated in the Constitutional Assembly, and in the negotiations. Should we
perhaps revisit those debates, so that we can raise national awareness?

We also need to look at parliamentary mechanisms. We have established a
committee that looks at the implementation of Cedaw, but what are we doing
about the International Convention on the Elimination of all forms of
Racial Discrimination? There are other relevant conventions, including
these protecting the rights of migrant workers and members of their
families, and those relating to the status of refugees.

We need to require that the executive table draft reports on all
conventions in Parliament, which committees can then consider and in which
there can be public hearings before final reports are submitted to the
relevant international authority. Let us also look at which conventions
remain to be ratified. We need to consider and debate the reports prepared
by the UN special rapporteurs. We could learn from them, especially
recently on the issue of xenophobia.

What are we as members of Parliament doing about the xenophobia that is now
being manifested in particular in communities in South Africa, and which
runs against our history of being a home for the people of the region and
our aspirations for African unity? Today genocide ethnic, linguistic and
religious violence and cleansing xenophobia; and intolerance of almost
every type of difference prevail on every continent. There is also a
greater awareness of the diversity of populations, an awareness arising at
least in part from improvements in the dissemination of information and
greater diversity arising from the movement of people. We need to celebrate
this diversity as an enrichment of our society, rather than a threat to its
survival.

We in South Africa are particularly blessed as the cradle of humankind and
with a diversity reflected in our population. The declaration, ``Tolerance
and Diversity: A vision for the 21st Century'' signed by many presiding
officers of national legislatures, including this one, says, and I quote:


  Instead of allowing diversity of race and culture to become a limiting
  factor in human exchange and development, we must refocus our
  understanding, discern in such diversity the potential for mutual
  enrichment, and realise that it is the interchange between great
  traditions of human spirituality that offers the best prospect for the
  persistence of the human spirit itself.


  For too long such diversity has been treated as a threat rather than a
  gift. Too often that threat has been expressed in racial contempt and
  conflict, in exclusion, discrimination and intolerance. These horrors are
  still with us in various forms. It is now time to confront them and to
  take comprehensive measures against them.

Let us now go forward together and contribute to the realisation of this
vision in South Africa and internationally. [Applause.]

Mr P R MOKABA: Members of Parliament, I greet Madam Speaker, who is not, of
course, in her seat, but because what we are celebrating today - the input
of the Interparliamentary Union - took place in Durban when it did as a
result of the insistence of the Speaker of the Parliament of South Africa.

Madam Speaker realised at the time that there was not a way in which
governments were going to speak alone when governments are supposed to be
implementing laws. However, it was important for parliaments to come
together and for public representatives to come together to share a common
vision with the implementors of that law. For that reason, I rise to
congratulate Madam Speaker, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Comrade
Nkosazana Zuma, on the achievement they scored for humanity and not just
for South Africa. [Applause.]

The importance of the whole conference and the importance of the input of
members of Parliament, or public representatives, is underscored by the
fact that South Africa has accepted the mantle of leadership in the
struggle against racism here and abroad. We remain, as a country, a shining
example of how racism, xenophobia and other forms of discrimination here
and abroad can be confronted in a way that is uniting, and in a way that
avoids division and builds patriotism.

But what we need to be aware of as members of the legislature, as members
of Parliament, is that we should guard against reducing the issue of racism
to a mere question of attitudes. We should guard against reducing racism to
a mere question of formal freedoms.

Racism, we have defined many, many times, and it is when we agree on the
definition of racism that we will make progress towards resolving it. It is
not the fact that one is born white, neither is it the fact that one is
born black that constitutes the problem of racism. It is how these facts of
biology are used to discriminate, to decide who must eat and who should not
eat. That is the simplest definition of racism: That because of the colour
of one's skin, there is no way one can be allowed to live as a full human
being, that because of the shape of one's nose one will be identified as a
person who should be deprived of public goods and services. That is the
basis of racism.

To recognise racism as such is important, because it says to those who want
to fight it that, indeed, it is something that we can change, because it
does not require the elimination, by any means, of people one differs from
on the basis of colour. It requires the elimination of the system that
ensures that public goods and services are allocated on the basis of how
people were born. That is what is critical: that this racism is
socioeconomic. It is not an inborn thing. It can be changed and that is how
we should recognise it. The Government of the day in South Africa, since
its inception, has been putting in place programmes, programmes that at
times have been misunderstood, programmes approved by this Parliament,
programmes to affirm people who have been excluded from the Constitution
before - the Africans and black people in general. The RDP programmes - the
programmes of affirmative action and black economic empowerment - are at
the centre of our struggle towards resolving the problem of racism.

It would be important for us, as parliamentarians and public
representatives everywhere, at least to agree on this fundamental approach
to the issue of racism, ie that we have to change the material conditions
of life of our people to ensure that all have equal access, irrespective of
race, to public goods and services. Seven years into freedom, we need to be
asking ourselves the question: Are the property rights that we have
safeguarded in our Constitution allowing us to move forward towards the
resolution of racism? Have we changed patterns of ownership of productive
forces to a point where everybody feels that they can be owners in our
country?

Regarding the issue of income inequalities, which is still one of the worst
forms of racism in our country, what are the strategies and legislative
programmes that we can put in place? What are the actions that we should
take to assist us in eliminating these income inequalities? Income
inequality is sometimes, and I think correctly so, defined as a market
failure. It is also a form of failure, not of Government alone.

I am saying that if Government does not take action by putting programmes
in place, income inequalities are going to remain with us for many many
years. But this Government has taken action with regard to this issue of
income inequalities by ensuring that we turn around patterns of ownership.
It is for this reason that we are asking the support of all members of
Parliament to ensure that South Africa moves as quickly as possible towards
a nonracial, democratic and nonsexist country. Related to this is an issue
that is equally sensitive, that we should consider as members of Parliament
- we will not be able to defeat racism until we have defeated the problems
of tribalism and ethnicity.

The issue of title deeds for the rural masses has to be discussed - without
emotions - because it is an important issue towards dealing with the
problems that I have just defined. It does not make sense that in a rural
setting one finds a farmer having a title deed on his land, but those who
work on that very same land do not have title deeds. This is not a party-
political issue, but one of how we deal with rural development and of how
indeed we liberate the Africans in particular, and blacks in general.

This is not an anti-chiefs issue. It is about how together - the chiefs,
the public and political parties - consider issues of rural development for
our people, for if we do not do that their vote will continue to be
diminished in comparison with the vote of the urban dwellers. It is
important that we do not make such issues party political, but that we
consider dealing with problems of discrimination in our country, eg what
are the socioeconomic and political programmes that we should put in place
to ensure that we move quickly away from problems of discrimination among
ourselves.

The principle of affirmative action is a good one, but it has been used
most of the time to address problems between white and black. It is
critical that we find a system that can address or move us away from
ethnicity, as I have pointed out, as well as from tribalism and various
other forms of discrimination. And from the legislative framework, we
should find that system.

This is what the IPU was all about. This is what all political parties in
South Africa must be sensitive to. When these matters are addressed, it
does not help us, because of party-political positions, to accuse people of
reverse racism when, actually, what is being done is to judiciously apply
affirmative action, which is a temporary weapon until people are equal.

To correct what former governments before us have done, it is this approach
that we, as members of the legislature here and in every other province,
should adopt, for South Africa to move as a country. As a patriotic people
we should lead the world against the scourge of racism, xenophobia and
other forms of discrimination.

Unfortunately, it does not seem as if we are agreed on this basis. That is
why, even at that conference, instead of South African parliamentarians
speaking with one voice, we had problems of those who wanted to go there in
the international context and engage in the party politics of South Africa.
That did not assist the country. That did not assist humanity. It is
something that we, as South Africans, must consider. When will we act only
from a patriotic basis?

South Africa goes there and says to the world: We have defeated the first
forms of racism and we need your support to continue on this path. It is
something that we could do as we move into Africa and into the world. What
did we have? Members of our own Parliament seeking to detract from that
particular message, in spite of the fact that the Speaker actually gave
permission for people to speak their minds. She said people should not be
suppressed because they come from opposition parties; they should be
allowed to speak their minds so that South Africans can be heard, and that
right was misused.
However, I am not surprised because, at least, the conference has come back
to haunt them in the provincial legislature and the unicity, where the
problem of Marais is not a problem of corruption only, but is rooted in
racism. [Applause.] It is rooted in the need to abuse and mislead the
coloured population. It has exposed the undemocratic practices that we find
in a party that says it is fighting for democracy, where a leader takes
decisions alone to expel people from his party. [Interjections.] It is
easy, because they are coloured people.  [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, let me express my surprise at the hon Peter
Mokaba's complaint, that MPs at the conference did not speak with one
voice. The only MPs that spoke at all were Sheila Camerer and I. The hon
Peter Mokaba and the ANC delegates did not speak at all, and the subject on
which I spoke was the tension between free speech and hate speech.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Ms M SMUTS: That subject requires a certain treatment and application.

As Madam Speaker has said, this debate is not about the Durban race
conference, neither is it about the NGO forum that took place a week
beforehand, nor the UN Conference of governments itself. I say that it is
fortunately so, because the sooner the world forgets the race conference
and its association with us, the better for us. [Interjections.]

It was in the words of Nobel Peace Prize winner, Elie Wiesel, ``a circus of
calumny''. Moreover, I have to ask the question whether the journalist,
Daniel Johnson, son of Paul, did not, in fact, have a point when he said
that it created a context for events that followed thereafter.
[Interjections.] I say so because I found, at the NGO forum, that Middle
Eastern participants who became agitated at anything approaching free
speech, debate and challenging questioning, identified themselves upon
enquiry in discussions afterwards as members of the avowedly violent
organisations rather than mainstream Middle Eastern movements.

It has to be said, before I revert to the IPU Statement, that the hatred
that flowed at the NGO conference was, however, also present in the
precincts of the venue where the IPU Conference was held on Sunday. It was
in that place, the pleasant UN-controlled venue, that I was handed this
copy of the notorious Hitler pamphlet, which I have produced here for a
purpose and to which I will return. The debate is about the declaration of
the IPU Conference but it cannot escape its context.

The Interparliamentary Union met on the subject of the action of
parliaments, etc. The declaration produced there is necessarily - given the
broad composition of that pleasant Sunday meeting - in somewhat broad brush
strokes and impressionistic, and I intend to concentrate on a specific
aspect.

The declaration says that we are conscious of the importance of national
adherence to and implementation of the relevant international treaties, in
particular the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination (ICERD). It says that we should urge our parliaments
to adopt and monitor the implementation of laws consistent with our own
constitutions and which are necessary for the purpose of implementing the
conventions.

The qualification that such implementation should be consistent with our
own Constitution is there at our suggestion, with the support of the hon
Peter Mokaba on behalf of the ANC members of the delegation. And, it is
important to make that qualification because the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, is a convention
that is problematic. In fact, a string of countries has registered
reservations, especially against its article 4, which deals with free
speech and association. Those countries range from Austria through the
Bahamas and Belgium and carry on through the rest of the alphabet. They
have registered the reservations because they point to contradictions with
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Article 4 is, of course, the one that requires state parties to declare all
dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority and hatred and
incitement to racial discrimination an offence, punishable by law, and the
declaration makes it illegal for organisations to practice propaganda
activities which incite racial discrimination.  South Africa, in my view,
should not in fact have ratified the ICERD without reservation. This is a
subject of interesting dispute between myself and Dr Barney Pityana who,
through the SA Human Rights Commission, has pursued certain enquiries which
in my view should have stuck to our own Constitution rather than the ICERD
in trying to curtail free speech.

Our own Constitutions free speech provision is modelled on the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) which, unlike
the ICERD, is one of the genuinely great instruments. Our own free speech
clause, in turn, expressly departs from the ICCPR in a number of respects
which should be observed and which necessarily imply that we should not
implement the ICERD exactly as it stands.

The ICCPR, through article 20, especially provides for the prohibition by
law of any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence. Now, we
expressly did not require such legal prohibition in our free speech clause
and, therefore, we should think not once, but twice before we do legislate
against hate speech.

Secondly, our own definition of hate speech in our Constitution carries a
higher test or threshold than the ICCPR. It is not incitement of
discrimination that we have removed from the protection of free speech, but
the advocacy of hatred that constitutes incitement to cause harm. We did so
not because we approve of incitement or discrimination or propagandistic
activities or organisations, but because there is always a danger that
governments, any government, in a divided society will misuse the matter of
race to suppress political dissent under the cloak and disguise of acting
against racism. That is what happened in the old South Africa under the old
NP regime.

In addition, hate speech measures are always used by the powerful against
minorities. Madam Speaker here today said we should revisit those debates
during constitution-writing; I do so instantly. The examples of racial
speech that presented themselves, interestingly while we were negotiating
that constitution, included Mr Louis Farrakhan, who was then visiting South
Africa as a celebrity and, interestingly, Mr Tony Yengeni, the hon MP, who
said at the time that all whites were thieves. It is quite interesting to
look back at that time.
When we were negotiating, each time I cited one of those examples my fellow
negotiators who were black, and also some of our black journalists, thought
that I was scoring political points, but in fact I was not being
provocative. The fact was that the racial reproaches clouding the
contemporary atmosphere then tended to target persons other than black.
That simply showed that the power had shifted, because I think that the
genuinely held assumption was that it was only black people who needed
protection from white racist speech. That indicated that black hate speech
would not be seen as such.

The thing is that hate speech measures are always used - the trend has been
demonstrated - they are always used by the powerful against the minorities
in various countries; and do not forget that the majorities tend to have
the prosecutorial power and the minorities tend to be at the receiving end.
That is relevant to the point to which I wish to return.

I have said that our Constitution does not expressly require legal
prohibition of hate speech. Therefore, we should think not once but twice
before making such laws. A number of such legal provisions have been
passed. Section 10 of the Equality Act, for example, states that no person
may publish, propagate, advocate or communicate words based on the
prohibited grounds. That section does not in fact distinguish statements
made in private conversation from public utterance. It tends to want to
regulate all speech. Although it purports to regulate hate speech, it is
much more far-reaching than that.

Section 12 of that Act deals with the dissemination and broadcasting of
information, and that section, like the previous one, goes way beyond hate
speech and also way beyond what our Constitution envisages. Therefore, as
legislators we introduced a proviso which ensures that the constitutional
free speech clause will prevail. The proviso includes specific reference to
bona fide engagement in artistic creativity and debate.

Now the Equality Act does not criminalise hate speech as the ICERD
requires. Instead it referred that matter for further consideration. But
what I want to do today here is this: I want to draw members' attention to
the fact that we have in fact criminalised certain forms of hate speech. We
did it 1996 in the Film and Publications Act. The advocacy of racial hatred
that constitutes incitement to cause harm in publications, like this
pamphlet, carries a fine or imprisonment for up to five years in this
country. As always, we built in a proviso. We said bona fide scientific,
literary or comparable matters and bona fide discussion or argument would
be not be criminalised.

I wish to argue today that the Public Prosecutor, the Attorney-General in
KwaZulu-Natal, would in my view be in a position to institute proceedings
on this pamphlet. The person who produced and distributed it has publicly
identified himself. He has associated himself with the Islamic Propagation
Centre, formerly funded by the Bin Laden family. The centre itself has
distanced itself from him, as indeed the Bin Laden family has disowned its
son.

It is in closed societies, like some in the Middle East, that hate speech
does such harm. If incitement that goes on in certain territories and
countries had been public perhaps the terrorism we are now seeing would
have been anticipated - even better, the incitement could have been
countered head-on. In open societies we like to meet argument with
argument, insult with answer. It is never we on this side of the House who
want prohibitions on speech. It is usually the other side. We prefer
argument.
But I say that if ever there was a case for action, this is one such case.
Hitler asks: ``What if I had won?'' One of the good things would be that
there would be no Israel and no Palestinian blood shed. The rest is hon
members' guess. The bad thing: I would not allow the making of the new
Beetle. It is truly, truly shocking. If ever there was an example of
something that ought to be taken to the courts, this is it. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I think the contribution by Madam
Speaker was a very good one. She confined herself to the subject, and we
can go along with practically everything she has said. The same applies to
Ms Dene Smuts, who also made a very good contribution.

But there it stops, because I am very surprised at the speech made by the
hon Mr Peter Mokaba. Time only permits me to deal with one aspects thereof.
He stopped short of calling tribalism racism. He said we must move away
from forms of discriminatinon such as tribalism. This means that the hon
member is attacking the system of traditional authorities, because
tribalism is translated into traditional authorities. [Interjections.]
There can be no other explanation for it. The hon member stands here and he
says we must move away from that. [Interjections.]

I want to ask the hon the Deputy President if he agrees with the sentiment
that we must move away from tribalism as a form of discrimination.
[Interjections.] One sees that we have silence here. I think the hon member
owes the country an explanation for the stand that he has taken.
[Interjections.]

It is no use for the hon teacher sitting here, the professor with the big
moustache, to talk about that, because traditional authorities are
protected in the Constitution. [Laughter.] I can also teach the hon
professor something. [Interjections.]

The subject before us ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Dr Z P JORDAN: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary to
deliberately misconstrue what someone has said? [Interjections.] Is it
parliamentary? I did not hear the hon Mokaba say anything about traditional
authorities. He spoke about tribalism. Is it proper to misconstrue his
words? Is that parliamentary?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member we will look at what the
hon Mokaba said and we will look at what Mr Van der Merwe said. We will
then make a ruling later on that matter. Continue, hon Van der Merwe.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson I think the point of order is totally
unfounded. [Interjections.] That hon member ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Van der Merwe, continue with your
speech.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I am continuing because I want to answer that hon
member also. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Continue, hon member. [Interjections.]
Order!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I am trying to continue, but the hon members here are
shouting so much that I cannot hear myself. [Interjections.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members! Hon members, can we give
the hon member time to speak. Order! [Interjections.] Hon members, can we
give the member a chance to continue.

Mr J H VAN DE MERWE: I suggest, Chairperson, that you chase the Chief Whip
out. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, you do not have to challenge the
Chief Whip. [Interjections.] Continue with your speech, hon member.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, returning to the debate, the meeting in
Durban led to the declaration by the IPU. The way I read this it calls for
action by Parliament and parliamentarians, action in the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. The
South African Parliament and each one of us is therefore requested to do
something.

However, this comes from the IPU and I think that we should, just for a
moment, look at the IPU, ie what this body is. This union which was
established in 1889 is 112 years old and today consists of 142 parliaments.
The IPU's focal point is a worldwide parliamentary dialogue. It meets twice
a year and had two meetings this year.

At IPU meetings - I am also trying to educate the hon the Minister. If he
could just listen he would learn a lot - up to 1 000 members of parliament
from all over the world convene. One can hardly imagine the amount of
dialogue and interaction that takes place there. From that came this
resolution that something has to be done; action has to be taken in respect
of these evils.

We, as parliamentarians, have to look closely at ourselves. The subject
under discussion refers to what this Parliament can do and what we, as
parliamentarians, can do. The Speaker has clearly spelt out what Parliament
could do. If we look at what the country has done, we see that we have a
Constitution that provides for human rights. We have a Human Rights
Commission. We have courts that protect human rights. So as far as
Parliament is concerned, enough has been said about what it can do.

However, I want to focus on what we, as individual parliamentarians, can
do. I think that is the gist of it. What action can I, as a member of
Parliament, take. I want to quote from the declaration. It says:


  Members of parliament have a personal responsibility to use their
  influence on public opinion to promote the values of diversity and
  tolerance.

This huge international body, which represent 142 parliaments, is asking me
and each one of us to take personal responsibility to fight these evils. I
want to go a step further and say that the question whether or not to take
action is inherently a question of attitude. Our attitude towards other
people is what counts.

In conclusion, I want to say that our resolve today should be a very
personal one which each member should cherish, namely: What can I do? What
is my part going to be in the fight against these evils? If I can answer
that question personally, ie that I am committed to carrying out my
responsibility to do something constructive, then I am sure that this
positive attitude will ensure that action comes from that. [Interjections.]


Ms G L MAHLANGU: Mr Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, allow
me to congratulate Madam Speaker on initiating this debate.

I, however, would have been happier if we had discussed the IPU, as an
organisation, before this debate. There are a number of reasons why I say
so. One of the reasons is that the Interparliamentary Union is a world
organisation of parliaments. As a result, it is a focal point for world-
wide parliamentary dialogue and works for peace and co-operation among
people as well as the firm establishment of representative democracy. I am
definitely sure that anyone participating in the IPU would like to maximise
their participation, and we are not different from such people.

We stand to benefit a lot from our interaction with other parliaments if
we, ourselves, are better prepared before each conference. We are in an
even more serious position, as South Africa, as we are always perceived to
be leading Africa. Hence there are lots of expectations.

Over 140 parliaments - in fact, to be precise and for the benefit of Mr Van
der Merwe, it is 143; I do not know which one he dropped - are members of
the IPU. The programme of this union is very interesting and rich. The IPU
has four study committees which are as follows: Firstly, a committee on
political questions and international security; secondly, a committee on
parliamentary human rights questions; thirdly, a committee on economic and
social questions; and lastly, a committee on education, science, culture
and the environment.

Our participation in these committees is minimal, precisely because we have
never presented resolutions on any of these prior to conferences. According
to the rules, it will be those countries that have submitted resolutions
that will be given priority when it comes to speaking rights.

I need to mention here that I have listened to the Chief Whip of the IFP.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Jy lyk mooi, Gwen. [Gelag.] [You are looking lovely,
Gwen. [Laughter.]]

Ms G L MAHLANGU: Ek weet. [I know.] [Laughter.] I know that. What I am
going to say now is that when we were addressed by the head of state in
Cuba, the hon member, who has just left this podium, absented himself. I
want to believe that as we leave here as a delegation, we all represent
South Africa, no matter how one feels about a country. I think that is what
one should be saying here. Otherwise one actually undermines the IPU.
[Interjections.] I am, however, very pleased that in terms of preparations
for the coming IPU conference in Morocco, all these concerns will be
addressed.

I also need to mention the involvement of African countries. This is very
disappointing in the sense that we do not have regular meetings as a
geopolitical group, but, to a large extent, rely on the Francophone
countries. This tendency is a concern for Anglophone countries as they feel
marginalised.

A major concern for parliamentarians is peace and security. The two IPU
conferences held in Jakarta and Amman provided an excellent forum for
dialogue and negotiation.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, may I ask the hon member a question?
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Would you take a question, hon member?
Ms G L MAHLANGU: No.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, she is not prepared to take a
question.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I wanted to answer her on her lie that
Cuba ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Sit down, hon member. [Interjections.]
Order! Continue, hon member.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: She was lying, Chairperson. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Continue, hon member.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, if I heard Mr Van
der Merwe correctly he was saying that the hon member Mahlangu was lying. I
believe that should be withdrawn.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, would you withdraw those words
please. It is unparliamentary to say a member is lying.
Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I will do so, but I just want to tell
you ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: No, hon member. Just withdraw that, hon
member. [Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I sat listening to the President for more than an
hour. [Interjections.] Then I had another appointment and had to leave.
[Interjections.] I withdraw the words.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, I did not say you must
substantiate what you were saying. You must just withdraw the words that
the member was lying. Can you please withdraw them, hon member.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I withdraw that the member is lying.
[Interjections.] She is telling an untruth. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEES: Continue, hon member.

Ms G L MAHLANGU: A major concern for parliamentarians is peace and
security, and the two IPU conferences held in Jakarta and Amman provided an
excellent forum for dialogue and negotiation on issues relating to peace
and security for parliamentarians all over the world.

In the general debate on the political, economic and social situation in
the world, many delegates voiced their concerns about conflicts and
disputes that threaten international, regional or national peace and
security. The situation in the Middle East remains, of course, the focus of
much discussion. On 11 September this year, at the time of the attack on
the World Trade Centre, the IPU conference in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso,
was discussing the situation in the Middle East.

The IPU has always been a strong advocate for the prevention of conflicts
and for the stemming of conflicts at the source before they erupt, rather
than coping with the ravages of war and its consequences. Thus, in May 2000
the union urged states to address all the root causes of armed conflict in
order to ensure the long-term protection of civilians through the promotion
of economic growth, poverty eradication, sustainable development, national
reconciliation, good governance, democracy, the rule of law, and respect
and protection of human rights.
For many years the union has been outspoken in calling for the banning of
all nuclear weapons. It made a strong case for this in its resolution of
April 1999 on parliamentary action to encourage all countries to sign and
ratify the comprehensive test-ban treaty prohibiting all nuclear testing,
to encourage universal and nondiscriminatory nuclear nonproliferation
measures, and to work towards the eventual elimination of all nuclear
weapons.

In Amman the IPU conference once again expressed its support for the United
Nations disarmament efforts and encouraged the parliaments of all states
that had not yet ratified the treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear
weapons to do so without delay. The conference reiterated its call for the
earliest possible disappearance of all weapons of mass destruction, be they
conventional, biological, chemical or nuclear.

Echoing the appeals made by the United Nations General Assembly in October
1999, the IPU urged states to take all possible measures to ensure that
children under the age of 18 do not take part in hostilities or military
action, and are not forcibly recruited into armed forces.

On the partnership between men and women, for almost a quarter of a century
the IPU has been urging its members to make sure that their delegations to
IPU meetings include at least one woman. Since then careful attention has
been paid to the members' compliance with those terms, not only by women
MPs, but also by the IPU governing bodies, which some three years ago
mandated the gender partnership group to keep track of developments. It
should interest members that South Africa has never been a victim, because
the ANC makes it a point that women participate, whilst other parties in
this House have never sent a single woman to participate.

In June 2000, the United Nations Secretary-General declared that respect
for international law was essential for the proper functioning of
contemporary society. He appealed to all states to take stock of their
accession to the multilateral treaties, of which he was a depository,
inviting them to take advantage of the Millennium Summit to sign and ratify
those treaties or accede to them. Mr Kofi Annan further asked the IPU to
bring the matter to the attention of national parliaments for their
support.

On the protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, for a number of years now the status of
accession to Cedaw has been submitted twice a year to the meeting of women
parliamentarians and discussions concerning the implementation of and
respect for this key legal instrument took place again in 2000 at the
meetings in Amman, Jakarta and Cuba in April this year. In Jakarta the
meeting of women parliamentarians took a close look at the optional
protocol to Cedaw when it adopted this new instrument on 6 October 1999.
The United Nations General Assembly invited all the state parties to the
convention to accede to it as soon as possible. I hope by the time we go to
Morocco we shall have looked at the optional protocol.

In ratifying the optional protocol, a state would recognise the competence
of the committee on the elimination of discrimination against women.
Members should note that we still have not ratified the optional protocol,
as I have just been addressing the Speaker on that.

As a mother and an environmentalist, my plea to all parliaments of the
world with respect to intolerance, is to ensure that they have in place
adequate and appropriate legislation to outlaw all practices that degrade
our environment. Environmental racism is glaringly seen in the
nonacceptance of the Kyoto Protocol by the United States. The pressure on
the world's parliaments has to be deepened. Added rather graphically is the
use of terrorism to further particular causes.

Discussions and deliberations of the IPU and declarations such as the one
we are discussing this afternoon should receive support from parliaments of
the world, otherwise the exercise just becomes futile. We as parliaments
should show a commitment to the declarations of the Interparliamentary
Union to strengthen it. We find ourselves in the same globe and as
neighbours we should do unto our neighbour as we would do unto ourselves.
This is the basis of the civilisational dialogue from my continent Africa
and my country South Africa, let the IPU be seized with it. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I ask for an opportunity for a personal
explanation. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I will not allow it now during the
debate. We will consider it.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I have four minutes of my speech that I
did not use. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! We will consider that, but not during
the debate.

Mr J DURAND: Chairperson, the South African Constitution, passed in 1996,
states as the core values of this country nonracism, nonsexism and
equality. Our Constitution is a negotiated document between the former
government and the liberation movements. It is a contract between South
Africans. It is an instruction by the people on how they want to be
governed. And as members of Parliament we are the guardians of the
Constitution. We must make sure that it gets implemented in the lives of
our people.

The Constitution attempts to remain true to the values of the Freedom
Charter, and sentences from the People's Charter are very clear on how
South Africans want to live. South Africa belongs to all who live in it,
black and white, and only a democratic state based on the will of the
people ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, could you please lower
your voices. Mr Durand, continue.

Mr J DURAND: ... can secure to all their birth right without the
distinction of colour, race, sex or belief.

All South Africans welcomed the speech by the then Deputy President, Thabo
Mbeki, on 8 May 1996 when our Constitution was adopted. I want to quote
from this masterpiece. The wonderful images of unity and diversity resonate
through the speech, with the central theme being - We are all Africans:


  I owe my being to the Khoi and the San ...
  I am formed of the migrants who left Europe to find a new home in our
  native land.
  In my veins courses the blood of the Malay slaves who came from the East.


  I am the grandchild of the warrior men and women that Hintsa and
  Sekhukhune led, the patriots that Cetshwayo and Mphephu took to battle
  ...
  I am the grandchild who lays flowers on the Boer graves at St Helena, the
  Bahamas ..

As our future President then, he united all South Africans as one, as
Africans, as equals. As a future leader of this country, he reassured us
about the Constitution:


  The constitution, whose adoption we celebrate, constitutes an unequivocal
  statement that we refuse to accept that our Africanness shall be defined
  by our race, our colour, our gender or our historical origins.


  It seeks to create a situation in which all our people shall be free from
  fear, including the fear of the oppression of one national group by
  another, the fear of the disempowerment of one social echelon by another,
  the fear of the use of state power to deny anybody his or her fundamental
  human rights, and the fear of tyranny.


  It aims to open the doors so that those who were disadvantaged can assume
  their place in society as equals with their fellow human beings without
  regard to colour, race, gender, age or geographical dispersal. It
  provides the opportunity to enable each and all to state their views,
  promote them, strive for their implementation in the process of
  governance, without fear that a contrary view will be met with
  repression.
We come from a divided, racist and unjust past. As South Africans we have
taken a conscious decision to change. We created a miracle when all
Africans of the South, both black and white, got together and made a new,
free, nonracial country possible. The world celebrated with us. We were
happy. It is good to be South African - proud, loyal and patriotic.

We should learn from the past, not repeat it. What we need is a superhuman
effort to be other than human, not seek revenge, though it might seem just,
not be bitter, though it might be normal to be. What benefit will there be
for Afro-Americans if they hate Africans for having sold them as slaves to
the Europeans? It will not add an inch to their length, nor will it put the
clock back.

The apartheid society did not only create hatred for each other, but also
self-hatred. The limited range of opportunities open to blacks gave rise to
rationalisation in favour of the status quo, self-doubt and self-
accusations. We should not call each other ``coconuts'' or ``10% men'',
merely because our pigmentation or the shape of our noses differ slightly.
We are Africans.

Dit bly egter van kardinale belang dat die diskoers rondom die
konseptualisering en definiëring van die self, wie of wat ek as mens binne
'n bepaalde groep is, binne die bruin gemeenskap een is wat hom beroep op
nugtere en deurdagte dialoog. Dit is 'n diskoers wat gevrywaar moet word
van politieke opportunisme en moeisame, ingewikkelde artikulasies van
selfgeprofesseerde intellektuele, soos baie keer in die Parlement gebeur.

Die kwessie rondom bruin identiteit is 'n persoonlike keuse, 'n keuse wat
moontlik gemaak word deur die aanpasbaarheid wat inherent en onoplosbaar
deel is van bruinwees, diep gewortel is en het sy oorsprong in ons afkoms.
Hetsy die individu dus sy Europese afkoms of sy Afrikawortels besing, dit
bly 'n persoonlike saak.

Juis omdat die Grondwet, wat die basis van ons demokrasie vorm, ons toelaat
om ons individualiteit uit te leef en toleransie as 'n fundamentele
beginsel beklemtoon, het geen persoon of groep die reg om ons daaroor aan
te val of skuldig te laat voel nie. Dus, of ek myself as 'n bruinman of as
'n kleurling beskou, dit bly my reg. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[However, it remains of the utmost importance that the discourse around the
conceptualising and defining of the self, who or what I am as a human being
within a certain group of people, within the coloured community, is one
that calls on level-headed  and well-thought-out dialogue. It is a
discourse that should be safeguarded from political opportunism and
tiresome, complicated articulations of self-professed intellectuals, as
happens many a time in Parliament.

The issue around coloured identity is a personal choice, a choice that is
made possible by the adaptability which is inherent in and an insoluble
part of being coloured, is deeply rooted and has its origin in our
heritage. Whether the individual therefore praises his European or his
African roots, it remains a personal issue.

Precisely because the Constitution, which forms the basis of our democracy,
allows us to express our individuality and emphasises tolerance as a
fundamental principle, no person or group has the right to attack us
because of this or to make us feel guilty. Thus, whether I consider myself
as brown or as a coloured, it remains my right.]

As parliamentarians we are aware of the particular role and responsibility
that parliaments and their members have in the fight against racism, racial
discrimination and related intolerance, for parliaments adopt laws, approve
the national budget and oversee the executive branch of Government. Members
of Parliament have a personal responsibility to use their influence on
public opinion to promote the values of diversity and tolerance.

The controversy about who is or is not an African has turned vicious,
racist and exclusive. The focus on pigmentation has befuddled the South
African debate. Just this week the Algerian President spoke to us. He is
very light-skinned but he is very African. The widow of Joe Slovo claimed
that her exit from the Land Bank was part of a campaign of ethnic
cleansing; the same reason why Hitler killed 6 million Jews and, recently,
why hundreds of thousands suffered, and many died, in Eastern Europe.

We are assisting in a peace process in Africa where ethnic friction made
priests and nuns forget their calling and the fundamentals of the Bible.
They assisted in genocide of fellow Africans. Let us not forget the
contract that we, as South Africans, entered into that South Africa belongs
to all who live in it both black and white. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the hon Mr Van der Merwe
has requested to explain something to the House. [Interjections.] Order! I
said I will consider that and I have checked the Rules. In terms of Rule 69
(2), I will allow Mr Van der Merwe only three minutes. He should confine
himself to what he wants to explain with no debate! He should explain what
he wants to explain, that is all.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Chairperson, thank you for the opportunity, it
will be only one minute. My explanation is that at the state banquet or
meeting in Havana, President Castro addressed us. I attended that meeting
and did not leave when he arrived. After we had sat there for about an hour
and ten minutes - and he was still speaking - my wife and I had to keep
another appointment. I excused myself and we left. [Interjections.] We
could not wait for two hours. I think, he spoke for more than two hours.
[Interjections.] Therefore, any suggestion that I left the moment President
Castro arrived, as a sort of an insult to him, is a lie. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, you have explained yourself but,
again, you have repeated the unparliamentary word which I asked you to
withdraw before. Can you please withdraw that.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, now that I have given my explanation I
feel that the truth is out and I withdraw that. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, just withdraw that.
[Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Finally ...[Interjections.] ... I could have said it
there on the podium. [Interjections.] I just want to say that Gwen should
be ashamed of herself. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: No, no additions! Order! The following
member of the UDM is going to give his maiden speech, that is, W G Makanda.
[Applause.]

Mr W G MAKANDA: Mr Chairperson, hon members, the origins of racism in South
Africa are well-documented and have been extensively covered in various
fora where this vexing problem has been debated. It is deeply rooted in our
society and pervades our entire social fabric. To rid our society of this
scourge, we have to confront it squarely and honestly.

It is common knowledge that the present day economic disparities the
resultant social stratifications correspond to the racial inequalities
emanating from our history and perpetuate a divisive status quo which
reinforces the racial animosities which still plague our society. Common
sense tells us that the physical environment which breeds racism must be
transformed in such a way that people can relate as equals, compatriots,
humans, neighbours, colleagues, friends, brothers and sisters, bonded by a
common patriotism and a commitment to a shared destiny.

To achieve this goal, each one of us must be prepared to give a little.
That is a reciprocal process which places an obligation on all the
stakeholders. To uplift our disadvantaged countrymen, to whom the much-
vaunted freedom remains an elusive mirage, those who control the means of
wealth creation must go the extra mile in rekindling the economy and
redistributing the largesse ever wider. That includes the newly emergent
black entrepreneurs who have joined the league.

All of us, in equal measure, must exorcise the demons of our past because
they continue to haunt us in our thoughts, utterances, political
strategies, social and political interactions. There are those who look to
the past with nostalgia and even dream of recapturing those memories on
distant shores. Yet others continue to blame their misfortunes, even those
of their own creation, on the legacy of apartheid. These are mental
aberrations, undoubtedly sourced from our history, which we nevertheless
must discard because they shackle our progress.

South Africans have adopted a model Constitution for all those who cherish
democracy. This document is binding on all people who live in this country,
even those who never truly embraced its principles. It is the duty of all
structures of governance, all private-sector institutions and civil
society, to see to it that the Constitution is implemented and carried out
to the letter. We cannot afford to allow a brazen flouting of the
individual and community rights of people by recalcitrant pockets of
resistance, whether it be on the farms, in traditional racist strongholds,
in the entertainment industry, at the work-place, or in traditionally white
or black institutions. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! [Interjections.] Order, hon member I
wish to plead with the Whips to educate their members. [Laughter.] All
Whips, you have just seen what has happened now. I hope you will do that. I
educate your members. want to embarrass the member because he is quite new,
but the Whips must educate their members.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to extend a warm welcome to the hon member
who has just preceded me. Chairperson and colleagues, the IPU declaration
reads, and I quote:


  It urges parliaments to adopt and monitor the implementation of laws that
  are consistent with their constitutions, and which are necessary for the
  purpose of eradication of racism, including, where required, measures of
  affirmative action and systems of redress for the victims of racist acts.
  We shall also strive to make sure that leading figures in society,
  including members of Parliament, along with educational institutions,
  such as schools, imbue current and future generations with a profound
  appreciation of the value of diversity in a world where we all share a
  common heritage and destiny.

That is the IPU Declaration of the Durban meeting of parliamentarians.
There is no doubt therefore that we still have a responsibility to go
beyond the speeches and resolutions of the many meetings and conferences on
this subject.

When he opened the National Conference on Racism on 30 August 2000,
President Mbeki pointed out that the discussion on racism, spearheaded by
the Human Rights Commission, had exposed a discomfort among us in tackling
this matter. He said:


  It has been argued that those who point to the persistence of racism in
  our country are themselves racist. Those who propagate affirmative action
  are accused of seeking to introduce reverse racism, or more directly of
  resorting to antiwhite racism.

Hon members will have noted that the first extract I read was from the
declaration, not only of this Parliament, but a declaration agreed upon by
parliaments of about 50 countries whose members were at the World
Conference Against Racism. So those who hold the view that affirmative
action is reverse racism are totally out of step with broader humanity and
must work hard to catch up.

It has been said before, but we must repeat it until we have rid ourselves
of this disease. Racism must be discussed, understood and fought in order
for us to eradicate it and create a truly equal society. Racism is an
ideology that assigns inferiority and superiority to groups of people from
different cultural backgrounds, resulting in maximum economic exploitation
of the one by the other. This perpetuates the social, cultural and
political domination of the one by the other. In the main, human experience
of this phenomenon has been characterised by white advancement, supremacy
and privilege on the one hand, and black underdevelopment, poverty and
misery on the other.

As a young democracy that has committed itself to the transformation of our
society, based on the Reconstruction and Development Programme, we need to
always bear this reality about our society in mind and the challenge ahead
of us in tackling our tasks.

The declaration urges members of Parliament to take personal
responsibility, to exert their influence on public opinion and to promote
the values of diversity and tolerance. In the preamble to the South African
Constitution, we say we -


  ... believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in
  our diversity.

This, of course, is easier said than done. How many of us become literally
irritated when another South African speaks a language we do not
understand, especially an African language? Instead of accepting the right
of the other person to speak their language, one's irritation is an
imposition of one's preference on them. One adopts the attitude that one
should not be inconvenienced by making an effort to understand them, by
getting a translation, or in the longer term trying to understand their
language.

I use this example advisedly, because I believe all of us as
parliamentarians, me included, are guilty of perpetuating a hierarchy of
languages in this Parliament which we inherited from our racist past. Over
the centuries the cultures, traditions, religions and languages of
dominated communities were devalued and those of the dominant groups
overvalued and promoted through force. All of us public representatives
committed to creating a new society must accept this as a historical fact.
This must then inform our activities as we perform our duties that
influence public opinion, as referred to by the IPU Declaration.

The South African Parliament is in the fortunate position of having passed
the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill in
2000 in order to enable our society to create conditions for equality,
especially in areas of life where most racist practices exist.
Parliamentarians, as part of their oversight responsibility, must monitor
compliance in our identified categories, and many others that they become
aware of, through their work in portfolio committees and in their
constituency offices.

I have been informed by the Department of Justice that although the
Equality Review Committee has been formed, its functioning has been
hampered by the perennial problem of a shortage of resources. I believe
Parliament needs to prioritise resource allocation to the work of the
machinery we have created, to ensure that we do deracialise our society.

If we do not, we will keep patting ourselves on the backs for having passed
a good law, only to find it is gathering dust on some shelves because we
cannot tell whether it is working or not. We cannot pick up areas that need
to be revisited or tightened up, or whether there are totally new aspects
we need to provide which we could have overlooked. If we neglect this, we
neglect an opportunity to accelerate the healing of the divisions of the
past, the creation of social justice and the improvement of quality of
life, all of which are commitments contained in the preamble to the
Constitution.

In the category of labour and employment, we must monitor that artificial
barriers to equal access to employment opportunities by using certain
recruitment and selection procedures are discontinued. In this regard I
want to point out that the issue of experience and very unrealistic
academic qualifications is a case in point.

We all know that in the past the majority of our people were not allowed to
venture into certain areas of life. They were not allowed access to
training or education, not even to employment in those areas. Does it mean
they must never participate in those areas?

We as Parliament recently had to ask ourselves these questions when we had
a process to employ an art curator. We could hardly find an African fit for
consideration. The challenge to transform has led us to agree now that
someone from the previously disadvantaged communities of our society must
be given an opportunity to understudy the curator we have now employed.

The field of education continues to pose many challenges to our society.
There is the question of school governing bodies, some of which perpetuate
thinking from our racist past. Some communities use these structures not to
promote unity in diversity and tolerance, but to perpetuate the domination
of the previously privileged cultures. This is a challenge for MPs to
influence the direction towards nation-building in their political and
constituency work.

We continue to read about learners who have been unfairly excluded from
institutions or from assistance by way of scholarships and bursaries on the
basis of race. But most important of all is the content of what our
children are being taught. We learned this past weekend that a child in
Mpumalanga had a very traumatic exchange with a teacher who insisted on
teaching the children that there are four provinces in South Africa and not
nine. The family of that child had to intervene in the matter.

In the category of housing, accommodation, land and property, there
continues to be enormous challenges and unequal distribution of resources.
In the overwhelming majority of cases, whites are property owners whose
rights to that property we have protected in the Bill of Rights.

In the case of farms, in spite of legislation we have passed, farmworkers
continue to be illegally evicted and cynically transported by farmers to
swell the ranks of the squatter camps, as opposed to helping in the
eradication of these settlements. Other problems in this sphere come in the
form of the redlining of so-called high-density areas. Those, of course,
are areas which banks do not want to give loans to because many Africans
have moved into them.

This weekend I will be seeing Mrs Wanda Stoffberg, the George woman who
continues to be hounded by super racists who hate her for just being a
normal human being who has an open attitude to fellow humans, including
Africans and coloureds. Her neighbours have agitated that she should not to
be allowed to run a butchery on her property, simply because many blacks
come to buy from her. Some cowards assaulted her and carved the letter
``K'' on her breast to teach her a lesson for being a so-called ``kaffir
lover''. Mrs Stoffberg is not an ANC member. In fact, she confesses to
having been brought up in a racist environment, but she is a South African
who belongs to the present and the future. I believe that we as members of
Parliament have a responsibility to recognise such people, to encourage and
support them as part of our campaign to create a non racial society.
[Applause.]

I wish to comment on the matter of race and gender, and how the convergence
of the two have shaped and produced this society. The discovery of diamond
and gold in 1867 and 1886 respectively led to an increased need for cheap
labour, which, of course, is cheap black labour in the areas around the
sites of these discoveries. Of course, this cheap black labour was also
needed on the white farms that were scattered all over South Africa.

The white colonial strategists developed a policy that ensured that African
women remained in the reserves in order that they remained the backbone of
subsistence economies that had to be maintained there to continue to
reproduce the army of cheap black labour for the industrial economy that
they were consciously marginalised from.

They looked after the children, the old and the sick in the reserves. I
also want to tell this House about the kinds of passes that they were
forced to carry in order to make sure that they were not allowed to come
and develop a permanent black community in the urban areas.

They carried stand permits, residential passes, visitors' passes, work
seekers' passes, employment registration certificates, permits to reside on
the employers' premises certificates to work on their own behalf, domestic
service books, washer women's permits, and entertainment permits, each of
which cost money. They had to pay that money in order to be allowed to
enter the urban areas. I am sketching this history to indicate to us that
the transformation of this society is a very complex challenge because of
the complexities that history has imposed on us.

I see that my time is up, and therefore all that I can say is that we as
members of Parliament must look out, when we receive the report of the
World Conference Against Racism, for the programme of action, the role of
Parliament and, in particular, the IPU, and continue fighting the battle
against racism. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, the ACDP commends
Madam Speaker for placing this debate on the Order Paper.

During the last 50 years since the adoption of 1948's Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the international community has made some important
advances in the fight against racism and racial discrimination. National
and international laws have been enacted and numerous international human
rights instruments, particularly a treaty to ban racial discrimination,
have been adopted. Progress has been made.

We witnessed the defeat of apartheid in South Africa, yet a dream of a
world free of racial hatred and bias remains only half fulfilled. The UN
has in the past taken various steps by way of resolutions to instigate a
global action against racism, and there have been many conventions and
declarations to defeat racism, starting with the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in 1948, followed by the
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. I can
go on throughout the various decades.

The first decade to combat racism started in 1973, and the second one was
for action to combat racial discrimination, starting in 1983. The third
decade to combat racism, of course, ended with the World Conference Against
Racism right on our doorstep.

Despite all the conventions and international conferences, racial
discrimination still persists. Why has it become so difficult for nations
and parliaments of the world to exorcise this demon of racism? It is
because racial discrimination and xenophobia are a sinful condition of the
heart. Its origin is spiritual and unless there is true repentance, a
public confession of the sin of racism and earnest concerted efforts by all
political leaders, including all MPs, to promote the universal truth that
all humankind has been created in the image of God and that we all have a
common origin, unless we change our actions and attitudes, we will not be
able to rid ourselves of the sin of racism. [Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, while attending the one-day
IPU conference in Durban, it dawned on me that people across the globe
believed in the equality of man. Distinguishing people according to the
colour of their skins is as abominable as it is unacceptable. It is this
type of feeling that led to some people in this country calling themselves
the master race, the opposite of which would be servant races which had to
be subservient to their masters.

Racism has to be avoided by all parliamentarians at all levels. While I sat
in that hall I was so surprised when I noticed that no country on the globe
can claim to be free of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance. We have to take solace from the fact that we are not
alone in this mess and turn it inside out to make sure that we rid
ourselves, our parliaments and society at large of all these vices.

Parliamentarians are known for the mirth in their speeches, but it is not
acceptable to use expressions laced with racial slurs. On average, people
take what they hear from parliamentarians as the way to speak and the way
to conduct themselves. Parliamentarians have a responsibility to use their
influence on public opinion to promote the values of diversity and
tolerance.

Let us rise to the challenge and accept the invitation by the World
Conference Against Racism to encourage debate, even action by parliaments,
on legal measures to be taken against all levels of racism, racial
discrimination and related intolerance.

In the words of one songwriter, ``Let us make our little lights shine in
each nook and cranny'' in endeavouring to establish a world free from all
kinds of discrimination based on race, colour, work, descent, national or
ethnic origin.

We believe in the UCDP that parliamentarians must love, respect, serve,
consult and be tolerant of their colleagues, constituencies and the whole
country. A parliamentarian should not behave like an unguided missile and
speak out of turn. [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, unfortunately I do not have enough time to go
into this important topic. Therefore, I will simply state our own position
on this topic. I want to say that the PAC was the first political
organisation in South Africa to have as one of its aims the overthrowing of
white domination, the implementation and maintenance of the right to self-
determination of the African people and the establishment of a nonracial
and unitary state. That is why Pan-Africanism, the ideology of the PAC, is
nonracial and why Pan-Africanism is today guiding the rest of Africa, as
reflected in the Pan-African Parliament and the African Union.

Africanism was once denounced as racism by some leaders of this country.
The PAC clearly stated that the colour of an individual did not matter.
That is why at the height of the Algerian revolution, where our guerrillas
such as Gen Kondlo trained, Patrick Duncan, whom the PAC had converted to
its non-racial Pan-Africanist philosophy, was sent to Algeria to represent
the PAC there. Duncan was the son of a former colonial governor-general in
this country.

PAC members of Parliament find this declaration in accordance with our PAC
teachings. The PAC has been fighting racism and its related intolerance for
a long time. In May 1960, when PAC leaders appeared in a colonial court,
charged with leading the Sharpeville uprising, their spokesperson,
Mangaliso Sobukwe, said:


  We believe in one race only - the human race to which we belong. The
  history of the human race is a long history of struggle ...

The PAC, however, from its inception, declared that politics is not a
matter of race or colour, but of vital material interests. The race
question is subsidiary to the class question.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, may I also thank Madam Speaker for
bringing this matter up for discussion.

The fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance is globally present. It is felt that the world conference
hosted in Durban, as a global effort in tackling these hideous issues, has
been beneficial to nations around the globe. Not only have we managed to
share, but we have also managed to learn. Though many diversities make
themselves known and however different efforts may be to eradicate these
problems, the efforts deserve recognition and support.

The MF has taken note of the Inter-Parliamentary Union's statement that
voices the importance of parliaments in the success of this programme of
putting into action resolutions that may serve to eradicate the matters at
hand. The IPU has described parliaments as institutions that -


  ... oversee government action; enact appropriate legislation where
  needed; and decide on the allocation of the national budget. Moreover,
  parliaments and their members are the key participants in the creation of
  national policy and plans of action.

The IPU sentiments of parliaments is true. We do host these powers and
abilities; we do share the need to eradicate the evils brought by racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and since we
share all this, it is clear that our abilities can be mechanised to
eradicate these treacherous problems that plague our nation.

Our first success has already made itself visible in the Republic's
Constitution and Bill of Rights. Parliaments are now going to be the tools
to inculcate a strategy to eradicate the harsh and poisonous presence of
these subjects.

South Africa has had racism and racial discrimination, but, most
importantly, as reflected by the IPU, a parliament has a key to eradicate
them. Let us embark upon this challenge together nationally and
internationally. We can not only make a difference, but we can also destroy
racism and its cousins as it has tried for many years to destroy us.
[Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, this is not a mere document on racism, but an
introspective document for us parliamentarians. What are we obliged to do?
In this regard, the declaration mentions our legislative, budgetary and
oversight functions. But it also mentions our personal responsibility to
influence public opinion to promote the values of diversity and tolerance.

Where do we stand in these matters? It is my opinion that in the first
three aspects, the South African Parliament has done much to combat racism,
but not enough to promote diversity. Some of the Bills we have passed do
not take into account sufficiently the diverse nature of our society. A law
that allows the Minister of Education to enforce a neutral multireligious
ideology on our children, exhibiting religions like products one can choose
from at random from a supermarket shelf blatantly disregard the real
essence of diversity.

If the hon Mokaba calls tribalism a form of racism, it proves that we have
a long way to go before the real value of diversity is recognised.

I quote from the opening speech of Dr Heptulla:


  Parliamentarians need to reconcile the use of their most important tool
  in carrying out their mandate to represent the people by giving voice to
  their opinions, with their special responsibility to promote a society
  based on tolerance.

I make the statement that we parliamentarians of South Africa often, by our
conduct, promote a society of intolerance. We do it when we call each other
coconuts or when we make such a big issue of it; we do it when we play the
race card so often or when we act so arrogantly that it is perceived as
racism and we do it in our attitudes, our body language and our tone of
voice.

Let us show the people of South Africa that in this House we can vigorously
debate the issues of our country, but still treat each other - from
different races, cultures and philosophies - with dignity and respect.
[Applause.]

Ms N N MAPISA-NQAKULA: Chairperson, hon Deputy President and hon members,
in order for us to move forward on the question of fighting racial
discrimination, it is correct to reflect on the past. Discrimination in the
form of racism polarised our country and our people. The remnants of the
era continue to bedevil race relations in our country.

The situation we come from saw many families among the indigenous people of
our land forcibly broken down. Children were separated from their parents,
husbands and wives were separated from each other and from their children.
There was a clear attack on the nobleness of love, following the
promulgation by the racist regime of laws which were designed to stop love
and marriage across the colour line. The majority of people were denied
elementary human rights of equal citizenship, the right to vote and equal
access to all and every benefit available to the citizens of our country.

The apartheid regime led to the assault on the right of our people to land,
through their policy of land dispossession. Through this, they created
conditions for the expropriation of land from the people of our country by
land barons and industrialists.

Racial discrimination became the policy tool that determined the allocation
and distribution of wealth. It also determined the provision of goods and
services to the different social groups and communities. In its aftermath,
we continue to experience the serious problems of poverty, homelessness,
illiteracy and other deprivations.

Whereas racism still lives in our country, the 1994 democratic breakthrough
has provided us with the legal instruments which we require to pave the way
towards the establishment of the South Africa that is envisaged in the
ANC's Freedom Charter. This Parliament is one of those instruments that we
can use to effect the change for the better that our people deserve.
Through this forum, we must create the space we need to establish the South
Africa that many of the freedom-loving people of this country were prepared
to lay their lives down for, to secure, on the basis of democracy, peace,
security and justice for all.

Democracy and human rights are crucial elements in the development of
stability and prosperity for all our people. Parliament, therefore, has the
responsibility to ensure that these concepts are recognised as fundamental
values of our society and must, therefore, be respected by all people.

The greater majority of those who constitute this Parliament contributed
tremendously to the fight against and the defeat of apartheid and its
policies of racial discrimination. It was that struggle of the forces of
progress and democracy that influenced the international community, through
the United Nations, to declare apartheid a crime against humanity.

Assembled here in this Chamber are public representatives who are a mirror
of our society. To a large extent, we represent the wishes and dreams of
our people. We are also representatives of the orientation and tendencies
that exist in our communities. These, at times, are evident in the manner
in which we conduct ourselves in this House.

Some of these tendencies, unfortunately, are backward and inimical to the
democracy we are building. These should serve as a challenge to us, because
we have to change the mindset of our people. We must help them to break the
barriers and overcome racial prejudice.

We want to do this, and we must do this, among other things, through the
promotion of our languages and cultures, so that we instil a sense of pride
in our children, for whom these are meant, without encouraging racial
stereotyping.

Parliament therefore has a pivotal role to play in ensuring that all
legislation that we pass is based on our Bill of Rights. That further
affirms our people and entrenches our democracy.

There is no doubt that racial discrimination in our country gave birth to
bitter contempt and hatred of white people by blacks. Racism also fanned
racial prejudice, not only between whites and blacks, but also between
African people themselves, arising from the process in which Africans were
split by the racist regime into small, hostile and intolerant ethnic
groupings. In other words, racial discrimination became the nucleus of all
our problems.

South Africa and the world should mount a united and consistent campaign to
fight racial discrimination. We need to co-ordinate our efforts to
eradicate this scourge. This is a challenge to all political parties and
other formations in our country and abroad.

On its part, this Parliament should truly be an assembly of people who
carry on their shoulders the hopes and aspirations of our people as a
unique creation of our democratic ideals. We should remember in this
context the words of Chief Albert Luthuli in his message to the Congress of
the People in Kliptown in 1955, when he said, and I quote:


  Why will this assembly be significant and unique? Its size, I hope, will
  make it unique, but above all its multiracial nature and its noble
  objectives will make it unique, because it will be the first time in the
  history of our multiracial nation, that is, people from all walks of
  life, will meet as equals, irrespective of race, colour and creed to
  formulate a Freedom Charter for all the people in the country.

The Freedom Charter, therefore, is not a mere shopping list of demands, but
it provides a firm foundation for democratic change. The Freedom Charter is
a programme for the true unity of the people of our country. Our call,
therefore, is that we should all unite behind the ideal of a united front
against racism in all its forms. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                        DEMOBILISATION AMENDMENT BILL

                   TERMINATION OF INTEGRATION INTAKE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I would like to call upon the
Minister of Defence to address the House. [Interjections.] I am afraid, hon
Minister, that the other speakers did not take up all their allocated time.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, I should just indicate that nature
called and ... [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order! The hon the Minister of Defence has his
prerogatives right.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, this afternoon we table the two Bills, the
Demobilisation Amendment Bill and Termination of Integration Intake Bill.
These two Bills mark an important milestone in the history of the
transformation of South Africa, and specifically in the history of the
South African military.

As a result of the negotiation process, a new force, the National Defence
Force, was created on 27 April 1994 comprising the old South African
Defence Force, the TBVC states' forces - TBVC being Transkei,
Bophuthatswana, Venda and Ciskei - and uMkhonto weSizwe, the armed wing of
the ANC.

At a later date the Azanian People's Liberation Army, Apla, the armed wing
of the PAC, took part in the process. The new Constitution established a
single defence force to be the only lawful military force in the Republic.

The nonstatutory forces were identified by a certified personnel register
commonly known as the CPR. This in essence is a register of the members of
the liberation formations who had been verified by the liberation
organisations. The completion of such a register was an achievement that
has gone by and large unrecognised by the broader electorate.

The liberation formations kept their records in circumstances vastly
different from those in which the conventional military forces operated.
These sections of the liberation movement were based in many different
countries and records were therefore not at any one time located in one
central point. Part of the problem was that the liberation formations
sought to avoid their falling into wrong hands and consequently
contributing to the capture of valuable freedom fighters in the country in
which they were fighting for freedom.

In addition, the levels of involvement in an underground illegal
organisation differ widely. Whilst on the one hand there were combatants
militarily trained, they were often accommodated and protected by civilians
who had had no military training whatsoever. Nevertheless, had those
civilians been caught and arrested, they would have been treated in the
same way as if they had been trained military personnel and paid similar
prices to the trained guerrillas for whom they provided accommodation.

In the process of integration, dealing with the unravelling of all of these
puzzles became an involved exercise. Once settlement was made, it became an
arduous and lengthy process for the liberation movements to bring all the
records first of all into the country as well as into a centralised
register. This explains the flexibility with which command structures of
the South African National Defence Force treated the timeframes surrounding
the intake and integration process. I made this point to remind the House
and draw its attention to one of the aspects of the complexity of the
process of integration, integrating different armed formations into a
single, united military force.

The two Bills therefore before us, coming as they do seven to eight years
since the start of the integration process, bear testimony that, to all
intents and purposes, this process may now be concluded administratively. I
am pleased to report to the House that with all the problems that can be
imagined in carrying out this process, the SANDF has successfully managed
this process and is now ready to move on.

The Termination of Integration Intake Bill seeks to bring to an end the
process of taking in members of MK and Apla for integration purposes. There
will be an intake next month of around 100 persons. A final intake will
take place early next year before the final date, just to make sure that a
door has been left ajar for any latecomers.

The Demobilisation Amendment Bill amends the definition of ``closing date''
by providing that the closing date shall be 31 December 2002. This new date
is fixed so as to allow members of MK and Apla who are unable to meet the
employment requirements of the SA National Defence Force for various
reasons to demobilise.

On behalf of the SA National Defence Force and the Department of Defence I
would like to thank the Portfolio Committee of Defence, under the
leadership of the hon Thandie Modise, for holding a public hearing on these
two Bills. This gave the veterans' associations of both MK and Apla a
chance to raise issues of concern with the oversight committee.
Recommendations coming from the committee will be accommodated by the
department.

The successful integration of seven military formations into a single,
lawful, loyal and professional military force is one of democratic South
Africa's most shining achievements. This National Defence Force unites
young South Africans around the patriotic duty of defending their country
and peoples. I am convinced that it will continue to fulfil this function
for generations to come. I therefore urge members of the House to support
these two Bills. [Applause.]

Ms T R MODISE: Chairperson, hon members, I will be nice. The Termination of
Integration Intake Bill seeks to bring to a close the integration intake of
former uMkhonto weSizwe and Apla combatants into the SA National Defence
Force.
The Bill also takes away the open-ended right to integrate within a
reasonable period, as provided for in the interim constitution of South
Africa. We believe that eight years has been more than reasonable.

The Bill recognises the right of those who have applied for amnesty to
enlist within 90 days after the granting and receipt of such amnesty. The
ANC supports this Bill. In so doing, we recognise that this Bill in no way
stops integration within the Department of Defence, but merely puts a stop
to a specific type of intake.

We support the Department of Defence for the smoother than expected
integration process. The Phalaborwa, Tempe and Simon's Town shootings were
a sign of a process that is still frustrated by a lack of trust and
appreciation of the many cultures, backgrounds, beliefs and customs.
Phalaborwa, Tempe, Simon's Town and Potchefstroom remind us of just how bad
things can become when we fail to transform structures and influence
beliefs, attitudes and habits.

I believe that Tempe, Phalaborwa and Simon's Town could have been avoided
had we dropped the know-it-all and dispenser-of-all wisdom attitudes and
emphasised the richness of all our armed forces. Clearly, when the SA
Defence Force and uMkhonto weSizwe were brought together there was the
potential for tension and conflict.

Former uMkhonto weSizwe combantants were used to a commissariat that
enabled them to voice opinions, to debate and to articulate their
grievances. The hierarchy of the former SA Defence Force had no experience
of this, and would indeed interpret any behaviour not conforming to their
training to be insubordinate and ill disciplined. That is why the
establishment of the Ministerial Committee on Civic Education was seen as a
priority in the transformation of the Department of Defence.

Not only was the civic education programme expected to ease the
transformation of relations, but it also expected to bring the South
African National Defence force members up to speed on international laws,
conventions and agreements. Sadly, Cemac has hardly met this year.

We want to congratulate the Equal Opportunities and Affirmative Division.
They are doing well, especially in the policy formulation and advocacy
fields. How much easier would transformation have been had the civic
education programme not floundered.

The Demobilisation Amendment Bill brings to a close the demobilisation of
members of Apla and uMkhonto whose names appear on both the CPR and or the
personnel lists and who, for whatever reason, failed to exercise their
right to be members of the SA National Defence Force. They then received a
small gratuity.

Parliament adopted the Defence Review and agreed to force levels, doctrines
and force structures. At the beginning of the integration process the SA
National Defence Force stood at 101 000 members. Currently the force levels
are between 80 000 and 79 000. In our own understanding, we are a mere 4
000 men away from our target force levels.

Stories that a further 10 000 personnel must leave the SA National Defence
Force must be treated with caution because the justification that more
people must leave so that there is more money has never materialised
anywhere. Reduction in numbers does not necessarily translate into more
money and more development.

Demobilisation of former members has actually been treated with little
respect. Demobilisation has not yet been seen as part of a broader
developmental challenge for South Africa. The service corps was identified
as a vehicle for the reskilling of the former members of the Defence Force.
Instead, the parliamentary committees have received reports that numeracy
and literacy programmes were on offer. Recently a group of members from the
service corps reported that what was on the top agenda for the service
corps was to be given an opportunity to get a drivers' licence. Clearly, we
are far away from reskilling the nation.

The service corps needs to be relooked at. With the world market sliding
and unemployment rising, we should broaden our programme of national
reskilling. The defence industry is beginning to exploit military
technology for commercial use. Why is it not exploiting military personnel
in the same way? Joint ventures with civilian companies could help to
absorb demobilised and rationalised members of the SA National Defence
Force.

The civil corps should not only be given survival skills, but should be at
the forefront of creating opportunities for former members the SA National
Defence Force to be reintegrated into civilian life and into the civilian
economy. It should make the transition of such members from military into
civilian life its business.

We should not just be too willing to give the service corps into private
and unknown hands because, thus far, it has had very little positive
imaging. I submit that it would be irresponsible to continue to demobilise
personnel without proper planning to retrain, reskill and provide them with
marketable skills to ease their reintegration into society. I have yet to
hear of psychological counselling that is being given to the potential
demobilised or rationalised personnel of the SA National Defence Force. The
lower levels of skills that the service corps conduct do not enable the
members to survive and therefore we should be wary when such members use
their military skills to survive in civil society.

We must remember that institutions like Khula and Ntsika can be approached
to help fund small projects for former members of the SANDF. Management of
such projects must therefore be supervised, so that they do not flounder.
If we are to avoid problems of military veterans like those experienced in
Mozambique and Zimbabwe, then we must be systematic in our planning.

I am sure that funding could be found from sympathetic donors if we revise
the demobilisation strategy and plan accordingly. Some of the demobilising
members are old and frail. The gratuity they are going to get will not last
beyond two to three months. Most of them have health problems. The current
demobilisation package does not consider this, and this country could pick
up problems in the future.

The JMCC agreements recognise the services of the nonstatutory force
members. This, then, should mean recognition of the rights of all military
veterans. I would like to say to the Minister that we are still waiting for
the veterans' advisory board to report. Maybe they will make
recommendations on the rights and privileges of all other military
veterans.

The ANC supports both the Demobilisation Amendment Bill and the Termination
of Integration Intake Bill. We see this not as an end, but as a beginning.
It is the end of the identification with and loyalty to all ideologies; and
the beginning of a new and nonpartisan, loyal and dedicated SA National
Defence Force.

During the public hearings, both uMkhonto weSizwe and Apla veterans
indicated that some of their members were not on both the CPR and personnel
lists. They also described their frustration with the MK and Apla officers
within the Department of Defence. These officers should have contributed to
transformation, especially at the beginning of the integration process.

The Minister has powers to consider cases, on a case-by-case basis, that do
not appear on the certified personnel register and the personnel lists.
Clearly, there are members who, for one reason or another, did not find the
opportunity to place their names on such personnel lists. Some, we were
told, live in the rural areas where they did not have the opportunity to
see the sophisticated media advertisements in order to place their names on
such registers. Some of them did put down their names, but found that their
surnames were left out. Some found that their first names were repeated,
and some found that when they came forward for integration, other people
had taken their places and their names. Surely, when we are told this we
cannot just dismiss it?

The hon Kota recently returned from Tanzania, where she met with former MK
members, who understood neither her explanations about CPR lists nor the
deadlines. All they knew was that they had proudly served uMkhonto weSizwe,
and that they had a right to serve in the SA National Defence Force.
Clearly the Minister has his job cut out for him. I do not envy him. But we
cannot cut corners, because we need to be fair.

It will not be right for me to finish my input without mentioning the
unique problem of the SA Cape Corps. Whether these former members of the
SADF are right or not, whether the perception they have of being kicked out
of the Defence Force to make way for MK and Apla is right or not, I do not
know. All I do know is that we have to get to the bottom of this. Just as
it is undesirable for us to have both members of uMkhonto and Apla running
around with lethal skills, unemployed and bitter, so it is that we do not
have the right to leave members of the Cape Corps bitter, with grudges
which are justified or unjustified. We need to find out exactly what
happened. We need to get to the bottom of their problem. We need to make
sure that at the end of the day we do not contribute to possible threats to
the security of this country by default. [Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chairperson, the SA National Defence Force was constituted
in terms of section 224 of the interim constitution. In terms hereof,
members of the SA Defence Force, any defence force relating to the TBVC
countries, as well as any armed force as defined by the Transitional
Executive Council Act of 1993, and whose names were included in the the
certified personnel register, or so-called CPR, were entitled to integrate
into the SA National Defence Force.

Section 236(8)(d) of the interim constitution determined that members who
wished to enter into an agreement for appointment within the SANDF should
have done so ``within a reasonable time'', as well as further provisos
which are at present  irrelevant. Members of the nonstatutory forces, being
Apla and MK, therefore had to assert their rights within a reasonable time
as provided for in section 236 of the interim constitution.

It is clear that nonassertion of these rights within a reasonable time, as
provided, will lead to the termination of the rights of members of
nonstatutory forces to assert their substantive rights conferred upon them
in terms of that section. It is clear that after a period of approximately
seven and a half years this reasonable time for members of Apla and MK to
enter into agreement for employment has lapsed. This view is shared by the
Chief of the SA National Defence Force, General Nyanda. We, as the
Portfolio Committee on Defence, are in agreement with his view. Although
the CPRs were initially required to be completed before 27 April 1994, the
cut-off date was extended for MK and Apla members to 8 May 1996, thereafter
to 23 August 1996 and then again to 11 October 1996, to enable them to
bring their CPRs up to date.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, too many of you
are making calls to your neighbours. It is still not callmore time, so will
you please pay attention. Carry on, hon member.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chairperson, these extensions to the cut-off date led to
the further updating of the list by the addition of 8 290 names, with MK
adding 4 355 names and Apla an additional 3 864 names. Furthermore, it is
clear that the present Constitution of 1996 prohibits any further names
being added to the CPRs after 11 October 1996. Eighteen intakes of
nonstatutory force members have taken place since 27 April 1994.

It is abundantly clear that the SANDF does not have the necessary budgetary
resources to handle mass intakes of nonstatutory force members. The SA Army
has, however, budgeted for a final intake of approximately 300 nonstatutory
force members during 2001.

Volgens 'n voorlegging aan die Gesamentlike Staande Komitee oor Verdediging
blyk dit dat die gemiddelde koste verbonde aan die integrasie van nie-
statutêre lede gemiddeld R69 991 per persoon beloop, terwyl die koste
verbonde aan diegene wat demobiliseer, ongeveer R34 413 per persoon sal
beloop. Sodanige koste sal verhaal word teen die werwingsbegroting vir die
boekjaar 2001-2002. Die aanwending van fondse in hiérdie verband sal
ongelukkig lei tot die vermindering van fondse vir die beoogde werwing van
ongeveer 10 000 skoolverlaters, soos aangekondig deur die agb Minister van
Verdediging.

Daar is dus twee prosesse wat gelyklopend geskied. Aan die een kant is daar
die  proses van integrasie van diegene wat se name op die gesertifiseerde
personeelregisters voorkom, en geregtig is om aan te sluit by the SANW. Aan
die ander kant is daar diegene wat nie geregtig is om te kwalifiseer nie,
ingevolge die bepalings en vereistes van die SANW se
indiensmeningsvereistes, asook diegene wat uit eie keuse besluit om nie te
integreer nie, en wat, op voorwaarde dat hul name op die gesertifiseerde
personeelregisters verskyn, geregtig sal wees op demobilisasie.
Demobilisasie binne hierdie verband beteken die uitbetaling van 'n bedrag
geld, en, soos ek reeds genoem het, beloop hierdie bedrag ongeveer R34 000.

Die DP is ten gunste van die finalisering van beide hierdie twee bogenoemde
prosesse ten einde finaliteit te bereik. Alhoewel die DP, sowel as die NNP,
ten gunste was van 'n vroeëre datum waarteen die demobiliseringsproses
afgehandel sou moes word, naamlik 31 Maart 2002, soos voorgestel in die
portefeuljekomitee, steun die DP beide hierdie wetsontwerpe. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[According to a presentation to the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, it
would appear that the average costs relating to the integration of
nonstatutory force members average R69 991 per person, whilst the costs
relating to those who demobilise will amount to approximately R34 413 per
person. Such costs will be recovered from the recruitment budget for the
2001-2002 financial year. The application of funds in this regard will
unfortunately lead to a reduction in funds for the envisaged recruitment of
approximately 10 000 school-leavers, as announced by the hon the Minister
of Defence.

There are thus two processes that are running concurrently. On the one hand
there is the process of integration of those whose names appear on the
certified personnel registers, and who are entitled to join the SANDF. On
the other hand there are those who are not entitled to qualify, according
to the provisions and requirements of the SANDF's employment requirements,
as well as those who, of their own free will, decide not to integrate, and
who, on condition that their names appear on the certified personnel
registers, will be entitled to demobilisation. Demobilisation in this
regard means the payment of an amount of money, and as I have mentioned
before, this amounts to approximately R34 000.

The DP is in favour of the finalisation of both of these above-mentioned
processes in order to achieve finality. Even though the DP, as well as the
NNP, was in favour of an earlier date by which the demobilisation process
were to be completed, namely 31 March 2002, as suggested in the portfolio
committee, the DP supports both of these Bills.]

Members of nonstatutory forces whose names appear on the CPRs, but who were
unable to enter into an agreement with the SANDF  due to their imprisonment
for an offence which was associated with a political objective, and who
have been granted amnesty in terms of the Promotion of National Unity and
Reconciliation Act, may, within 90 days after being notified of the
decision to grant them amnesty, enter into an agreement with the National
Defence Force after the 31 March 2002.

However, in terms of the Demobilisation Amendment Bill, those members who
cannot be integrated because they do not satisfy the employment policies,
as well as the terms and conditions of the SANDF, may demobilise by 31
December 2002. Initially the date proposed by the department was 31
December 2001 for purposes of termination of integration intake. A decision
by the portfolio committee to extend this date to 31 March 2002 could lead
to the present figure of approximately 190 members who are entitled to
integrate, to change substantially due to the extension.

Due to unnecessary delays regarding the acceptance of these two Bills, the
initial integration date proposed by the Department of Defence being, and
please note, 31 March 2000, has been amended to 31 March 2002. Due to these
delays, the initial demobilisation date of 31 March 1999 was extended to 31
December 2002.

The legislation is therefore intended to bring an end to the intake of
members of nonstatutory forces into the SANDF, as well as a demobilisation
process with regard to their specific rights in this regard. Hopefully the
termination of intake of members into the SANDF from various highly
politicised groups such as MK and Apla will lead to a nonracialised SANDF
and the disappearance of politically aligned groups in accordance with the
different views of the various forces they emanate from, ultimately leading
to a highly professional, successful and focused defence force of which all
South Africans can be proud. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, these two Bills
have to be adopted and passed by Parliament, because they are requirements
in the interim constitution of this country. The interim constitution laid
down the procedures to be followed in the integration process, together
with the compilation of the names of members from the nonstatutory forces
and former SA Defence Force. It is called a certified personnel register,
CPR.

After seven years, the Department of Defence, together with the portfolio
committee and the Cabinet, came to the conclusion that we should terminate
this intake, because we believe that all those whose names appear on the
CPR should have been integrated already. However, the KwaZulu self-
protection forces were not integrated, although there was a Cabinet
resolution/agreement to include them in the integration.

The fact that they did not receive the same privileges as MK and Apla is a
source of great concern to the IFP. Therefore, the IFP appeals to the
Minister directly to adhere to the request which I am forwarding to him
about this matter, in order that Parliament should not be seen as favouring
some forces above other forces.

The IFP supports the Termination of Integration Intake Bill, and urges all
those whose names are on the CPRs to come forward and be integrated before
the due date, because the IFP will not support an eighth extended date if
there should be one. [Interjections.]

Cha, bengithi ngeke kuphinde kusenze ukuthi siphinde siluhlehlise lolu suku
lomhla ka-31 March. [Ubuwelewele.] Pho manje abewubangelani umsindo lawaya
malungu? [No, I thought the postponement of 31 March would never work.
[Interjections.] Why are those hon members making a noise?]

Those whose age does not allow them to be in the force have a right to get
out while the privilege is there. The Demobilisation Amendment Bill does
give them that right, and time is still on their side.

Labo abaminyaka yabo ibonakalisa ukuthi amadolo awasavumi ukuthi
bangaphatha isibhamu bayovikela izwe,  - angifuni ukulinganisa ngelinye
ilungu elikhona lapha endlini - kungakuhle ukuthi kube yibona abacelayo
ukuthi bahambe bayohlala ekhaya. Kumhlonishwa ngithi-ke kuyoba kuhle
kuqashelwe ukuthi lapho sebehlezi emakhaya, leya ngxenye eyavulwa okuthiwa
yi-Service Corps, okufanele ngabe iyabaqondisa ibafundise ukuze bakwazi
ukucosha izitifiketi ukuze bakwazi ukuthola idokwe, iyasebenza. Umhlonishwa
angakhohlwa ukuthi le mali esayibeka ifuna ibe nabantu abazoyisebenzisa
ukuze le Phalamende isethembe nakusasa uma isikhethile ukuthi sibheke
izimali zabantu, ukuze bakwazi ukuthola okuya ngasethunjini ngokuthi
bathole lezo zitifiketi ezifanele.

Kusemqoka futhi ukuthi laba bantu bonke abaphumayo babone kunzima ukuthi
bacabange ukuthwala isibhamu uma befuna umsebenzi noma izimali abazozifaka
emakhukhwini. Kunalokho kufanele  babone kuhlakaniphile ukusiza umphakathi
ukuze kuthi noma kufika izikhukhula noma yini eyehliswa yinkosi ezulwini
iyehlisela kithina, bakwazi ukusiza umphakathi. Ngakho-ke le ngxenye ye-
Service Corps kuhle ime ngezinyawo ukuze ikwazi ukulekelela ekuthini
kungenzeki nangephutha ukuthi abantu bathi sebeqeqeshiwe baphume nolwazi
lwabo bayohlala emakhaya, ngoba bacabanga izinto eziningi uma bengabantu
abakwazi ukudubula. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)
[Those who are too old to carry guns and fight for the country I do not
want to compare to the other hon members in this House. It would be better
if they themselves applied for retirement. I would like to say to the hon
the Minister and those who are now at home, that the service corps is
operational and it can help them to get certificates so that they will be
able to make ends meet. The hon the Minister should not forget that the
money we saved should be used so that this Parliament will trust us in
future when it appoints us to look after the public finances, so that
people will be able to get food by obtaining suitable certificates.

It is important that those who left the army should see that it is
difficult to carry guns when they are looking for jobs or money to put in
their pockets. Instead, they should find it easy to help the public when
floods come or there is any act of God. Therefore, this part of the service
corps should be on standby to assist so that people will not receive the
training and find themselves staying at home with skills. When they are at
home and find themselves unable to use their shooting skills, they think a
lot of things.]

Therefore, I would urge all our people in the SANDF to use the facility,
because the date that has been agreed upon would not change and nobody will
allow them to demobilise after the date which has been agreed upon. The IFP
supports the Demobilisation Amendment Bill and the Termination of
Integration Intake Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M E MABETA: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the UDM, in its
consideration of the proposed amendments to the two Bills, has taken into
consideration a number of issues. Firstly, the integration of members
belonging to the NSF was inevitable and justifiable on the grounds just
outlined by the Minister here, that is, the difficulties involved in the
integration process of seven military forces.

Secondly, practical aspects of the Bill are adequate because the provisions
of 31 March 2002 as the cut-off date for the termination of the integration
intake process allow for the initiation of all possible communications by
the department to interested and affected members in preparation for the
Demobilisation Amendment Bill cut-off date of 31 December 2002.

The Department of Defence, in conjunction with the organisations of
affected groups, should ascertain that there are no additional categories
of nonstatutory members left out if they qualify to be added to the class
covered by the provisions of clause 4(1)(a) to (c).

It is absolutely crucial that affected members should be adequately
informed about these amendments and provisions so as not to prejudice
anyone. A compelling argument has been made in some of the submissions that
there is no effective communication infrastructure in the rural areas and
thus unavoidable limitations may be placed on members wishing to apply from
such areas.

It is because of this reality that every effort must be made to establish
effective administrative measures to facilitate these processes so as to
eliminate the already widespread perception that whereas statutory force
members were able to enter into agreements for integration or exit, their
counterparts, who have made so much sacrifices in fighting for our
liberation and democracy, have not been afforded equal opportunities.

Indeed, Phalaborwa and Tempe become relevant reminders to what misgivings
about an administrative process may lead to. The Demobilisation Amendment
Bill extends the windows of gratuity to NSF members who, because of
political circumstances as outlined, were forced into the army at great
sacrifice and therefore at this point, in our country, have no chance of a
new life for a lack of skills in the employment market or simply due to old
age.

Numerous administrative problems have undermined this process in the past.
We must recognise and accept the fact that this process takes place at a
time when high unemployment is a problem that affects the wider society of
South Africa. Therefore the assessment of gratuities must take into account
the special circumstances of affected persons who had no opportunities to
attend courses, thus becoming non-promotable, or those whose promotions
were not remunerated, though granted, and who, for the most part, served in
command positions in the nonstatutory forces, but not in the SA National
Defence Force. These are critical considerations that will adversely affect
their exit gratuities and they cannot be ignored. The UDM supports these
Bills.

Mphathiswa, makhe ndimenze nje utshe omfutshane. Ndiyavumelana nosihlalo
wekomiti le esikuyo xa esithi kukho ubungozi bokhuseleko lwendlela oza
kuqhutywa ngawo lo msebenzi wokulungiselela izimali zaba baphumayo
nokwamkelwa kwabanye abafuna ukungena ngaphakathi.

Ndivumelana, kananjalo, nohloniphekileyo uBawo uNdlovu xa esithi le nkqubo
ayinakho ukuhamba nje umphelo, ze iphele apho ithanda khona. Likhona ithuba
apho kuya kufuneka kuthiwe iphelile, akunakho ukuqhutyelwa phambili.

Andivumelani nomnu Schmidt xa esithi ... (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Hon Minister, I would like to say something briefly. I agree with the hon
chairperson of the committee that we serve on when he says that there might
be problems related to issues of security in the way in which payment of
the ones that are leaving and the acceptance of those that would like to
join in, would be done.

I also agree with hon Mr Ndlovu when he says that this programme cannot go
on for an unspecified period. At some point it would have to end, and
nothing more would be done.
I do not agree with Mr Schmidt when he says ...]

... the issue of a reasonable time has not been taken seriously. Although I
agree with his assessment here of what a reasonable time is, the historical
conditions of the people involved, and what these people have been
subjected to, including problems related to issues of security and what
would happen to them and unavoidable problems, such as not being accessible
enough in order to receive information, were not their problems.

I do agree with him that we need to take strict cognisance of the budgetary
implications of this process if we are committed to a young, professional
and voluntary force in South Africa, rather than opening a endless window
that allow people to move in and out. We support both Bills.

Mr G C OOSTHUIZEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, die twee wetsontwerpe wat voor ons
dien, is in 'n sekere sin profeties. [Mr Chairperson, the two Bills before
us are in a certain sense prophetic.]

These are the Termination of Integration Intake Bill and the Demobilisation
Amendment Bill.
Terwyl ek na die agb Schmidt geluister het, kon ek nie help om vir 'n
vlietende oomblik te dink dat die integrasie van die DA ook tot hul
demobilisasie aanleiding gegee het nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Indien ek korrek na die woordkeuse van die agb Schmidt geluister het, het
hy eers gesê die DP steun die wetgewing, later sê hy die DP en die Nuwe NP
steun dit, en hy het geëindig deur te sê die DP steun dit. Ek sien die Nuwe
NP praat nie. Hulle is waarskynlik besig om te demobiliseer uit die
integrasieproses. Ons aanvaar dat hulle die wetsontwerpe steun, maar ons
sal definitief nie 'n blaadjie uit hul boek neem oor hoe om te integreer of
te demobiliseer nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die integrasie van nie-statutêre magte is 'n belangrike proses wat in
hierdie land moes plaasvind. Dit is 'n proses waarvolgens  opponerende
magte, vanuit 'n baie hartseer deel van ons land se geskiedenis, één moes
word om nie net ons gebiedsintegriteit te beskerm nie, maar ook om te
verenig in ons nasionale doelwitte. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[While I was listening to the hon Schmidt, for a fleeting moment I could
not help but think that the integration of the DA also gave rise to their
demobilisation. [Interjections.]

If I heard choice of words of the hon Schmidt correctly, he first said that
the DP supported the legislation, later he said that the DP and the New NP
supported it, and concluded by saying that the DP supported it. I see that
the New NP is not speaking. They are apparently in the process of
demobilising out of the integration process. We accept that they support
the Bills, but we will definitely not take a page from their book about how
to integrate or demobilise. [Interjections.]

The integration of the nonstatutory forces is a very important process
which had to take place in this country. It is a process whereby opposing
forces, from a very sad part of our country's history, had to become one,
not only to protect our territorial integrity, but also to unite in our
national goals.]

The challenges of the integration process still have to be overcome. The
building of an esprit de corps for our National Defence Force, sharing a
common pride which culminates in achieving the goals of nation-building, is
one of the challenges that we know have been overcome. In fact, we want our
armed forces to know that we are not only proud of them, but that we will
do whatever we can to assist in overcoming whatever challenges they may
face in future. We welcome the final date, 31 May 2002, for final intakes.
We also urge the SANDF to ensure that the final date will be well-
advertised and well-canvassed, so that all people are aware of it.

As far as demobilisation is concerned, it is a necessary but also a very
sensitive issue. I want to offer a little history to those members who will
be demobilised and say to them: winning is not never having fallen, but how
many times one can stand up again. One should compare oneself to this man:
He lost his job in 1832; was defeated for the legislature in 1832; failed
in business in 1833; lost his sweetheart to death in 1835; had a nervous
breakdown in 1836; was defeated for Speaker in 1838; was defeated in a bid
for Congress in 1843; was elected to Congress in 1848 but rejected for land
officer in 1849; was defeated for Senate in 1854; lost nomination for the
vice-presidency in 1856; was again defeated for Senate in 1858 but was in
1860 elected the 16th President of the United States. This is the track
record of Abraham Lincoln, one of the great presidents of the United
States. [Applause.] I am offering this to those who will be demobilised to
say: We know it is painful and sensitive, but stand up. We will be there to
support you.

The SANDF will have to overcome certain challenges relating to
demobilisation. It is in this regard that we wish to draw their attention
to the lessons of the past. What we are requesting is a well worked out
plan for the people who will be demobilised. Our opinion is that the Public
Service Commission should be engaged to assist in forwarding a clear plan
as to how demobilisation will be approached. The objective and aim of the
plan must be to take unemployment and joblessness into account.

The possibility of interdepartmental transfers should be explored. The SA
Police and the Department of Correctional Services could benefit from this
pool of skills and resources we have there. What we are saying is that the
skills of those who will be demobilised must be taken into account.
Depending on their age, the possibility of redeploying some for peace
initiatives should be explored. Their skills and manpower should be secured
for the reserve forces. We trust that some of those who will be demobilised
will become respected veterans in our communities. We urge them to assist
Government in curbing crime, in building our nation and in creating a
better life for all.

Gister het ons gesit en luister na baie goeie en breedvoerige voorleggings
van die kommandos. Hulle het 'n tekort aan geld om mense op te lei. Op
grondvlak integreer hulle reg, maar 'n tekort aan geld maak dat hulle nie
kursusse kan kry om mense in die leierskapskorps van die kommando te kry
nie. 'n Tekort aan geld is die probleem. Ek wil vir die kommandos vandag
vra: Gryp die geleentheid van demobilisasie aan. Daar is offisiere wat
reeds opgelei is. Daar is mense wat hulle kan vat en in die proses in
leierskapsposisies plaas. Dit is op daardie pad alleen wat Suid-Afrika die
wenland sal bly wat hy is. Die ANC steun hierdie wetsontwerp. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Yesterday we sat and listened to very good and detailed submissions by the
commandos. They have a shortage of money to train people. At grassroots
level they are integrating properly, but a shortage of money consequently
does not allow them to present courses to as to get people into the
leadership corps of the commandos. A shortage of money is the problem. I
want to say to the commandos today: Grab the opportunity of demobilisation.
There are officers who are already trained. There are people who could take
them and in the process place them in leadership positions. It is only on
that road that South Africa can stay the winning country it already is. The
ANC supports this Bill. [Applause.]]

Adv Z L MADASA: Chairperson, essentially these two Bills constitute the
final fulfilment of the constitutional legal requirements for the
establishment of one united South African Army.

The two Bills once and for all confirm and affirm that we now have one
SANDF. But do we, in fact, have a united army? This is the question we pose
to the Minister and the Government. A lot has been done, but much more can
be done.

During a presentation by the Office for Equal Opportunities and Affirmative
Action to the Portfolio Committee on defence, the researcher from that
office reported that as many as about 61% of the soldiers interviewed
expressed concern about racism in the army.

How will unity be achieved in the present circumstances? The department
must encourage the white component of the army to be loyal to the
Government and the Constitution by mixing skill, experience and new blood
sensitively when promotions are considered.

Transformation in the middle management and command structure must be
hastened. The veterans' associations and political parties which have
access to the army should play a role to encourage soldiers to remain in
the service of the department and the country.

Unity between the so-called statutory and nonstatutory forces must continue
to be encouraged. Any means of distinction between these former forces must
be stopped immediately. Let us all work to unify the army.

The ACDP supports both Bills.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, ná 1994 het baie dinge in Suid-Afrika
verander en verskillende mense het dit verskillend beleef.

Na my mening is een van die terreine waarop die meeste veranderings ná 1994
plaasgevind het, dié van verdediging. Ná 1994 moes sewe verskillende
verdedigingsmagte in der waarheid saamgevoeg en geïntegreer word. Die
realiteit was dat diegene wat as vyande beskou is, skielik kamerade was,
mede-soldate in die stryd teen 'n nuwe vyand.

In baie gevalle was dit vir baie mense traumaties. Sommige het gevoel hulle
sien nie kans daarvoor nie. Uiteindelik het ons 'n punt bereik waar ons kon
sê die sewe verskillende verdedigingsmagte is suksesvol geïntegreer.

Ander dele in die wêreld het soortgelyke probleme ondervind. In Duitsland
het die ooste en die weste byvoorbeeld geïntegreer en weer een geword. Ook
dáár moes verskillende weermagte geïntegreer word. As 'n mens 'n
vergelyking tref, sien jy dat die SANW goed gedoen het.

Die VF verwelkom dié twee wette omdat daar spesifieke sperdatums gestel
word vir die beëindiging van integrasie en demobilisasie. Die sowat agt
jaar was genoeg tyd. 'n Fase in die lewe van verdediging word afgesluit
wanneer dié sperdatums aanbreek.

Baie ander probleme moet nog opgelos word. Daar is egter nou finaliteit. Ek
stem saam dat dit behoorlik geadverteer moet word sodat almal daarvan weet.

Die VF steun die wetsontwerpe. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, many things in South Africa changed after
1994, and different people experienced it in different ways.

In my opinion one of the spheres in which most changes took place after
1994 is defence. Seven separate defence forces had to be amalgamated and
integrated after 1994. The reality was that those who had been regarded as
enemies were suddenly comrades, fellow-soldiers in the struggle against a
new enemy.

In many cases this was traumatic for many people. Some felt that they could
not do that. Ultimately we reached a point where we could say that the
seven different defence forces were successfully integrated.

There were similar problems in other parts of the world. In Germany, for
example, the east and the west integrated and became one again. There
different defence forces also had to be integrated. If one draws the
comparison one sees that the SANDF did well.

The FF welcomes these two Bills because specific deadlines are set for the
finalising of integration and demobilisation. The period of approximately
eight years was long enough. A phase in the life of defence will be
concluded when these cut-off dates come into effect.

Many other problems still have to be solved. However, there is finality
now. I agree that it should be advertised properly so that everyone can be
aware of it.

The FF supports the Bills.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, these Bills seek to bring to a close a very
difficult process. Our country has negotiated a revolution, a truly
historic undertaking in human history.

We have used extraordinary methods, with very little precedence elsewhere
in the world. To bring back to normal a war situation is not easy. It
requires patience, determination and extraordinary resources which some of
the nonstatutory forces did not have at their disposal. The PAC supports
these Bills.

After extensive consultations with representatives of our Apla forces, as
well as discussions at the hearings of the portfolio committee, we
appreciate that a wide consensus involving Apla, MK and even the hitherto
unknown Cape Corps is necessary and that a later and mutually convenient
date must be fixed. The portfolio committee asked Apla and MK to have their
500 names each submitted for the final inclusion in the final list. We hope
that the spirit that obtained at the hearings of the portfolio committee
will be present when this termination and demobilisation are implemented.

Some of the people involved are still in prison and others are returning
from exile. We need to be compassionate with these categories of people so
that they do not feel discriminated against in comparison with their fellow
comrades in arms who have already been demobilised and integrated. The
naked truth is that too many trained people who are presently unemployed
are feeling desperate. We need to channel their training and experience
positively within the regulated and disciplined atmosphere of the SANDF. We
need close co-ordination and co-operation between the leadership of the
SANDF and that of the parties from where the statutory forces come from. We
support both Bills.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chair, it is agreed that the six years given to complete
the integration of members of nonstatutory forces was sufficient and so the
cut-off date is supported.

The accommodation of those members of the nonstatutory forces - Apla and MK
- who were detained for political reasons; and as a result granted amnesty,
need more time to be integrated is supported and agreed to.

However, it is a concern as to how this accommodation is to be made since
the department has noted that it does not have the capacity or budget to
handle mass intakes of nonstatutory force members, and has planned for
approximately 200 of these members, when having identified 262 who may
still be considered for integration. However, there appears to be a budget
accommodation through money allocated to the recruitment of Grade 12s.

The MF hopes that the views of all parties be carefully taken into
consideration, and that the final decision will be the result of thorough
planning as to how these gains are to be used.

The MF supports the Termination of Integration Intake Bill and the
Demobilisation Amendment Bill.

Siyavumelana noMthetho wakhe. [Ihlombe.] [We support these two Bills.
[Applause.]]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Voorsitter, die agb mnr Oosthuizen het leedvermakerig verwys
na die DA wat geïntegreer en toe gedemobiliseer is. Ek weet van iemand wat
geabsorbeer is. Hy sit vandag in die ANC.

Die AEB steun dié twee wetsontwerpe. In wese is dit iets wat moes gebeur om
sake tot 'n einde te bring. Ons is dankbaar dat dit nou kan gebeur.
Iets moes gebeur. Mense moes in die weermag geïntegreer word, dit kon nie
anders nie, al het dit aanvanklik vir ons baie moeilik geklink. Dié wet sê
egter dit kan nie vir altyd gebeur nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, the hon Mr Oosthuizen gloatingly referred to the
DA that was integrated and then demobilised. I know of someone who was
absorbed. Today he is in the ANC.

The AEB supports these two Bills. In essence this is something which had to
happen to bring matters to an end. We are grateful that it could happen
now.

Something had to happen. People had to be integrated into the defence
force, it was the only way, even if it sounded very difficult to us
initially. However, this legislation says that it cannot go on forever.]

In other words, what we have here is a sunset clause on the integration of
these people into the SANDF. There comes a time when things must get back
to normal.

My vraag is vandag: Wanneer kry ons 'n ``termination of affirmative action
Bill''? Is dit nie ook 'n saak wat só ver gevorder het dat ons 'n stadium
kan bereik dat dit ook beëindig kan word nie?

'n Sensitiewe maar belangrike saak is die talle voormalige Apla's wat nie
nou nie, en ook nie ná 31 Maart 2002 in die SANW geïntegreer gaan wees nie.
Daar is baie sterk aanduidings en vermoedens dat van dié selle nog ernstig
betrokke is by die vlaag plaasmoorde in die land.

Ek kan baie tekens daarvan aandui. 'n Rukkie gelede is voormalige Apla-
guerrillas gevang met 38 semi-outomatiese weermagwapens wat vir taxi-geweld
bestem was. Wat van plaasgeweld wat dit wat na aan die hart lê, bedreig?

Ons vra dat daar gekyk word na, of dat 'n oudit gedoen word van die
voormalige Apla's wat nie in die Weermag opgeneem is nie, sodat sake
beveilig kan word. Ons weet daar is nog baie interne spanning, ons sien dit
in die Weermag.

Ons wens die Minister sterkte toe met die verdere harmonieuse integrasie
van die Weermag. Ons steun die ``sunset clause'' op die invoer van die
Apla's in die Weermag. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Today my question is: When will we see a ``termination of affirmative
action Bill?'' Is that not also a matter which has progressed to such a
point that we can reach a stage where it can also be terminated?

A sensitive but important issue concerns the numerous former Aplas who are
not going to be integrated into the SANDF now, or after 31 March 2002.
There are very strong indications and suspicions that some of these cells
are still seriously involved in the wave of farm murders in the country.

I can indicate many signs of this. A while ago former Apla guerrillas were
caught with 38 semi-automatic defence force weapons which were destined for
taxi violence. What about farm violence which threatens that which lies
close to our hearts?

We want to ask that this be looked at, or that an audit be done of the
former Aplas who have not been integrated into the defence force, so that
matters can be safeguarded. We know that there is still a great deal of
internal tension, we see it in the defence force.

We wish the Minister all of the best with the continued harmonious
integration of the defence force. We support the sunset clause on the
importing of Aplas into the defence force.]

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chairperson, I am sure that I detected a deep sense of
nostalgia in the hon Oosthuizen's voice when he mentioned his old political
home. I wish that I could say to the hon Oosthuizen that he would be
welcome in the DA, but we do have our reputation to think of and his
integration would be terminated there immediately. [Laughter.]

The year 1994 was one of miracles for South Africa. Besides the first
inclusive democratic elections, the SA National Defence Force embarked on
an endeavour that would transform it forever. The integration of seven
separate entities, some of which were former enemies, was and is by no
means an easy task. It was, however, a task that was crucial for the
democratic future of the country.

The problems that were experienced with the integration were predictable
and, to a large degree, expected. In evaluating this process, the following
should be taken into account. Firstly, the entities that integrated had
diverse military cultures owing   to the nature of their training and their
former missions and deployments.

Secondly and flowing from the first point, was the question of staffing and
placement of former nonstatutory force members, many of whom did not have
conventional training. Thirdly, former hostilities, prejudices and
perceptions had to be eradicated and managed in order to ensure that they
did not undermine this process. Incidents and allegations of racism did
occur and led to a great deal of conflict within the SANDF. This is still
an issue of dissent and dissatisfaction.

Frustration and administrative command and control structures also played a
part in this process. These and other problems eventually led to tragic
incidents in which members of the SANDF lost their lives. I think of the
tragic incidents at Tempe, Simon's Town and Phalaborwa that are still fresh
in our memories.

The time has now come to end this chapter in the history of the SANDF and
to move forward to face the many challenges that the new millennium
promises to bring. The Termination of Integration Intake Bill and the
Demobilisation Amendment Bill seek to do exactly this. Although the
outcomes of these Bills are strategically connected, it is the Termination
of Integration Intake Bill that I will concentrate on today.

Section 236(7)(d) of the interim constitution makes provision for members
of the various forces to enter into an agreement with the SANDF within a
reasonable time. I think and, indeed, the committee, the department and the
veterans' organisations of the two former nonstatutory forces, MK and Apla,
agree that seven and a half years for integration has been reasonable and
that the SANDF should now move forward. Delaying this process further
implies an ongoing process, with the inevitable personnel and financial
implications.

It has therefore been decided that 31 March 2002 is a reasonable time by
which former nonstatutory forces have to enter into an agreement for
temporary or permanent appointment within the SANDF, provided ``such
agreement shall be in accordance with normal employment policies and terms
and conditions of service''. Furthermore, this Bill will allow individuals
who are on the certified personnel register or personnel list and who have
been granted amnesty in terms of section 21 of the Promotion of National
Unity and Reconciliation Act, to enter into the same agreement.

In respect of the implementation it is necessary to commend the SANDF
Integration Committee for the role that they have played since September
1994, with attempts to ensure that the process runs smoothly. I think the
status of the integration of the former Cape Corps should, however, be
reconsidered by this committee.

With the implementation of this Bill the following aspects will impact on
the capacity of the SANDF, and will have to be managed. Firstly, the age of
the average members of the SANDF is increasing and is already over 30 years
in some instances, meaning those who qualify may be beyond the age of
integration; secondly, the cost of integrating a single person is about R69
991 per year, and 300 people could cost up to R21 million, excluding
logistics, uniforms, food or training; thirdly, members will have to
receive bridging training to make them productive; and fourthly, further
reviews of ranking, medals and other related aspects will have to take
place.

The committee has been generous in extending the date for final integration
on a number of occasions. The MK and Apla veterans' organisations must now
finalise the issue by the legislated date. It is already doubtful whether
the SANDF has the capacity to accommodate large numbers of new members. It
must also be remembered that the integration will imply that fewer
matriculants, whose youth is greatly needed in the organisation, will be
able to join the SANDF. The SANDF is and should remain a national asset,
one that must continue to be moulded into a force that the citizens of this
country can be proud of - a force that will meet the challenges of the new
millennium with efficiency, effectiveness and vigour.

In closing, I think it appropriate to remember those who lost their lives
during the conflicts before 1994, and were not able to reap the benefits of
either integration or demobilisation. Some lost their lives in the struggle
against apartheid, while others still lie buried in shallow graves in
Angola and elsewhere. These brave souls and their families should be
remembered. [Applause.]

Mrs Z A KOTA: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, comrades and colleagues, it is
a great honour to participate in this important debate. But please allow me
to address myself to two hon members who have raised issues of concern.

Dr Mogoba should note that we in the committee did not say that MK and Apla
should each come up with 500 Defence Force members. They have indicated to
us that they might come up with 500 members, subject to verification. The
names of those members should appear on the certified personnel register.
If they do not appear on the certified personnel register, the Minister may
view that matter on an individual basis - that is, on a case by case basis.

Mr Jankielsohn should note that the process of integration will take place
in the same vein as that of other members in 1994. We are not going to put
any conditions on that integration. All members felt that they have been
integrated equally before the law.

Let me now come to my speech. The Bills before Parliament are of great
significance as they deal with a most important component of our country,
namely our Defence Force members. I will focus mainly on the Demobilisation
Amendment Bill and its implications.

We are having this debate at the time of a changing environment when the
spirit of new patriotism is calling upon all South Africans, from all walks
of life, to make a difference in the lives of our people. This presents a
challenge to those members of the SANDF who will be demobilised for, like
all of us, they will continue to contribute to the efforts aimed at
creating lasting peace and prosperity on our continent and the world over.
As members will be entering the new area of deployment, they will be
expected to lead our democracy to new heights. We urge them to give their
best in those tasks they choose o perform.

The challenges upon us, as organs of civil society, Government and the
private sector, are to create an enabling environment that allows these
combatants to unleash their individual potential.

These former members have a tremendous role to play in our society. In a
number of debates in this House, as members of the defence committee, we
have raised the importance of an exit plan for the demobilised members of
the SA National Defence Force.

The idea we had in mind was an integrated plan in terms of a number of
departments that are in dire need of this expertise. We mentioned, among
others, Police Services and Correctional Services, as Comrade Gert
Oosthuizen has said. This is a matter that we urge the Minister to revisit.

There was a ministerial committee that was mentioned in one of the
briefings that we received from the Department of Defence, which was meant
to take up this matter. The security cluster has to look at this as a
matter of urgency.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Mnr die Voorsitter, op 'n punt van orde: Is dit
toelaatbaar vir 'n agb lid om van kameraad Oosthuizen te praat, aangesien
hy nooit 'n kameraad was nie? [Mr Chairman, on a point of order: Is it in
order for an hon member to talk about Comrade Oosthuizen, seeing that he
was never a comrade?]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: It has been conferred upon him since
then.

Mrs Z A KOTA: Mr Chairperson, when the members are demobilised, the service
corps is meant to play a central role in assisting members in their new
careers. The point is whether the service corps is able to rise to this
challenge or not.

We did receive a report from the service corps and it is clear in our minds
that it is not able to deliver on this mandate. The question still remains:
How many ...

Mr V B NDLOVU: [Inaudible.]

Mrs Z A KOTA: Ndlovu, yima. [Wait, Ndlovu.] The question still remains: How
many of these members have been trained and how many of them have been able
to get jobs, and why?

Imbangi yokuba nditsho kukuba maninzi ekuhlaleni amadela-kufa aqeqeshwe
yile `service corps', kodwa bahleli ezilokishini, abenzi nto. Ke, abazali
bayasibuza into yokuba ingaba sicinga ukwenza ntoni na ngalo mba. Kunzima
kuthi ukuphendula, kuba nathi asazi ukuba kwenzeka ntoni na, kuba
baqeqeshwa, beqeqeshelwa into yokuba bakwazi ukufumana imisebenzi, okanye
bazizamele ezinye iindlela zokuphila, ze bakwazi ukukhulisa uqoqosho lweli
lizwe. Kodwa akwenzeki oko. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The reason I say this is that there are many of these recruits in the
community who have been trained by these service corps but who are sitting
idly in the townships. On the other hand, their parents are asking what we
are planning to do in this regard. It is difficult for us to respond to
this because we also do not know what is happening as they were trained in
order to make it possible for them to get jobs or to enable them to devise
their own warp of making a living so that they could also contribute to the
economy of the country. Yet this is not happening.]

The challenge, therefore, is to revisit the content of training provided by
this entity, and determine whether the certificates they give to members
after these courses do have accreditation or not. Do members get assistance
when they are seeking jobs? This is the practice internationally. Do
members who want to open small businesses get assistance? If not, why not?
That is why we want interdepartmental assistance in this process of
demobilisation.

We also urge demobilised soldiers to join the ranks of the reserve force.
There should be no restrictions on members who want to serve our country in
this capacity, as this is in line with our one-force policy, which says
that the SA National Defence Force is an all-volunteer force comprised of
relatively small and regular forces backed up by a large reserve force.

In light of the public hearings that we had yesterday, which echoed with
one voice that there are no funds available to train new recruits, the
demobilised members will, therefore, save the department money, as we are
referring to people who are already trained militarily ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, you are
continuing with your caucus, which started early this morning. Let us now
attend to the caucus at hand here. There is a great deal of caucusing going
on. Carry on, hon member.

Mrs Z A KOTA: The demobilised members would save the department money, as
we are referring to people who have been trained militarily, some of whom
are officers in their own right. The challenge that remains is to ensure
that the reserve force gets attention, as far as civic education and the
equal opportunity programmes are concerned.

That will go a long way in addressing the concerns of people. However, we
do recognise the good work that has been done by these courageous sons and
daughters of our soil.

In conclusion, we need to use the expertise of these demobilised members in
the peace initiatives which are taking place in our communities in terms of
the CPF forums in other parts of Africa, as well as in the UN.

Andiyivumi mna Gatyeni into yokuba la madelakufa ahambe, nokuba anamadolo
abuhlungu, aye kuhlala ekhaya. Mabancedise abantu basekhaya njenge ...
[Personally, I do not agree, Gatyeni, that we should dispense with these
recruits and let them stay at home. They should go and help the communities
as ...]

... ambassadors of this democracy. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Minister, I hope that this
time the call of the Chair has precedence over the call of nature!
[Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, I agree. I noticed that Messrs Mulder
and Aucamp are plotting a coalition there. [Laughter.]

Firstly, may I express the department's gratitude for the support that all
the parties have expressed and given to the Bills. There are a few question
which have been raised during the course of the debate, which are receiving
the ongoing attention of the department. They include the question of the
KwaZulu Self-Protection Units, the Cape Corps and similar issues.

With regard to the dissatisfaction that continues to emerge from the former
forces, whether it is the Ciskei or Bophuthatswana Defence Force, the Cape
Corps etc, I would like to urge hon members to recall the atmosphere around
which this process began. Once an indication was given that people could
demobilise and immediately access certain large amounts of money, many
members of all these units and forces were tempted to take advantage of
demobilisation in order to immediately access money, without taking the
period that lies ahead into account.

In the transition period there were stories that abounded, and many of the
people were misled by some of these rumours. Today we continue to receive
delegations' complaints, and when we look into the records, we are able to
show that most of the people who are complaining actually took
demobilisation and accessed money without realising what they were doing.
Many of them have made that mistake. Nevertheless, every case that comes
before the SANDF command structures is given very thorough attention.
Documents and records are produced, and we will continue to do so, so that
no single individual suffers unfairly.

The hon Aucamp raised the question as to when a Bill will be tabled to
terminate affirmative action. I would just like to say that in so far as
this Parliament is concerned, the National Defence Force must be
representative of the country's populace, so we will continue to focus on
achieving that objective. Once that objective is achieved, there will be no
need for any affirmative action or a Bill, because it will just fall off in
so far as the command structures will have fulfilled the policy demands as
dictated by this Parliament.

I would like to proceed, finally, to thanking my colleague the Deputy
Minister for her contribution. But, more importantly, I wish to take this
opportunity to thank my predecessors, Joe Modise and Ronnie Kasrils, who
had no immediate precedent to follow in initiating the process that this
legislation is dealing with, but were nevertheless able to lay foundations
which have made the process flow as smoothly as it did. I take this
opportunity to do so, alive to the fact that the health of my predecessor,
Joe Modise, is not so well. We would like, before and together with this
House, to express our gratitude to him on behalf of the people of our
country, and to wish him well. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bills read a second time.

The House adjourned at 17:22.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 18 October 2001 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Labour Relations Amendment Bill [B 77 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75).


     (2)    The Minister of Trade and Industry submitted the
         Wysigingswetsontwerp op Loterye [W 81 - 2001] (National Assembly -
         sec 75) to the Speaker and the Chairperson on 18 October 2001.
         This is the official translation of the Lotteries Amendment Bill
         [B 81 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), which was introduced
         in the National Assembly by the Minister on 16 October 2001.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly:

Papers:
1.    The Speaker:


     Dr N B Pityana gave notice on 28 September 2001 of his resignation from
     the South African Human Rights Commission with effect from 31 December
     2001.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Interim Rationalisation of Jurisdiction of High
     Courts Bill [B 44 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 8 October
     2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the subject of the Interim Rationalisation of
         Jurisdiction of High Courts Bill [B 44 - 2001] (National Assembly
         - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments
         [B 44A - 2001].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on the
     Security Industry Regulation Bill [B 12 - 2001] (National Assembly -
     75), dated 16 October 2001:


        The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, having considered
        the subject of the Security Industry Regulation Bill [B 12 - 2001]
        (National Assembly - 75), referred to it and classified by the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, presents the Private
        Security Industry Regulation Bill [B 12B - 2001] (National Assembly
        - 75).

