---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 March 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-03-15
---

THURSDAY, 15 MARCH 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M T GONIWE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with pleasure the decision by Chief Ndaba Mtirara to leave the
       UDM and join the ANC ... [Applause.]
  (2) believes that the move by the chief represents the imminent demise of
       the UDM;


  (3) welcomes the chief to the ranks of the ANC; and


  (4) calls on other patriots to emulate this example and join the ANC, as
       it is the only party that is able to lead South Africa towards total
       national liberation.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Will hon members please wait to be called before they
speak? The next notice of motion will be by the DP. Will members take their
seats and stop private meetings, please! Order!

Mr N J CLELLAND: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that President Mbeki yesterday, during parliamentary question
       time, promised to refer the matter of his new luxury presidential jet
       to the Cabinet;


  (2) notes that the enormous cost of buying and maintaining such a jet is
       a luxury that the poor people of South Africa cannot afford;


  (3) further notes reports in the media that there is now a serious
       shortage of qualified pilots for this new luxury jet and that pilots
       from the private sector may have to be used, at a huge cost to the
       state; and


  (4) calls on the Cabinet to delay final purchase of the jet so that all
       options can be carefully considered with due deference to the real
       needs of our people.

[Interjections.] [[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -

The SPEAKER: Just a moment, hon member. The microphone seems to be out of
order. Would you try again?

Hheyi! Lawo malungu ahloniphekile mawangadlalali lapha! [Uhleko.] [Hey!
Those hon members must not play here! [Laughter.]]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) is shocked to learn of the murder of a SAPS member  because his dog
       made a noise;


  (2) asks the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to look
       at the bail system which applies to people who are involved in
       killing police;


  (3) urges the courts to apply harsher sentences to those people who kill
       members of the Police Service because they are police members; and


  (4) urges the members of the House to support the police - those who are
       good and innocent - to do their work properly without fear or favour.

Ms L M T XINGWANA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with displeasure and shock the continued screening of Yizo
       Yizo;


  (2) further notes the widespread outrage and condemnation of this show;


  (3) believes that the screening of Yizo Yizo does not contribute
       positively to the kind of society we seek to build;


  (4) further believes that this undermines the norms, values and cultural
       and religious beliefs of the majority of our people; and


  (5) urges SABC 1 to stop further broadcasts of Yizo Yizo.

[Applause.]

Mr M C J VAN SCHALKWYK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with disbelief that Mr David Rasnick, a member of the
       President's Aids Advisory Panel, wrote a letter to the Financial
       Mail, published in the edition appearing on the streets this
       afternoon, in which he refers to HIV/Aids as ``a harmless virus'';


  (2) further recalls that President Mbeki has assured the nation that he
       will be guided by the advice of scientific experts on the issue of
       HIV/Aids; and


  (3) calls on the President to distance himself, once and for all, from
       perspectives of people such as Mr Rasnick by removing him from the
       President's Aids Advisory Panel, and by availing himself of more
       reputable scientific advice in order to properly address the HIV/Aids
       crisis in South Africa.

It is not a harmless virus. [Applause.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the growing impatience amongst rail commuters with
       the level of service being offered;


  (2) takes heed of the public complaints about the service and other
       expressions of dissatisfaction;


  (3) recognises the efforts being made by the SARCC and other relevant
       authorities to improve their service and salutes those who are
       striving towards this objective, despite financial constraints;


  (4) urges such authorities to think beyond simply trying to cope and to
       work proactively to attract customers; and


  (5) calls upon all the relevant authorities to make their service more
       user-friendly and to win the commuter over to their side in the
       competition for business.

Mr D M GUMEDE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the strike which resulted in the backlog in the delivery
       of letters by the Post Office has been called off by the union;


  (2) believes that the resolution of problems engulfing this service
       between unions and management will contribute positively to improving
       the quality of service;


  (3) commends the bold decision by unions and management to resolve their
       dispute; and


  (4) calls on both management and unions to develop mechanisms to ensure
       that disputes are resolved without having to resort to strike action.

[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) acknowledges the community transformation that has taken place in
       some 40 cities worldwide where the levels of poverty, disease,
       unemployment and crime have drastically reduced as a result of
       concerted and united prayer action;


  (2) welcomes the initiative taken by the group of business, church and
       community leaders known as ``Transformation'' in organising prayer
       meetings with a view to community transformation;


  (3) notes the Lord's promise contained in Jeremiah 33 in this regard; and


  (4) particularly welcomes the united prayer meeting to take place at
       Fedsure Park, Newlands Rugby Stadium, on Human Rights Day, 21 March
       2001, where at least 40 000 people will participate in united prayer
       in the mighty name of Jesus, for community transformation in our city
       and country.

[Applause.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÃ‰: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) calls on the Minister of Transport to urgently take steps to address
       and remove the problems that exist with regard to the rail commuter
       services, causing passengers to destroy public property and putting
       the safety of law-abiding citizens at risk;


  (2) further calls on the President to take note of the mood that exists
       among low-income groups, who face hardship because of poor service
       delivery on the part of Government; and


  (3) calls on the President to ensure that Government improves its
       performance, because the destruction of infrastructure and equipment
       has a detrimental effect on investments, which in turn slows down
       economic growth and makes a mockery of what he and other leaders
       refer to as the African Renaissance.

[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, will you please conduct your private meetings
outside this Chamber, and not in the Chamber!

Ms N E HANGANA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the comments by the DA MEC for Finance and Gender Affairs in
       the Western Cape, Mr Leon Markovitz, in a debate in the legislature
       on Tuesday, 13 March:


         ... Ms Essop, who has her back turned to me, which is my favourite
         position ...'';


  (2) further notes that a motion calling for the Commission for Gender
       Equality to investigate the incidence of sexism and the absence of a
       gender policy in the Western Cape was blocked by the DA;


  (3) expresses its utter disgust and condemnation of this kind of
       entrenched sexism;


  (4) calls for an investigation into claims of sexism in the DA-controlled
       legislature; and
  (5) urges the Human Rights Commission to investigate claims of sexism in
       the Western Cape legislature.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes media reports that sex offenders are now targeting children
       with physical and mental disabilities because they are either unable
       to speak up or are not able to name their abusers;


  (2) notes that when these tormented children make it to court, they are
       doubly abused by a system that often is uncaring and treats them as
       adults even if their mental age is that of a child;


  (3) further notes that the Sexual Offences Act of 1957 still calls these
       people idiots and imbeciles; and


  (4) calls on


       (a)  the Minister of Safety and Security to address this increasing
           problem as a matter of urgency; and


       (b)  the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to
           investigate the practices that physically and mentally disabled
           children endure in the justice system, so as to accord them
           their due dignity as enshrined in the Constitution.

[Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that yesterday, a long and crippling work stoppage within the
       Post Office was finally ended;


  (2) notes that the length of the stoppage went beyond causing
       inconvenience and that it had, in fact, a negative impact on our
       economy;


  (3) further notes that while the return to normality will be a  welcome
       relief to all, one is nevertheless constrained to ask what could be
       done to further improve the negotiating environment so that
       industrial disputes do not become protracted and drawn out; and


  (4) therefore calls on all relevant role-players to further refine
       instruments for wage negotiations so that employers and employees can
       find one another without disruption and major work stoppages.

Mr J H MOMBERG: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the University of Stellenbosch has agreed that Hellenic
       may use Coetzenburg for their last home match, and will have further
       discussions with the club for next season;


  (2) believes that the latest move by the University of Stellenbosch
       administration to allow a match to be played represents a victory in
       the struggle for equal facilities for all our sporting codes; and


  (3) welcomes the decision by the university administration, and calls on
       the DA-controlled unicity council to allow soccer to be played in the
       Newlands Cricket Stadium.

[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the nonavailability of some Ministers to answer
       questions in the economics cluster scheduled for 28 March this year -
       some of the Ministers will be accompanying President Mbeki on an
       extended visit to Cuba, while no reasons have been given for the
       unavailability of the other Ministers;


  (2) further notes that -


       (a)  Ministers are accountable, collectively and individually, to
           Parliament; and


       (b)  their growing trend of nonattendance is indicative of their lack
           of respect for Parliament and is yet another example of the
           scant regard for the legislative arm by the executive, thereby
           undermining our young democracy;


  (3) therefore calls on Ministers to treat their parliamentary
       obligations, rather than international jet-setting and junketeering,
       as their priority; and


  (4) furthermore calls on the Speaker of the National Assembly and the
       Leader of Government Business to intervene in this matter by
       reminding the executive of its constitutional duty to Parliament.
[Interjections.]

                        ALLOCATION OF SPEAKING TIMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I move the draft resolution printed on the
Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, as
follows:


  That the following times be allocated to parties for comment on the
  amendments to Report 13 of the Public Protector:


         African National Congress: 5 minutes; Democratic Party: 4 minutes;
         Inkatha Freedom Party and New National Party: 3 minutes each;
         United Democratic Movement: 2 minutes; all other parties: 1 minute
         each.

Agreed to.

   ADOPTION OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON REPORT 13 OF PUBLIC PROTECTOR
      (Decision of Question on Report and on amendments moved thereto)

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, four years after Minister Penuell Maduna
breached the Rules of this House and violated the  Constitution, this
matter is being discussed for the third successive day. A previous
parliamentary committee sat for more than a year. The Public Protector
investigated the matter at vast expense for another year, and the latest ad
hoc committee spent more than a year considering the Public Protector's
report.

The reason that the ANC was not able simply to sweep the matter under the
carpet two days ago was because of procedural lapses, which at least gives
us the opportunity to again communicate with the public. How unnecessary
and what a waste of time and the people's money this whole saga has been.
Because the ANC is determined to protect its own, irrespective of the cost,
Parliament has in effect been told to ignore the most important part of the
Public Protector's recommendations.

Furthermore, until the day arrives when the new Powers and Privileges of
Parliament Act is passed, Ministers and MPs will know that if they
represent the governing party, at least, they can breach the Constitution
with impunity and say anything in the House. They can defame, tell lies,
undermine other organs of the Constitution, in fact they can do anything,
as long as they are prepared to withdraw the remarks when ordered to do so
by the Speaker. A quite ghastly precedent is being created in terms of
which parliamentary privilege can now be used to protect and even promote
grossly inappropriate conduct. I hope hon members of the ANC realise what
they have done.

As for Minister Maduna, I was asked yesterday immediately after moving the
amendment why I hated him so much. I want to place on record that I do not
hate the hon the Minister. In fact, I hate no one in the world.
[Interjections.] This is not about the Minister as a person. It is about
him as a Minister, as an MP, and about the opposition and the role it has
to fulfil. The whole opposition united in condemning the report of the ad
hoc committee, and this, in itself, should have made the ANC and Minister
Maduna think again.

I want the hon the Minister to consider whether he has acted in accordance
with the high standards that one expects of Cabinet Ministers. In
particular, as the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, he
has to be measured against even higher standards than almost anyone else in
the Cabinet. His ill-advised comments in breach of the Rules and in
violation of the Constitution, have cost the taxpayer millions of rands.
Not once has Minister Maduna said to the public: ``I am sorry.'' Not once
has he said: ``I am sorry, I did not mean to violate the Constitution, and
I certainly did not mean to cost the taxpayer millions of rands.''
[Interjections.] I want to appeal to him today and say: Is it too late,
even at this late stage, for the hon the Minister to stand up and say to
the people of South Africa, ``I am sorry?'' I challenge him to do so.
[Interjections.]

I move the amendment standing in my name. [Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Madam Speaker and hon members, what is important
today is to chart a way forward, so that Parliament can map out rules and
regulations relating to any transgression by any individual in any organ of
state. This will enable Parliament to have a defined procedure for future
alleged transgressions.

Having said that, I wish to state that adopting this report, with the
relevant amendment which refers to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development, will enable the House to finalise this matter
speedily. Justice delayed is justice denied.

This exercise will then enable the hon the Minister to concentrate on other
matters of state in the criminal justice system, and these are many and
varied. We sincerely hope, therefore, that whatever concerns remain
unresolved at the back of the minds of some members of this House will be
taken care of by this reference.

Siyacela-ke kule Ndlu ukuthi lolu daba lulungiswe ukuze lusheshe luphele
futhi lufike ekugcineni. Siyazi sonke ukuthi izinto zoniwa ngomlomo futhi
zilungiswe ngomlomo. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[We ask this House to quickly rectify this issue so that it will be
concluded soon. We all know that things are brought into disarray by means
of the mouth, and they are also rectified by means of the mouth.]

Mr D M BAKKER: Madam Speaker, I already stated on Tuesday that this matter
should actually never have been on the agenda of a democratic parliament.
[Interjections.] I have stated that one would not have expected a Minister
of state to act in the manner that the hon Minister Maduna did, especially
since he knew, within a few days, that his absurd claim was false and that
he was not as knowledgeable as he thought he was. [Interjections.]

Instead of apologising for his absurd statement, he elected to continue
making a fool of himself, which resulted in a process which cost the
taxpayers in excess of R13 million. One would also have expected that, when
a Cabinet Minister violated the spirit of the Constitution, the hon the
President would have acted against such a Minister.

'n Mens sou verwag het dat hierdie Parlement ten minste 'n versoek van 'n
hoofstuk nege instelling van ons Grondwet baie ernstig sou opneem, en dit
behoorlik sou hanteer. Wat ons egter gesien het, is 'n ad hoc komitee van
hierdie Parlement, oorheers deur die ANC, wat uit hulle pad gegaan het om
een resultaat, en een resultaat alleenlik, te bewerkstellig, en dit is
naamlik om 'n ANC Minister te beskerm. Om dit te bereik, probeer die
komitee se verslag om verkeerdelik die indruk te wek dat die Parlement
magteloos is om enige iets te doen, en dat hy nie kan doen wat die Openbare
Beskermer van hom verwag het nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Duidelik, en sekerlik in opdrag van die uitvoerende gesag, het die komitee
'n verkeerde klem geplaas op die uitspraak in die De Lille saak om sodoende
'n verskoning te vind dat die Parlement se hande afgekap is. Die groot
verskil tussen hierdie aangeleentheid en die De Lille saak is dat hierdie
aangeleentheid baie min te doen het met vryheid van spraak, maar alles te
doen het met die verkragting van ons Grondwet. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[One would have expected that this Parliament would at least take a request
from a Chapter 9 institution of our Constitution very seriously, and deal
with it properly. However, what we have seen is an ad hoc committee of this
Parliament, dominated by the ANC, that has gone out of its way to achieve
one result, and one result only, and that is to protect an ANC Minister. To
achieve this, the report of the committee attempts to create the erroneous
impression that Parliament is powerless to do anything, and that it cannot
do what the Public Protector expected of it. [Interjections.]

Clearly, and surely on the instructions of the executive, the committee
incorrectly placed emphasis on the judgment in the De Lille case in order
to advance the excuse that Parliament is powerless. The major difference
between this matter and the De Lille case is that this matter has very
little to do with freedom of speech, but has everything to do with the
violation of our Constitution.]

Most opposition parties recommended that at least Minister Maduna should
have been instructed to appear in the National Assembly to render his
apologies, show some regret at violating the Constitution, and be
reprimanded for his actions which have cost the public more than R13
million in legal expenses. [Interjections.] This is exactly what the
amendment by the Chief Whip of the Opposition would achieve, and it should
be supported by this whole House.

Persoonlik sou ek wou gesien het dat die Parlement die agb Minister ten
minste gelas om sy eie regskoste te betaal, maar die besprekings het nooit
so ver gekom nie. [Personally, I would have liked to see Parliament at
least order the hon the Minister to pay his own legal costs, but the
discussions never got that far.]

The New NP supports the amendment proposed by the Chief Whip of the
Opposition, but is strongly opposed to the ANC's own Protector-General's
report which is only a cover-up for the ANC Minister. [Applause.]

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Speaker, hon members, the failure by the SFF and the
Auditor-General to perform their duty with regard to informing the Minister
about changes in accounting processes did not entitle the Minister, in
turn, to undermine the integrity of these organs in his remarks, especially
in the absence of conclusive evidence. But, most importantly, we reject the
majority party's insistence that Parliament is powerless to ask Minister
Maduna for an unconditional and unqualified apology.

In our view the proposed amendment by the majority party is another attempt
to emphasise that Parliament is powerless to do anything about this. We
simply ask for the adoption of the report without paragraph 6(3), which
moves that this be referred to the Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development and be submitted to the Constitutional Review Committee. We
believe that had the Minister given enough thought to these matters and
consulted, he could have got conclusive evidence on the issues and we would
not have had to deal with this.

We, therefore, reject the amendment of the ruling party, and support the
amendment of the opposition. [Interjections.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and members, I am not sure why
the hon the Minister has left this House, because I would have wanted to
say what I have to say in his presence. [Interjections.] However, the legal
cost of R13 million which has been incurred as a result of Mr Maduna's
statement, should have been foreseen by the hon the Minister.

Chapter 7, section 64, of the Public Finance Management Act places a heavy
responsibility on the executive. The hon the Minister should, therefore,
have foreseen that his actions would have huge financial implications.
However, the Minister continued with his actions and, to this day, I do not
think that the Minister has apologised to the public for the loss of this
amount of money.
The ACDP, therefore, has no option but to support the hon Gibson's
amendment in respect of the adoption of this report. We, therefore, come
out in support of the opposition motion. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, during the original debate on this report, on
Tuesday, the hon member Ms Thandi Modise defended the hon the Minister by
saying that as a new Minister in the department, he went around asking
questions everywhere, trying to ascertain exactly what happened. I can
understand that and I agree with it. The problem is that ...

... die Openbare Beskermer in sy verslag bevind het dat die aantygings van
die Minister die indruk gewek het dat R170 miljoen weggeraak het en dat die
Ouditeur-Generaal daarby betrokke kon wees. Hy bevind in sy verslag dat diÃ©
indruk maklik uit die weg geruim kon word.

Die Openbare Beskermer het bevind dat die Minister diÃ© ongelukkige indruk
maklik uit die weg kon geruim het deur gepaste oorlegpleging met sy
bestuursouditeur of 'n regstreekse, diepgaande gesprek met die Ouditeur-
Generaal self. Die Minister kon met die Ouditeur-Generaal self gepraat het,
maar hy het dit nie gedoen nie.

In die lig van diÃ© situasie sal die VF nie die wysiging van die regerende
party kan steun nie, maar sal wel die wysiging van die Amptelike Opposisie
steun. Die indruk is geskep dat die ANC die geleentheid wat hy gehad het om
die saak reg te stel, deur sy vingers laat glip het. Dit is die indruk wat
na buite sal bly staan. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[... the Public Protector has found in his report that the allegations of
the Minister created the impression that R170 million had disappeared and
that the Auditor-General could be involved in this. He found in his report
that this impression could easily be rectified.

The Public Protector found that the Minister could easily have rectified
this unfortunate impression by way of appropriate consultation with his
managerial auditor or a direct, in-depth discussion with the Auditor-
General himself. The Minister could have spoken to the Auditor-General
himself, but he did not do so.

In the light of this situation, the FF will not be able to support the
amendment of the governing party, but will, in fact, support the amendment
of the Official Opposition. The impression has been created that the ANC
let the opportunity which it had to rectify this matter slip through its
fingers. This is the impression that will continue to prevail among the
public.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, we have noted the amendment by the majority
party in respect of this matter. But we in the UCDP remain constant as the
North star as regards our findings and recommendations.

Minister Maduna is at fault and the House should support and accept the
findings and recommendations of the Public Protector on this matter. The
Minister has to apologise for his utterances against the Chapter 9
institutions. This will go a long way towards ensuring that the
Constitution is upheld and respected in word and deed.

We reject the amendment by the ANC and support the minority amendment.
[Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, what will follow after this is a defamation
case by the former Auditor-General, Mr Kluever. It will be an embarrassment
if the report of Parliament is found in court to be unconstitutional and
wrong. [Interjections.] When that happens, we must say to the Minister that
he will have to pay his own legal costs and he will have to pay for
whatever he is going to be sued for. [Interjections.] It is unfair that the
state should pay a cent more on this. I paid my own legal costs and he must
pay his. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

As Parliament, we have missed a golden opportunity to show that we respect
the highest law in this country.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: [Inaudible.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I am saying to the Minister of Finance that
that is what the Constitution says - that we shall all uphold the
Constitution. Therefore, we support the amendment of the hon Gibson.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÃ‰: Madam Speaker, we have already put the FA's point of view
on the table that we, as members of Parliament, are obliged to ensure - on
behalf of the nation - that members of the executive and ourselves remain
true to the oath that we took that we will stand guard over the institution
of Parliament, the Constitution and especially the institutions mentioned
in Chapter 9, which includes the Auditor-General's office.

Parliament may not, after a Minister has attacked the Auditor-General and
was found guilty by the Public Protector of overstepping that rule, change
its previous decisions purely because the executive has put pressure on
Feinstein, Scopa and its ANC members. [Interjections.]

We are not in a Quatro camp, nor will anybody necklace us for standing up
for constitutional democracy. An ANC member verbally abused me when I made
my speech. He only demonstrated that our point of view is correct. We will
not bow to pressure. Our vote against this report must be registered. We
support the hon Gibson's amendment. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, proper administration of the law and
investigation procedures must be executed within the Constitution. This
will ensure effective and impartial results which will dispel any doubts of
transparency and accountability.

The MF, therefore, accepts that the Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on
Report 13 of the Public Protector be adopted, subject to the substitution
for paragraph 5(4)(d) of the following paragraph: ``The committee
recommends that these matters be referred to the Portfolio Committee on
Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and report and be
submitted to the Constitutional Review Committee.'' [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, normaalweg sou ek nie baie gretig wees om
weer aan die debat deel te neem en weer die Minister aan te val nie. Ek hou
nie daarvan om 'n man wat platlÃª te trap nie. Die feit is egter: Die
Minister wil nie lÃª nie en hy wil nie eens om verskoning vra nie, en daarom
verwelkom ons die geleentheid om weer vandag hierdie dinge vir hom te kan
sÃª.

Die AEB het in die komitee ook hom gevoeg by die minderheidsrapport en sy
steun daaraan gegee. Ek was verbaas om in die komitee te hoor dat 'n
minderheidsrapport nie behandel kan word in hierdie Huis nie. Nou het die
verslag wel hier met 'n tegniese omweg beland en ek wil tog daarvoor pleit
dat minderheidsrapporte van komitees wel deur die Huis behandel word,
anders gaan die publiek nooit weet wat ons standpunte was.

Ek verwelkom hierdie debat. Die AEB ondersteun hierdie mosie van Mnr Gibson
heelhartig. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows).

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, normally I would not be very keen to take part
in the debate again and once again attack the Minister. I do not like to
kick a man when he is down. However, the fact is: The Minister does not
want to stay down and he does not even want to apologise, and therefore we
welcome the opportunity to say these things to him again today.

The AEB also associated itself with the minority report in the committee
and supported the report. I was surprised to hear in the committee that a
minority report cannot be dealt with in this House. Now the report has
indeed ended up here via a circuitous technical route, and I would like to
appeal that minority reports of committees should, in fact, be dealt with
by this House, otherwise the public will never know what our points of view
were.

I welcome this debate. The AEB wholeheartedly supports this motion of Mr
Gibson. [Applause.]]

Mr A C NEL: Madam Speaker, this amendment that the DP has put before us
today is nothing but an attempt to draw the last drop of political capital
out of an issue which is already closed. The DP is trying to raise from the
dead issues on which it was defeated through thorough and well-considered
arguments in the portfolio committee. They are bringing up the same old
issues over and over again.

Let us deal with them. Firstly, with regard to the question of the costs,
the DP consistently ignores, or chooses to ignore, the fact that the Public
Protector told our portfolio committee that every cent spent on this
investigation was money well-spent.

Secondly, they are creating, or attempting to create, the impression that
it was Minister Maduna who dragged this investigation on for two years.
They consistently refrained from telling the public that it was by a
decision of the National Assembly that this matter was referred to the
Public Protector for investigation. The Minister co-operated fully with
that investigation. This is in stark contrast to the attitude adopted by
the Premier of the Western Cape, who is refusing to co-operate with an
investigation by the Public Protector into alleged corruption. [Applause.]

Thirdly, they are trying to create the impression that we have created the
impression that Parliament is powerless. What we have said is that in view
of the judgment in the De Lille case the Powers and Privileges of
Parliament Act does not provide a proper framework to deal with matters
such as these. Therefore we have recommended that, rather than try to set a
precedent on an ad hoc basis, we should refer these matters to those
structures in Parliament which are best suited to deal with them, to
examine them thoroughly, and not in the heat of the moment when there is a
juicy political apple dangling in front of the opposition.

We believe that we have recommended a responsible way of taking this matter
forward, an approach that will in the long term serve to safeguard the
integrity, the efficiency and the dignity of our Chapter 9 institutions. I
think the time has come for this House to say that the question of Minister
Maduna is closed and what we are opening now is a new chapter, in which we
as an institution will try to seek lasting solutions and guidelines to
these important constitutional questions. [Applause.]

Debate on amendments concluded.

Amendment by the Chief Whip of the Largest Minority Party put.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 75: Abrahams, T; Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Bell, B G;
  Beukman, F; Blaas, A; BlanchÃ©, J P I; Borman, G M; Botha, A J; Bruce, N
  S; Camerer, S M; Clelland, N J; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I
  O; De Lille, P; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dowry, J J; Durand, J; Ellis, M J;
  Farrow, S B; Frolick, C T; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Gous, S J; Green, L
  M; Greyling, C H F; Heine, R J; Holomisa, B H; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S
  V; Lee, T D; Mabeta, M E; Madasa, Z L; Mbadi, L M; McIntosh, G B D;
  Mfundisi, I S; Moorcroft, E K; Morkel, C M; Mothiba, L C; Msomi, M D;
  Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Mzimela, S E; Mzizi, M A; Niemann, J J;
  Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Pheko, S E M; Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J;
  Ramodike, M N; Rhoda, R T; Schalkwyk, P J; Schippers, J; Schmidt, H C;
  Schoeman, R S; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smit, H A;
  Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Southgate, R M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Taljaard, R;
  Van Deventer, F J; Van Jaarsveld, A Z A; Van Niekerk, A I; Van Schalkwyk,
  M C J; Viljoen, C L; Waters, M.


  NOES - 216: Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N;
  Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Belot, S T; Benjamin,
  J; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W;
  Buthelezi, M N; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
  Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Cronin, J P; De Lange, J H; Didiza, A T;
  Dithebe, S L; Doidge, G Q M; Duma, N M; Dyani, M M Z; Ebrahim, E I;
  Fankomo, F C; Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Gandhi, E;
  Gcina, C I; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gininda, M S;
  Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Goosen, A D; Govender, P; Gumede,
  D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A
  C; Hlengwa, M W; Holomisa, S P; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R;
  Jordan, Z P; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J
  J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro,
  M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G;
  Mabudafhasi, T R; Maduna, P M; Magashule, E S; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N
  E; Mahlangu, G L; Mahlangu, M J; Mahlawe, N; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S;
  Makasi, X C; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J;; Malumise,
  M M; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I;
  Martins, B A D; Masithela, N H; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbete, B; Mbulawa-Hans, B G;
  Mgidi, J S; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G
  P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Moeketse, K M; Mofokeng,
  T R; Mogale, E P; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J; Mohlala, R J B; Mokaba, P R;
  Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S
  J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Moosa, M V; Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M;
  Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S
  A; Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi, F S;
  Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B; Ndabandaba, L
  B G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
  Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, H;
  Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S;
  Nkosi, D M; Nqakula, C; Nqodi, S B; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B;
  Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oosthuizen, G C; Pahad, E G; Phala, M J;
  Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S;
  Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C M P; Rasmeni, S M;
  Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E; Schneeman, G D; Scott, M I; September, C C;
  September, R K; Serote, M W; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N;
  Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M;
  Skosana, M B; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J
  E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete,
  S V; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe,
  J H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Xingwana, L M T; Zita,
  L; Zondi, K M; Zondo, R P.

Amendment negatived.

Amendment by the Chief Whip of the Majority Party put.

Division demanded.
The House divided:


  AYES - 217: Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N;
  Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Belot, S T; Benjamin, J; Bhengu,
  F; Bhengu, N R; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M N;
  Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chohan-Kota, F I;
  Cindi, N V; Cronin, J P; De Lange, J H; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L;
  Doidge, G Q M; Duma, N M; Dyani, M M Z; Ebrahim, E I; Fankomo, F C;
  Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Gandhi, E; Gcina, C I;
  George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gininda, M S; Gogotya, N J;
  Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Goosen, A D; Govender, P; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N
  B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlengwa, M
  W; Holomisa, S P; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P;
  Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q
  J; Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Louw,
  J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabudafhasi, T R; Maduna, P M;
  Magashule, E S; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E; Mahlangu, G L; Mahlangu, M J;
  Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L;
  Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Mahlawe, N; Malumise, M M; Manie, M S; Manuel, T
  A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Martins, B A D; Masithela, N H;
  Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya,
  A M; Mbete, B; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mgidi, J S; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G;
  Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R;
  Modisenyane, L J; Moeketse, K M; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mohai, S J;
  Mohamed, I J; Mohlala, R J B; Mokaba, P R; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A;
  Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
  Moosa, M V; Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I;
  Mothoagae, P K; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembi-
  Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi, F S; Mutsila, I;
  Mzizi, M A; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B; Ndabandaba, L
  B G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
  Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, H;
  Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S;
  Nkosi, D M; Nqakula, C; Nqodi, S B; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B;
  Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oosthuizen, G C; Pahad, E G; Phala, M J;
  Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S;
  Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C M P; Rasmeni, S M;
  Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E; Schneeman, G D; Scott, M I; September, C C;
  September, R K; Serote, M W; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N;
  Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J;
  Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F; Smith, V G;
  Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B;
  Tolo, L J; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, S V; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I;
  Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, J
  F; Van Wyk, N; Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondi, K M; Zondo, R P.


  NOES - 77: Abrahams, T; Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Baloi, G E;
  Bell, B G; Beukman, F; Blaas, A; BlanchÃ©, J P I; Borman, G M; Botha, A J;
  Bruce, N S; Camerer, S M; Clelland, N J; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L;
  Davidson, I O; De Lille, P; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dowry, J J; Dudley, C;
  Durand, J; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Frolick, C T; Gibson, D H
  M; Gore, V C; Gous, S J; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Heine, R J;
  Holomisa, B H; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; Koornhof, G W; Lee, T D;
  Mabeta, M E; Madasa, Z L; Mbadi, L M; McIntosh, G B D; Mfundisi, I S;
  Moorcroft, E K; Morkel, C M; Mothiba, L C; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A;
  Mzimela, S E; Niemann, J J; Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Pheko, S E M;
  Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Ramodike, M N; Rhoda, R T; Schalkwyk, P J;
  Schippers, J; Schmidt, H C; Schoeman, R S; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
  Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smit, H A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Southgate, R M;
  Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Taljaard, R; Van Deventer, F J; Van Jaarsveld, A
  Z A; Van Niekerk, A I; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Viljoen, C L; Waters, M.

Amendment agreed to.

Report, as amended, accordingly adopted.

                            APPROPRIATION DEBATE

                           (First Reading debate)

Ms B A HOGAN: Madam Speaker, it is a great honour to speak in the First
Reading debate on the Appropriation Bill and the Budget for 2001-02.

There is a great temptation to produce a scintillating economic analysis
with statistics and data, and to dazzle members with the brilliance of my
economic training. But that is not what Parliament is about. Parliament is
about speaking in a language that is accessible and easy for people to
understand, particularly when we are speaking about a Budget which will
affect the everyday lives of all people in this country. For these reasons,
the Budget must be discussed in language that is easily understood.
I would like to make a few remarks to introduce this debate. The Budget for
2001-02 has often been contextualised as a movement from macroeconomics to
microeconomics. What does this mean? In essence, it means that Government
has achieved stability in terms of the major macroeconomic fundamentals
that affect the economy. In other words, growth is at a steady pace,
inflation is down from double digits, interest rates are on a steady
downward course, the balance of payments is no longer the problem it used
to be in regard to inhibiting growth and, as was reported yesterday, is in
a healthy state.

These major economic indicators are no longer flashing the danger signals
that they were flashing when we came to power in 1994. We have, in effect,
a benign macroeconomic situation in that regard. To those who feel that
economic growth has not reached the targets projected by Gear in 1996, I
think we need to point out that over the last decade the gross domestic
product has grown systematically from the negative growth in the early
years of this decade to a striking 4,2% growth in GDP in 1997.

Then the economy was hit by the impact of the Asian crisis and we were
tragically thrown back to 0,7% growth because of the international effect
of the Asian crisis on the economy. The remarkable thing is that this
economy has survived far better than most economies in the developing
world, which were similarly affected by the Asian crisis. The 3% growth
which we have now, and the projected 3,5%, are therefore impressive, given
the storms that have assailed this economy in the past, and it is
remarkable that we have been able to achieve the stability that we have at
the present time.

There are two outside factors, the two ``lone riders out on the ridge'' as
I call them, that are going to continue to bedevil our whole approach to
growth and social development in this country. Firstly, we face jobless
growth and, secondly, we need greater growth as well. I will deal with the
greater growth as well as the measures that the Government is taking to
facilitate greater growth. But first I want to refer this House to some of
the debates that took place around jobless growth. I want to quote from our
report which is before Parliament:


  Gear has successfully achieved stability in terms of the macroeconomic
  fundamentals. However, the South African economy has undergone a
  fundamental structural transformation in recent decades in terms of
  sectoral change, labour skills, profile and production technology.

The consequence of this transformation is the rising importance of the
tertiary sector which, Dr Raja Bidien now argues, generates 65% of the
national income. This shift has created a structural reduction in the
demand for unskilled labour and an increased demand for skilled labour.

Given this profile, it is likely that poverty and inequality will increase
through rising levels of structural unemployment, even within the context
of ongoing aggregate growth. This is an important point. Major investment
in skills training and employment generation are now the key policy
challenges required to capitalise on the achievements of Gear.

A little further on the report reads, and I quote:


  Socioeconomic factors related to poverty and inequality are having a
  negative impact on investor confidence and inhibiting prospects for
  future growth. Concerns regarding the business risks associated with
  investing in an economically polarised society as manifested in terms of
  crime rates, political stability and so on combined with concerns
  regarding the low skills base of the labour force, limit both domestic
  and foreign investments.

The message is clear. Like most developing economies, we face a problem of
structuring our unemployment. Poverty will continue to have a destabilising
impact on this country and, therefore, needs to be addressed with urgency.

The Government's response to both joblessness growth and insufficient
growth is very clear. One is delighted to see the concerted programme that
the Government has laid out for growing this economy. It is reflected both
in the Budget and in the President's debate.

The President has said, and I quote ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Mrs De Lille, are you rising on a point of order?

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, one can hardly hear the speaker at the
podium. There are too many conversations going on in the House.

The SPEAKER: Order! hon members, it is very difficult to hear the speakers.
There are still a lot of private meetings and some have been continuing for
a very long time right in front of me. I would urge hon members to please
keep quite. Please proceed, hon Hogan.

Ms B A HOGAN: Earlier the President, in his state of the nation address,
said and I quote:


  ... we have decided that, this year, the Government itself, in all its
  spheres, and the public sector as a whole, must make a decisive and
  integrated contribution towards meeting the economic challenges the
  country faces.

The message is clear: Government must intervene in order to grow this
economy and have an effect on the quality of life of the people. The
objectives that he outlines are higher growth paths, increasing
competitiveness and efficiency, raising employment levels and reducing
poverty and persistent inequalities. This is to be done by lowering input
costs and there is a move towards a managed liberalisation of the energy,
transport and communications sectors.

Electricity supplies will be restructured to introduce greater levels of
competition. Gas will be used as a new source of energy. There will be
expanded investment in rail, road and transport infrastructure. There will
be more efficient operation of the ports. There will be steps to increase
air traffic to and from the Republic of South Africa. There will be a
Telkom public listing. Greater certainty will be reached in the framework
of the telecommunications industry and two presidential commissions will be
set up to look at this framework.

Other sectors of the economy will be addressed: tourism, agro-processing
with export incentives, mining technology, minerals beneficiation and
cultural industries. Moreover, there is going to be an enabling framework
for economic efficiency and competitiveness, which is welcome. This will
include a comprehensive strategy for addressing human resources.

Furthermore, there will be an increasing emphasis on technology, research
and development, the building up of an economic infrastructure and access
to capital, especially for small to medium enterprises. Access to capital
is particularly important for job creation, because it is the small to
medium enterprises that need it.

The regulation of the financial services sector is going to be under
review, particularly to look at this access to capital. This regulatory
environment will impact on economic growth rates, employment levels and
competitiveness. Besides these initiatives, we have two other major
initiatives to deal with growing the economy. One is the Integrated Rural
Development Strategy, and we have already seen nodal points that have been
isolated by the President, for input by the state, to grow the economy in
rural areas.

The other is the Urban Renewal Plan. Areas such as Alexandra, Mdantsane,
Khayelitsha and Mitchells Plain have already been isolated, amongst others,
as areas for concerted attention from the state. Those who have witnessed
the decisive action taken by the Gauteng province in Alexandra, and the
morale boost that that has given to the residents of Alexandra, let alone
those in Sandton, will be able to appreciate the impact of these decisive
interventions by the state to grow this economy.

Furthermore, the state is looking at the question of poverty relief and how
we grow our people into this economy. It has always surprised me that in
the debate - and it is a legitimate debate - about the exodus of skilled
people from this country, we never include a debate about the skills that
are lost because our people are not developed. That is a major focus of
Government in the forthcoming year namely a human resource development
programme. Hopefully, it is going to be extensive, intensive and
purposeful, because this is going to facilitate the access of our people to
the economy and will grow the economy.

We also need to look at poverty relief itself. We have to be realistic that
there are people who are going to be out of the net of growth, and who are
going to continually have to fight a daily battle for survival in this
country. Government is proposing a number of very important initiatives in
this regard.

Increasingly, we have looked at the Poverty Relief Programme, which now has
definite figures attached to it and plans and programmes connected with it,
I must mention, by Water Affairs and Forestry, Public Works' Community-
Based Public Works Programme, and Environmental Affairs and Tourism.

We also need to look at the measures being taken in this Budget to deal
with poverty relief. Fifty-eight per cent of nonintraspending of Government
is directed towards spending on education, health and welfare. Then, there
are smaller measures - the zero rating of VAT on illuminating paraffin will
make a substantial difference to people who are poor. Moreover, the
commitment by Government to make social grants inflation linked in the
future will be welcomed by many people who have had those concerns.

In addition, we are looking at a major infrastructural investment
programme. Over the next three years, R7,8 billion is going to be directed
towards infrastructural investments. We will see R1,5 billion going to the
provinces for repairing flood-related damage. R6,3 billion will go towards
infrastructural investments in the provinces. For instance, R1,5 million is
going to roads. A similar amount is going to the building of schools. R510
million is going to health facilities. A further amount of R214 million is
going to rural development projects.

That infrastructural investment is vital. Infrastructural investment by the
state in capital programmes not only generates jobs but generates the
infrastructure, both economic and social, that is critical for the
wellbeing of our people and for the economy.

Moreover, there is an amount of R863 million that is going to be devoted to
the construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of police stations, courts
and prisons. So, the infrastructural programme is a major flagship
programme of Government addressing itself both to employment creation and
the alleviation of poverty, and by providing the necessary infrastructure
for this economy to grow.

For those people who have been calling out and heckling at the sides here,
that the budget deficit is going to grow out of control, they certainly
have not read the Budget documentation before us. The fact that the state
is able to intervene in this decisive manner is precisely because we are
now able to earn and have been able to gain benefits from the debt
reduction programme that the state embarked on so energetically since it
came to power in 1994, to the extent that we have now brought interest
payments and state debt under control and are able to release R10,2 billion
for spending to meet the needs of the economy.

I believe that we have indeed moved from the macro to the micro. I believe
that that is a significant watershed in the economic growth and wellbeing
of our people. Moving to the micro means that we will be able to unleash
energies that we were not able to before. I also believe that there is
another way in which we can see this. Those who wish to believe that the
long road ahead will constitute one giant leap forward are mistaken. If
members look at the pattern of growth and at what we are achieving in this
country, it is stable, steady, focused and directed. It is not the giant
leaps of imagination which fall away in the washes of time. It is focused
and sustained progress.

I would like to congratulate the Ministry of Finance, the SA Revenue
Service and the Cabinet for producing, in a thoughtful manner, this Budget
which will go a long way towards meeting the needs of our people.
[Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, I just want to point out to the hon Ms Hogan
that the comment made by one of my colleagues on this side of the House was
not in relation to the deficit; it was in relation to the President's jet.
But, obviously, in concentrating on her speech, she did not hear that
clearly.

In some respects, today's debate on the Budget is a celebration of a
victory. When the Gear strategy was introduced in June 1996, there was a
real danger that South Africa could slide into a debt trap. This did not
happen, and today our debt position is a very sound one. Unfortunately, in
other more important respects we are not in a position to celebrate a
victory.

The primary objectives of economic policy should be to reduce unemployment
and eradicate poverty, but this has not happened. On the contrary, they
have increased relentlessly year after year. In tackling these challenges,
we must have certainty and consistency in fiscal policies. Although only
parts of the Gear strategy were implemented, it provided a focused basis
against which fiscal policies could be measured and predicted. This is
unfortunately no longer the case.

One of the greatest problems with this Budget is the degree to which it
contains contradictions and inconsistencies. To encourage employment on the
one hand, there are to be tax incentives amounting to R600 million. But
Government is to increase the skills development levy from 0,5% to 1%,
which will take an additional R1,5 billion from employers and make
employing people more expensive.

Illuminating paraffin is to be zero-rated for VAT purposes, which will
assist many poor families and cost the state R400Â million, while social and
old age pensions, which constitute the most effective form of welfare
distribution at present, increase by a meagre R30 per month, leaving
hundreds of thousands of families worse off than they were a year ago.

We are told that Government is committed to a steady relaxation of exchange
controls, but there is precious little in this Budget giving expression to
such a policy, and in the view of many informed analysts the effects of
this year's changes will be to tighten, not relax, exchange control.

Government claims to be committed to poverty alleviation as a high
priority. Unfortunately, the reality does not support this claim. One
department after the other does not spend the money allocated to it, so
denying poor people goods and services they desperately need.

Over and above this inability to deliver is the disgraceful situation of
Government sitting on billions of rands which should be used for the
benefit of ordinary people. I am referring to the proceeds of the lottery,
the Umsobomvu Fund and the Skills Development Fund, which remain largely
undistributed.

These are particular problems relating to a lack of consistency in this
Budget. However, the key issue remains: What must be done to obtain the
investment and the 6% growth per year which we need to be able to reduce
unemployment and poverty?

At a meeting with the Portfolio Committee on Finance in August last year,
the Governor of the Reserve Bank referred to investor perceptions and asked
the following question: What is the missing ingredient in South Africa?
Perhaps sentiment is a bigger problem than we think. I believe that it is
of critical importance that we try to identify what the missing ingredient
or ingredients are if we are going to be able to meet our challenges.

I would like to put forward some thoughts on this matter. We are attracting
neither the foreign direct investment nor the domestic fixed investment
which we need to increase our growth rates. There are many factors that
impact on investment decisions. However, if there is a lack of domestic
investment, this will deter most foreign investors who believe that
domestic investors are better informed that they are. In other words, we
will not attract the foreign direct investment which is needed, unless
there is sufficient domestic fixed investment in the first place.

The aspect of low domestic fixed investment which I want to focus on today,
is what the Director-General of the National Treasury refers to as:
``Continued lacklustre domestic confidence''. She identified this as the
major domestic factor which could pose a negative risk to the inflation and
GDP growth forecasts of Government.
I believe that a major cause of this continued lacklustre domestic
confidence is that very large numbers of the white community feel
marginalised, alienated, insecure and often unwelcome in their own country.
They may or may not be justified. [Interjections.] I hear the hon Minister
of Safety and Security, who could not care two hoots about the poor, saying
``shame, shame'', because he has a fat job, a big salary, a big car, and a
big house. [Interjections.] [Applause.] They may or may not be justified in
having those feelings, but the ramifications for our economy and country
are enormous.

It is not my intention this afternoon to lay the blame on anyone's
shoulders, but rather to try to analyse the extent of the problem and what
can be done about it. While one imagines that investors make decisions on
predominantly rational grounds, the fact is that if an individual is
feeling disillusioned, unhappy or insecure, that is going to impact on
investment decisions that he or she makes.

The most dramatic and drastic manifestation of disillusionment or
insecurity is when people vote with their feet and emigrate. Unfortunately,
South Africa has suffered a massive brain drain. The evidence is
overwhelming. A 1999 survey by The Economist found that the likelihood of
South African professionals emigrating was among the highest in the world.
In the World Economic Forum's World Competitiveness Report issued in
September last year, the loss of skills in South Africa caused by
emigration was the third most serious amongst 59 countries surveyed.
[Interjections.]

Mr J H MOMBERG: Mostly DP voters.

Mr K M ANDREW: That hon member is about to be an ambassador, and will get
free food and a free house - no wonder he does not care. [Interjections.] A
US-based credit rating agency estimates that 16 per cent of South Africans
with tertiary education live abroad. A survey last year found that four out
of 10 heads of South African companies would jump at the chance to take
jobs overseas if they were offered them.

In a worldwide survey conducted by a Swiss company last year, South Africa
was singled out as the country, after Russia, in which well-educated people
were least likely to stay. A survey conducted this year among information
technology professionals in South Africa indicated that 54% were
considering leaving this country within two years and 26% were very likely
to look for a job overseas.
Of the SA Institute of Chartered Accountants' 19Â 099 members, nearly 22%
were living abroad at the end of 2000. This figure excludes South-African-
trained chartered accountants who are no longer members of the SA Institute
of Chartered Accountants. Official statistics released in London in June
last year revealed that 1Â 416 nurses and midwives from South Africa
registered for work in the UK in the year to March 2000, a 40% increase
over the previous year.

The best estimates are that about 250 000 people have emigrated from South
Africa in the last eight years. The estimated costs to the country of this
emigration are staggering. There is an estimated R8,4 billion in lost
income tax and a further R285 billion in potential contributions to the
gross domestic product, which would make money available for poor people
for houses, jobs, education and health.

High-income and high-wealth individuals are mobile, but we cannot afford to
lose them. South Africa has to keep and grow its capital and its skills if
it is to succeed. One could go on, but the point is clear. Far too many
highly skilled South Africans do not look upon their prospects in South
Africa in a favourable light.

The reasons for emigrating are many and varied. I would like to identify
only two. A South African doctor in Canada, when asked why he had left
South Africa, simply replied: ``I want my family to be safe.'' One of the
top matric students of 1994 who is now living in London gave as his reason:


  I want my children to be able to grow up without South Africa and its
  anger. I am tired of having to feel guilty. I simply want to be free.

[Interjections.] This problem must be addressed sooner rather than later,
because we cannot afford to continue losing so many of our skilled people.

There is just one further aspect which I wish to mention in this regard. It
is the tax burden on individuals in the middle-income brackets which has a
major effect on the quality of life of many young qualified people.

Let me illustrate what I mean by using a married person with two school-
going children and a taxable income of R100 000 a year as an example. That
person pays R22 520 in personal income tax. However, to educate two
children in a good public school, belong to a medical aid scheme, pay for
security services and abnormally high insurance, because this hon Minister
cannot do his job, and protect their home or car and possessions costs an
additional R25 000 per year.

The direct result is an expenditure of R47 000, or 47% of this individual's
taxable income being spent on tax and these essential services, most of
which should have been provided by the state in the first place. A good job
in some other country must be tempting for people with skills who are
struggling to make ends meet.

In 1994 South Africa produced a political miracle which astounded the
world. We now need an economic miracle so that we can get the investment
and the growth required to tackle unemployment and poverty effectively. The
process leading to the political miracle involved inclusive and time-
consuming discussions and negotiations and a willingness to compromise. We
need to follow a similar process to bring about the economic successes that
we want.

It is quite true that in normal democratic terms the Government has a
mandate to implement its own economic policies irrespective of what anybody
else thinks about them. But we all know that that will not in itself solve
the problem. I call on the hon President and the Minister of Finance today,
to give serious consideration to initiating a process which will include
all stakeholders from all sectors of business, labour, civil society and
all political parties to try to achieve a consensus and a unity of purpose,
on the way forward in terms of economic policy.

Gear has served some useful purposes, including providing a focus for
fiscal and economic policy. We need a new agreed strategy for investment,
growth, job creation and poverty eradication. South Africa has produced one
miracle in recent times and there is no reason why we should not be able to
produce another. If we fail to do so, the Minister of Finance will not be
tasting the sweet fruit of liberty, but will be dealing with the grapes of
wrath of the poor and the unemployed and what they heap upon him.

Until we can address these problems in a way that is going to address
unemployment and poverty vigorously, the DA will not be supporting the
Budget.

Gen C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, ek is dank teenoor u verskuldig en ook
die hoofsweep van die ANC wat aan my die ekstra tyd gegun het, asook die
geleentheid wat ek gebied is om aan hierdie debat te mag deelneem. Dit word
opreg waardeer, want ek wil vandag afskeid neem. Dit is my laaste bydrae
tot 'n belangrike debat in hierdie Huis. Op 31 Maart tree ek uit as leier
van die VF en gaan aan die einde van April as lid van die Parlement bedank.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, I owe you and the Chief Whip of the ANC a
debt of gratitude for granting me extra time, as well as affording me the
opportunity to take part in this debate. It is greatly appreciated, because
today I want to say farewell. This is my last contribution to an important
debate in this House. On 31 March I shall be retiring as the leader of the
FF and at the end of April I shall be resigning as a Member of Parliament.]

Today, I say farewell from this podium. I will retire as the leader of the
FF at the end of March and will resign as an MP at the end of April.

In 1994 was my strategiese leiding aan my ondersteuners om nie buite die
Suid-Afrikaanse politiek en veral die ekonomie te bly nie. Deelname is deur
direkte onderhandeling bewerkstellig as alternatief tot geweld en dit het
sy waarde gehad tot en met 1996. Nou, 'n teleurstellende aantal jare
daarna, is my strategiese insig dat die politieke versplintering van die
Afrikaner, asook die afsydigheid van die ANC oor hierdie beleid, dit nie
nou en in die afsienbare toekoms moontlik maak om as 'n enkele politieke
party die praktiese sy van selfbeskikking te beding op 'n noemenswaardige
skaal nie.

Dit sal slegs moontlik wees indien die Afrikanerstrukture oor
partypolitieke grense heen genoeg solidariteit toon om gesamentlik te druk
vir selfbeskikking. Intussen moet die VF-politiek steeds bedryf word om
politieke bemarking te handhaaf, maar buite die politiek lÃª daar groot
werk. Die stryd duur voort. 'n Begrotingsdebat soos hierdie is altyd 'n
barometer van breÃ« politieke en ekonomiese vordering. Ons het sedert 1994
sewe geleenthede daarvoor gehad.
Kenmerkend van al hierdie debatte en begrotings was sukses met fiskale
balans en dissipline op die hoÃ« vlakke, terwyl daar probleme was met die
skep van die regte klimaat om ekonomiese groei te verbeter op die laer
vlakke. Dit raak die lot van almal, van die armstes tot entrepreneurs tot
kapitaliste. Die hoe verwagtinge van 1994 was rondom die ekonomie.

Eintlik het die destydse NP-leiding die land met die belofte van ongekende
ekonomiese groei omgekoop tydens die referendum. As daar net vrede sou kom
en ``een mens een stem'' aanvaar sou word sonder enige kwalifikasie, sou
yskaste sowaar uit die blou lug val en die werkloosheid sou vinnig opgelos
wees. Nou weet ons dit was 'n droom. 'n Plegtige skikking is tog bereik,
wat gekulmineer het in die Grondwet van 1996.

Alles het so goed verloop en nou is die ekonomiese groei teleurstellend.
Ons het reeds by van die vorige sprekers daarvan verneem dat die groeikoers
slegs die helfte van die noodsaaklike 6% gaan wees. Nou daal ons rand,
werkloosheid styg, misdaad raak buite beheer, veiligheidsmagte verswak en
is gedemotiveerd en die massas begin die spoorwegstasies en treine afbrand.
So kan ek voortgaan, maar ek wil nie negatief wees vandag nie. Waar het
alles fout gegaan? Ek dink daar skort iets met gesindhede. Die fondamente
is nie stewig genoeg in diÃ© verband nie. Die struktuur wat ons oprig, skep
nie vertroue nie; ook nie wedersydse respek, versoening, vrede of
rustigheid nie. Dalk moet ons weer 'n veelpartykonferensie hou met die
voordeel van terugblik, veral noudat ons ook worstel met die groot
verwagtinge rondom die ekonomie wat verwesenlik kan word deur mikro-
ekonomiese groei. Dit is 'n hoÃ« prioriteit. Die vraag is egter, hoe?

Die eerste jare na 1994 het hoop geskep. Daar was 'n vaste voorneme by
feitlik die hele land oor die gees van die ooreenkoms: Begrip en nie
wraaksug nie; herstel en nie vergelding nie; medemenslikheid en nie
viktimisasie nie.

Ek het die voorreg gehad om saam met mnr Mandela op ons eerste ontmoeting
die kernvraag oor stabiliteit tussen die Afrikaner aan die een kant en sy
swart ondersteuners aan die ander kant te bespreek. Vir daardie tyd was dit
natuurlik 'n kritiese saak. Na die verkiesing het ek weer die voorreg gehad
om na 'n lang gesprek te hoor dat sy deur altyd oopstaan vir die probleme
van die Afrikaner. Van groot betekenis was die gesindhede waarin dit
plaasgevind het. Transformasie sonder goeie gesindheid en welwillendheid is
gedoem.

My party het die belange van die Afrikaner probeer behartig. Die Afrikaner
is 'n inheemse volk soos een van die baie ander op hierdie kontinent. My
party glo dat die verskillende volke, groepe en mense van hierdie land
interafhanklik van mekaar is en mekaar nodig het. Ons doel was en is steeds
'n konstruktiewe opposisie en ons wil 'n eiesoortige Afrika-tipe demokrasie
help skep. Ons beleid van selfbeskikking is 'n internasionaal
geloofwaardige een en volgens die konsep van interne selfbeskikking kan
sulke volke en groepe boustene vorm van 'n groter nasiestaat. In 1994 was
daar genoeg steun daarvoor en 37% van die Afrikanerkiesers het daarvoor
gestem. Daar was werklik hoop.

Die eenparige aanvaarding van die klousule ten opsigte van selfbeskikking
in die 1996-grondwet was 'n prestasie vir alle partye. Van groot betekenis
na 1996 egter, was die gebrek aan goeie gesindhede. Vervreemding het gevolg
- ons het dit netnou ook van die agb Andrew gehoor. Daar was die KwaMakuta-
saak, die WVK, die staking van bilaterale gesprekke met die VF, die aanslag
op Afrikaans.
Wat ons voorgestel het, was billik en eenvoudig. Ons het gevra vir
kulturele selfbeskikking soos veeltaligheid, eie kultuurrade,
streeksoutonomieÃ« vir gebiede soos die klein, afgeleÃ« homogene gemeenskap
in Orania. Voorts het ons gevra vir toestemming tot 'n langtermynplan om 'n
ylbewoonde byna woestyngedeelte van ons land te ontwikkel as 'n toekomstige
tuisland vir Afrikaners. Die meerderheidsparty het vordering gestol in
hierdie verband. Dit was vir ons natuurlik in die party 'n groot dilemma en
die opposisiepartye het goed geoes onder ons ondersteuners. 'n Party wat
nie lewer nie, kry teÃ«spoed. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In 1994 my strategic leadership to my supporters was not to stay out of
South African politics and the economy in particular. Participation was
achieved by means of direct negotiations as the alternative to violence and
this was of value up to and including 1996. Now, a disappointing number of
years later, my strategic insight is that the political fragmentation of
the Afrikaner, as well as the aloofness of the ANC towards this policy,
does not make it possible now or in the foreseeable future to negotiate the
practical side of self-determination as a single political party to any
significant extent.
This will only be possible if Afrikaner structures across party-political
lines show sufficient solidarity to press for self-determination together.
In the meantime FF politics must still be practised in order to maintain
political marketing, but outside of politics there is a great deal of work
to be done. The struggle continues. A Budget debate such as this is always
a barometer of broad political and economic progress. Since 1994 we have
had seven opportunities for that.

Characteristic of all these debates and budgets was success with fiscal
balance and discipline at the high levels, while there were problems with
creating the right climate for improving economic growth at the lower
levels. This affects everyone's destiny, from the poorest to entrepreneurs
to capitalists. The high expectations of 1994 centred around the economy.

Actually the then former NP leadership bribed the country during the
referendum with the promise of unparalleled economic growth. If there were
peace and if ``one man, one vote'' were accepted without any qualification,
fridges would actually fall from the sky and unemployment would be resolved
quickly. Now we know that that was a dream. A solemn agreement was
nevertheless reached, which culminated in the Constitution of 1996.

Everything went so well, and now the economic growth is disappointing. We
have already heard from previous speakers that the growth rate is going to
be only half of the essential 6%. Now the rand is falling, unemployment is
increasing, crime is getting out of control, security forces are weakening
and are demotivated, and the masses are beginning to set fire to railway
stations and trains.

I can continue in this vein, but I do not want to be negative today. Where
did everything go wrong? I think there is something wrong with attitudes.
The foundation are not solid enough in this regard. The structure that we
are building does not inspire confidence; nor mutual respect,
reconciliation, peace or serenity. Perhaps we should hold another
multiparty conference, with the benefit of hindsight, especially now that
we are also struggling with the high expectations in respect of the economy
that can be realised by way of microeconomic growth. This is a high
priority. The question, however, is: How?

The first years after 1994 inspired hope. Virtually the entire country was
firmly resolved on the spirit of the agreement: Understanding and not
vengefulness; reconstruction and not retribution; fellow-feeling and not
victimisation.

I had the privilege, at our first meeting, to discuss with Mr Mandela the
key question about stability between Afrikaners on the one hand and his
black supporters on the other. For the time it was a critical matter, of
course. After the election I once again had the privilege, after a long
conversation, to hear that his door was always open to the problems of the
Afrikaners. Of great significance was the attitudes with which these
meetings took place. Transformation without a positive attitude and
goodwill is doomed.

My party tried to serve the interests of the Afrikaners. The Afrikaner is
an indigenous people, like one of the many others on this continent. My
party believes that the various nations, groups and people of this country
are interdependent and that they need one another. Our purpose was and
still is constructive opposition and we want to help to create a unique
African type of democracy. Our policy of self-determination is an
internationally credible one and according to the concept of internal self-
determination such nations and groups could form the building blocks of a
larger nation-state. In 1994 there was sufficient support for that and 37%
of Afrikaner voters voted in favour of it. There was real hope.

The unanimous adoption of the clause relating to self-determination in the
1996 Constitution was an achievement for all parties. Of great significance
after 1996, however, was the lack of positive attitudes. Alienation
followed - we also heard this from the hon Andrew a while ago. There was
the KwaMakuta case, the TRC, the cessation of bilateral talks with the FF,
the onslaught on Afrikaans.

What we proposed was reasonable and simple. We asked for cultural self-
determination such as multilingualism, own cultural councils, regional
autonomies for areas such as the small, remote homogenous community of
Orania.

We furthermore asked permission for a long-term plan to develop a sparsely
populated, semi-desert area of our country into a future homeland for
Afrikaners. The majority party stalled progress in this regard. This was,
of course, a huge dilemma to us in the party and the opposition parties won
over quite a number of our supporters. A party that does not deliver
suffers setbacks.]

The Afrikaner people have been decimated politically, at least temporarily,
and appear to have lost their identity, maybe in the pattern of the late
Machel when he concluded: ``For the sake of the nation, the tribe must
die.'' This is my major concern about the direction in which the majority
party is taking this country: nation-building based on individualism only,
ignoring collectivism. And it is all being done without consultation, which
is the same mistake that the old NP made in the previous dispensation.

Our traditional leaders have a similar problem. Of course, there are many
individuals who prefer individualism, including the DA. It might even be
possible that the majority in the country prefer the ideal of
individualism. But there is a substantial part of this country, across the
colour spectrum, that prefers the communal way of living. Why not allow
them to be happy as building blocks in the new country?

The issue of minority rights is a thorny problem here and in other African
states. Ignoring the problem will not solve it. The ANC might feel
comfortable with its majority, being in a position to steamroller Bills on
nation-building through Parliament. But this is not a wise approach, and
together we have missed an opportunity between two important communities.

To come back to this Budget debate, success in promoting microeconomic
growth is very important and is only partly dependent on the infrastructure
of the Government. The real success depends on the private enterprise of
entrepreneurs. That, again, is dependent on expertise and know-how. The way
to uplift the poor is to uplift the entrepreneurs. In South Africa the real
challenge is not to pay for the past, but voluntarily to participate in
passing knowledge to willing and hardworking entrepreneurs with potential.

Mentorship is what is needed from one community to the other. But this is a
fragile condition of the mind of the people and a willingness that is
easily damaged by the aggressive atmosphere of majoritarianism. This
willingness can also be easily damaged by the never-ending blame for the
past, as if all the mistakes were made by one side only. This willingness
is fostered by a sense of togetherness, such as one finds in communities.

Our traditional leaders have a role in development initiatives and
harnessing communities. This willingness is fostered by a healthy
interaction between communities at grassroots level. In short, the
relationships and goodwill between communities need to be created and
harnessed for the purpose of microeconomic development and growth. Working
together in mutual support will bring reconciliation. Blaming and shouting
will bring alienation.

But let me be honest with members. I have been experiencing some
frustration about the way our democracy works, particularly the
majoritarian aspect of it. The larger the majority, the more humble the
party should be. Members from the majority party dominate each commission
and committee and frantically organise it to ensure that this will always
be the case, even with regard to the more neutral committees such as the
one on ethics.

This House has become a talk shop. Speaking times and proportional
allocation are a problem. What is the point of speaking for two minutes on
some very important and relevant subject? Many parties can exercise very
little influence. The bilateral interaction has stopped. Even with my
knowledge of defence I am not allowed a seat on the Joint Defence
Committee.

I think the general style, namely the Westminster style of politics in our
House, is foreign to Africa. The present political division is based on
racial polls and the confrontational style of politics is therefore
hardening racial attitudes. In my opinion we should all be more humble in
our interaction. We should always show mutual respect and commitment so as
to bridge the divisions of our past. Yesterday's subject for discussion is
an example of this.

Die punte van kritiek wat ek gelug het, is goed bedoel. Laat ons streef na
uitnemendheid sodat ons demokrasie kan groei tot 'n voorbeeld in Afrika. Ek
stel intens belang in die sukses en die groei van ons land en kontinent,
veral wat betref die sake van selfbeskikking, vreedsame naasbestaan en
ekonomiese opheffing. Ek sal steeds buite die aktiewe politiek my daarvoor
beywer om stabiliteit in Suid-Afrika te help verseker. Ek wens die agb
Minister sukses toe met sy strategie van mikroekonomiese groei.
Mev die Speaker, ek dank u as voorsittende beampte, saam met u kollegas vir
die aangename wyse waarop ons kon saamwerk. Ek dank almal: Die uitvoerende
gesag en die lede van hierdie Huis vir die voorreg om saam met hulle te kon
dien in 'n gees van besonderse wedersydse respek. Daardeur is vriendskappe
en goeie verhoudinge opgebou wat aangenaam was.

My dank aan die personeel, amptenare en polisie en almal wat so vriendelik
en wellewend was. Goeie verhoudinge en wedersydse respek moet 'n
steunpilaar vir almal wees, want dan oorbrug ons verskille. My dank aan my
ondersteuners vir hul steun. My beste wense vir almal in hierdie Huis. Mag
hulle die wysheid van Salomo kry om hierdie belangrike taak voort te sit.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The points of criticism that I raised were well intended. Let us strive
for excellence so that our democracy can grow into an example to Africa. I
am intensely interested in the success and growth of our country and
continent, in particular as far as the issues of self-determination,
peaceful co-existence and economic upliftment are concerned. I shall still,
outside of active politics, endeavour to ensure stability in South Africa.
I wish the hon the Minister every success with his strategy of micro-
economic growth.

Madam Speaker, I thank you as presiding officer, along with your
colleagues, for the pleasant manner in which we could work together. I
thank everyone: The executive and members of this House for the privilege
of serving with them in a spirit of exceptional mutual respect. In this way
friendships and sound relations were forged, which was enjoyable.

My thanks to the staff, officials and police and everyone who was so
friendly and courteous. Sound relations and mutual respect should be the
mainstay of everyone, because then we bridge differences. My thanks to my
supporters for their support. My best wishes to everyone in this House. May
they receive the wisdom of Solomon to continue this important task.]

Ngithi kumalungu kudingeka asebenze. Muningi umsebenzi. Intuthuko
ihambisana nomsebenzi. [I would like to tell hon members that they should
work. There is a lot of work to be done. Development goes together with
work.]
Dankie. Bly rustig. Siyabonga. Salani kahle. [Ihlombe.] [Thank you. Keep
well. Applause.]]

Mr A J FEINSTEIN: Madam Speaker, may I begin by verbalising what I think
this whole House feels in paying tribute to and acknowledging the
contribution that Gen Viljoen has made to this House and to the country.
While some of us may disagree with certain of his political objectives and
views, no one would dispute that he has held them with integrity and as
part of a real commitment to creating a better South Africa. His courageous
role in the lead-up to our first democratic election will never be
forgotten. He will be missed by this House and I am sure we all join
together in wishing him well for the future. [Applause.]

Hon Speaker, hon Minister, I rise to support this Budget, hopefully not to
rage on the edge of lunacy and paranoia. It marks a logical continuation of
the past Budgets of this Government, while leading us in extremely
important new directions: the old is the maintenance of sound macroeconomic
fundamentals, while the new is an intensified focus and significant
increase in social spending and investments on the supply side of the
economy. These two thrusts are inextricably linked.
The stabilisation which has been universally hailed has created the
conditions for the next phase of reform. But before looking at the details
of this process, let me restate that everything we do in this House should
be premised on how best we can significantly improve the material quality
of life of the vast majority of our people.

For, as the hon Barbara Hogan mentioned, besides the moral imperative of
engendering greater equality by improving the lives of the poorest of the
poor, there is a hard-nosed economic rationale for doing so as well. We are
not alone in this quest. Throughout the developing world, the struggle for
liberation from poverty and misery continues.

Where we are unique is that we exhibit the most bitter of social outcomes:
destitution amid plenty. Because of the lunacy of apartheid, this
inequality remains cleaved along racial lines. Sixty-one per cent of
Africans in our country can be classified as poor, compared to one per cent
of whites.

Globally, though, progress has been made in the battle against poverty and
inequality. Joseph Stiglitz, the former Chief Economist at the World Bank,
in concluding an impressive study on economic reform, reminded us that the
past half century has seen remarkable improvements in living standards of
hundreds of millions of people in the developing world. The challenge for
this new millennium, he stated, is to see those successes, the benefits of
democratic, equitable and sustainable development, shared by the billions
more who have yet to taste their fruits.

The study to which I have referred reflects that so-called first stage
economic reforms - the stabilisation of the macroeconomy and liberalisation
- have brought significant benefits to, for instance, Latin America, where
inflation levels have plummeted from an average of over 100% in the early
1980s to just above 10% in the late 1990s. Growth levels have grown from
around 1% per annum to around 5% for the same periods. However, much more
remains to be done with respect to poverty alleviation and income
distribution. In Latin America, again, with the exception of Chile and
Bolivia, poverty has not been significantly reduced.

So, while there is widespread consensus amongst economists that
macroeconomic stability is a precondition for sustainable growth, to
realise the full benefits of this stabilisation and thus to raise output
growth, to improve equity, and increase opportunities and outcomes for the
poorest requires what are called second stage reforms. These include
microeconomic and supply side interventions, increased investment in
infrastructure, institutional reform, improved delivery of social services
and improvements in the legal and judicial services.

In reading this recent study, I was astonished by how regularly it reflects
many aspects of the direction that has been taken by the Budget before us.
However, as we discuss this Budget in this House today, we must combine
ambition with realism.

The study submits that structural reform takes time, because the policy
environment must become credible and this credibility must be earned
through overall consistency and persistence of policy. That credibility,
with our first phase of reforms, is clearly growing all the time.

With respect to the second stage reforms, there is an enormous amount that
still has to be learned around the world about timing, sequencing and
maximising synergies generated by reform packages. Internationally, at
present, no blueprint for these reforms exists.

So, here in South Africa, there is an enormous challenge for Government to
place on the table a holistic and integrated strategy that combines the
myriad of admirable initiatives that have been outlined in this Budget and
in the President's state of the nation address. In other words, it is up to
us to create our own unique blueprint where others have thus far feared to
tread.

On the issue of growth we must, as I say, remain ambitious and realistic.
We know what growth level we need. But we are foolish if we believe that
there is a magic formula eg privatisation of everything on the planet, or
massive demand management, or that sustainable high growth levels are
achievable in a matter of a few short years.

The issues identified by the President and the Minister to engender higher
growth include rural development and urban renewal strategies;
intensification of microeconomic and supply side interventions; significant
increases in infrastructure spending; a massive focus on human resource
development for life-long learning which, I would suggest, requires the
skills development levy; more rapid restructuring of state assets;
attention to the growth in entry level sectors such as tourism, household
and cultural services; continual building of trust between Government and
business, business and labour; and the expansion of the welfare net which,
as Prof Abedian stated during our Budget hearings, will contribute directly
and indirectly to increased growth. These interventions are all in the
right direction.

We know and must acknowledge that the challenges remain huge. However, to
suggest, as the hon Ken Andrew does, that this is a Budget of
contradictions and inconsistencies, that there is what he describes as
lacklustre domestic confidence and consequently people feel unwanted and
unhappy, I would suggest, borders on being nonsensical.

There is no doubt that there are certain people in our society who do feel
that things are not as they were. The vast majority of South Africans
celebrate the fact that things are not as they were ... [Interjections.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Why do you not invest here?

Mr A J FEINSTEIN: I suppose, in my own personal case I am, because I have
unit trusts.

What really concerned me - and I will return to this in far more detail
shortly - was the way in which the issue of the loss of people, the loss of
skills, was characterised by the hon Ken Andrew, which, as I suggested,
bordered on paranoia. It made me think that perhaps his greater concern,
rather than the loss of skills and talent, was the loss of voters to his
party.

Unfortunately, the intervention by the hon Ken Andrew reflected a cynicism
that pervades so much of the DP and the DA comments on everything, and it
is part of a broader mindset of permanent disaffection. It responds to
issues, from the economy to national symbols, in a way that suggests that
we are living in Zurich rather than South Africa, in a way that suggests
that history's only use is to be forgotten. This particular aspect of the
mindset was captured in this morning's Business Day where Drew Forrest made
the point, and I quote:


  The DP often comes across as insensitive and indifferent to the black
  experience of apartheid, reinforced, as it says, by opposition to many
  symbolically important laws.

As we all know in this House, the list of transformatory laws that they
have opposed is lengthy and legendary.

Let us look, as an example, at the issue of corruption in which I find
myself personally involved at the moment. [Interjections.] It is true, as I
would imagine, that everybody in this House knows that I have extremely
strong feelings, which I have expressed, about aspects of the arms deal
procedures in the investigation. [Interjections.]

When this matter is raised - and it is a sign of the health of our
democracy that it has become such a public issue - we never hear about the
extraordinary way in which the Minister of Minerals and Energy has handled
the recent, very serious issues relating to the SFF, nor do we ever hear
analyses from the opposition of how corruption was integral to the
functioning of the apartheid state. It is as though corruption arrived with
democracy, rather than our democracy having been polluted by a culture of
endemic corruption that was just one aspect of a corrupt and immoral order.
[Applause.]

What we need, in looking at the future characterised by high sustainable
growth that leads to job creation and the alleviation of poverty, as much
as interventions by Government, is a continual talking up of our prospects,
not in an unrealistic manner, but in a measured and informed manner. For
instance, when we talk of unsatisfactory growth performance, we must also
look to the progress that has been made, that between 1990 and 1994 GDP
growth in this country averaged 0,2%, between 1995 and 1999 it averaged
2,3%. Not enough, but a lot better.

We must talk, for instance, of the fact that, despite international
volatility, this economy has remained fairly robust in recent months and,
in particular, since the new year. This is reflected in vehicle sales,
electricity production and consumption, better than expected retail
spending figures and, particularly, manufacturing production statistics.
This showed growth of 5,7% in January on a year on year basis and quarter
on quarter growth equivalent to no less than 13,9% on an annualised basis.
This significant growth, being especially focused on manufactured exports,
reflects the success we have had in re-orienting this economy since the
advent of democracy. This is not to say that massive challenges do not
exist, but it is rather to say that we need to be balanced.

What we require in this country, as we look to growing the economy and
meeting the needs of the poorest in our society, is a patriotic activism,
not determined or judged by party-political allegiance; not uncritical,
which will be the death knell of our democracy, but just balanced, sensible
and productive.

Such activism might cover the critical tasks of not only selling South
Africa to the world, which is the responsibility that each one of us has,
but also of selling South Africa to each other. It requires not bondage to
our history, but a sensitivity to it and a determination to overcome it.
This determination in turn, requires an active engagement to redress the
poverty and inequality that exist around us. This is something that should
bind all of us to a common purpose: what was describe in this House
recently as unity in action for change.

But such a patriotic activism is particularly important for those of us who
benefited most from apartheid, whether wittingly or unwittingly. It is
incumbent upon us, the bearers of skills and experience that were not
available to so many for so long, to use these in the service of change and
progress. This is not about guilt. This is about basic human morality, and
it is why I believe, as the President suggested yesterday in this House,
that most South Africans living both here and abroad, want this country to
succeed.

What we need to do is to look at how globalisation has moved people around
the world and how we can link in to those South Africans who are not here,
so that they can continue to serve the course of growth and equality in our
society, because the reality is that if we are divided, be it by race,
material circumstances or life opportunities, this nation and all its
people will fail; for it is only together as a nation united in our
determination to expunge poverty, racism and criminality from our land that
we will taste the sweet fruits of liberty, of which the Minister spoke.
[Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Speaker, it is a privilege to follow on the hon
Feinstein and Gen Viljoen. The departure of Gen Constand Viljoen brings a
parliamentary era to an end.

Ons in die IVP sal vir genl Viljoen mis. Die pad wat ons saamgeloop het, is
'n merkwaardige roete met slaggate, opdraande en gelyktes. Sy
vriendelikheid en bedagsaamheid sal altyd waardeer word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We in the IFP will miss Gen Viljoen. The road that we walked together was
a remarkable route with potholes, inclines and level ground. His
friendliness and thoughtfulness will always be appreciated.]

Who will ever forget that late night dash to the World Trade Centre in 1994
when the IFP and the FF registered for participation in the elections, a
mere 30 minutes before midnight, the final cut-off date. This action, for
which some people in his own community wanted to crucify him, was
ironically one of his greatest contributions to peace in this country. We
in the IFP salute him. We salute him as Gen Viljoen, and we salute him as
Citizen Constand. [Applause.]
The IFP gives the Minister of Finance the thumbs up for the presentation
and the content of the Budget. The Appropriation Bill reflects a deficit,
before loans, of 2,5% of GDP, which is within the standards set by the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The marginal reduction in
overall debt, and particularly our foreign debt, is welcome. The IFP always
maintained that the proceeds from privatisation should be utilised to pay
our international debt.

Improved collection of taxes and better control will result in narrowing
the gap between expenditure and income, and it was therefore a
disappointment that a small reduction in corporate taxes and secondary tax
on companies was not announced. Similarly, middle-income earners should
also have been given some of the relief which has, indeed, been given to
the lower-income earners.

The medium and long-term framework, particularly in its reflection of this
Budget, has finally come into its own. The detailed reflection of the
various Estimates, comparing different years, has been simplified, and is
user-friendly. The documentation, and the presentation as a whole, is an
improvement on previous years. The general proportion and shape of the tax
system is much better, as well as the collection part and the
administration thereof.

The IFP is also in support of utilising the best of technology and
integrated computerised systems, which have been extended to all the
different departments. South Africa must be part of the globalisation
aspects of the world economy. Although we are small, and maybe
insignificant in comparison with the big players, we have an important role
to play in Africa in this global race. Just to give an indication: It is a
fact that yesterday alone on Wall Street, more than the total South African
economy was written off in one single day, just to give hon members an idea
of what the situation is and what we must compete against.

Similarly, the streamlining and future on-line reflection of companies and
close corporations at the office of the Registrar of Companies is welcomed.
Further technological and IT developments in this regard are being awaited
with interest.

It is a carefully and conservatively constructed Budget which is unlikely
to cause any hiccups in the markets, with the possible exception of the
bond market. It is neither contractionary, nor expansionary, and it is
neutral on the inflation front, which, given current Reserve Bank policy,
suggests that the Minister's 2002 inflation targets would be achievable.
With the exception of its shortfalls on economic stimulation, it maintains
the most essential balances, the necessary discipline, and as such, should
add to public confidence.

The success or failure of South Africa will depend on the rate of economic
growth. In order to create the required job opportunities we need to
maintain substantial growth over several years. This, in turn, is dependent
on massive investments coming from foreign, as well as internal, sources.

The IFP sees this as a national campaign and was therefore disappointed
when the Minister did not allow more incentives for saving by the general
public. We simply must improve on savings and encourage real fixed
investment in this country. A total change in mindset is required. If local
investors do not invest, how can we ever expect foreigners to invest in
South Africa? Certain obstacles, fears and perceptions must be removed or
addressed.
The most significant obstacle which makes this country a pariah is crime
and particularly violent crime. Unemployment and poverty are the other legs
or obstacles that must be addressed. We accept that there is a correlation
between unemployment and crime. Therefore, it would be beneficial to
address both at the same time.

Senseless killings, armed assaults, sabotage and possession of illegal
weapons as well as rape and violence against women and children should be
severely punished. Life sentencing should indeed mean life imprisonment.
Sabotage of the state and economic sabotage are the same thing. Wilful
destruction of Government assets and private assets is the same thing. It
should be seen as sabotage or treason. I fail to see the difference between
a person wilfully starting a small fire in a railway carriage and the
arsonists who set fire to the Pretoria station.

The senseless cutting off and theft of telephone and electrical cables, to
melt them down, thus destroying infrastructure and inconveniencing
thousands of people, should carry long sentences without the option of a
fine. Discipline and respect for the law must be the building block of the
African Renaissance.
The HIV/Aids pandemic is having a devastating effect on our communities.
The setting aside of resources and economic resources for combating and
relief of this terrible disease is absolutely essential and should be
encouraged. The IFP will be in full support of all these actions.

We thank the Minister for his support for the development of industrial
development zones and particularly the Lebombo Spatial Development Zone.
The road access and transport development will contribute to the
development of our economy. We have argued that the Richards Bay and
Empangeni areas should be an industrial development zone. The IFP still
maintains that this area should become the gateway between Africa and the
East, and the West Coast of America. Should Richards Bay become a free
port, with all its spare capacity utilised, this enclave could become the
Hong Kong of Africa.

In conclusion, I want to pay tribute to my predecessor in the Finance
Committee and IFP spokesperson on finance, Dr Gavin Woods. Dr Gavin Woods
played an important and decisive role in this portfolio committee for the
past seven years. It is with humility that I venture into his shoes. His
expertise will be sorely missed. However, we have appreciation for the very
important task that has been assigned to him as the Chairperson of Scopa -
Parliament's watchdog on public accounts. To me it is a consolation to rely
on, benefit and draw from his vast experience and knowledge. It is an
honour to have Dr Gavin Woods as my alternate on the Finance Committee.
[Applause.]

Mnr C M J VAN SCHALKWYK: Mevrou die Speaker, ek wil my ook graag skaar by
diegene wat Genl Viljoen alles van die beste toewens met sy aftrede. Sy rol
om 'n bepaalde groep regse Afrikaners, alhoewel baie van hulle teensinnig
was, deel te maak van die nuwe Suid-Afrika, sal altyd gerespekteer en erken
word. Ek wens hom sterkte en alles van die beste toe. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C M J VAN SCHALKWYK: Madam Speaker, I would also like to join those
wishing Gen Viljoen everything of the best on his retirement. His role in
making a certain grouping of right-wing Afrikaners part of the new South
Africa, although many of them were reluctant, will always be respected and
acknowledged. I wish him well and everything of the best.]

The debate about the national Budget is often clouded by waves of figures,
swarms of statistics and volumes of economic jargon. Naturally, these are
important aspects of any serious national budget. However, it is essential
that we, as the leaders of our country, should never allow the technical
complexity of the numbers to obscure the single most important truth - that
lifeless figures and cold statistics have a very real and very immediate
effect on every single South African.

If, in the course of this debate, we truly desire to make the most positive
contribution possible, we would do well to remember those whose future and
lives our discussions actually represent - from the small child in the
Eastern Cape who goes to sleep hungry every night to the proud matriculant
in Gauteng frustrated by nine months of fruitlessly searching for a job,
and to the old woman in KwaZulu-Natal who stands eight hours in the queue
for a tiny pension that supports 10 family members. These are the real
people behind the faceless figures.

It is not possible for us to address these challenges by simply shifting
zeroes from one column to another. No matter how competent our bookkeeping
may be, the key to our economic success lies in the simple priority -
economic growth. If we are ever to seriously address our massive national
challenges, we need economic growth in the region of 6% every year.

Despite some party-political differences that we may have, I would like to
say that Minister Trevor Manuel has earned himself substantial respect
across party lines for the way in which he has handled this portfolio. It
must be a source of endless frustration to Mr Manuel, Maria Ramos, Tito
Mboweni, and the other voices of reason that some members of the Cabinet
undermine all the good work that they are doing to create positive
perceptions.

The overriding priority to create economic growth in South Africa must be
attracting investments, and then retaining them. Yet, levels of direct
foreign investment have plummeted by 43% in 2000 alone, according to a
recent survey by Business Map, and domestic investors appear ever more
reluctant about further expansion of their operations. There is obviously
something badly wrong.

The opposition and the business community are sometimes criticised because
we point out, I believe rightly so, problems in our country. The ANC does
not need to launch an investigation into who is talking the country down.
They are actually paying huge salaries to Ministers like Mr Tshwete, Mr
Maduna and one or two others who act like bulls in the china shop of
international investor confidence.

The single most important problem that South Africa faces in trying to
attract and retain investments is the problem of credibility - credibility
on crime, HIV/Aids, the labour market and our regional policy. In
addressing these issues, we are not talking the country down; we are
levelling with the country and saying, let us deal with what is obviously a
credibility problem.

Perceptions about crime in South Africa are perhaps most often mentioned
when investors, both foreign and domestic, describe what they consider to
be the biggest obstacles to investments. Horst Jaeckel, the chief
spokesperson of the Association of German-speaking Companies in Southern
Africa, has said that:


  Crime is South Africa's biggest problem. We are fully aware that the
  Government is trying to address this issue, but the results are not yet
  sufficient to regain international investor confidence.

A recent survey by the World Bank and the Greater Johannesburg Metropolitan
Council found that 94% of large manufacturers in Johannesburg rank crime
and violence as the number one constraint to business growth in the city.
The same survey found that companies spend more than R2 500 per employee on
crime prevention devices and security guards. This is indicative of the
increasingly costly effect of crime on doing business in our country. When
even the elected representatives of the people of South Africa are denied
access to the facts about crime statistics, and are forced to vote on
budgets without knowledge about areas of greatest need, the question
arises: where is the credibility?

With regard to HIV/Aids, UNAIDS puts the number of HIV-positive South
Africans at about 4,2 million people - nearly a tenth of the population. In
the words of Edwin Cameron, then Acting Judge of the Constitutional Court,
to the 13th International Aids Conference, held last year here in South
Africa, Government has mismanaged the HIV epidemic at almost every turn.
The standing ovation his speech received from the largely international
audience is indicative of the perceptions about the Government's inadequate
commitment to combating this disease.

Mr Mbeki's flirtation with the HIV/Aids dissidents and the ludicrous and
hysterical pre-election allegations of ANC officials that the dispensing by
our Western Cape government of life-saving anti-retrovirals could be
equated to biological warfare against blacks in South Africa, all combine
to beg the question: If Government is truly committed to fighting HIV/Aids,
then where is the credibility? In today's Financial Mail, as I pointed out,
one of the Aids panel members wrote that ``HIV/Aids is a harmless virus''.

Despite public assurances by both President Mbeki and the Minister of
Labour in February 2000 that labour legislation would be urgently reviewed
and amended, these amendments have yet to be brought to this Parliament.
When the financial and political leadership of Government make repeated
appeals to the international community for increased capital investment on
the one hand and, on the other hand, urgent changes to labour legislation
are delayed and Government partners, like the SA Communist Party Secretary
General Mr Nzimande, call for ``the destruction of capitalist barbarism and
the creation of a socialist society'' - I think he was addressing the
Minister of Finance - the question again arises: Where is the credibility?
[Interjections.]

On regional political relations, few actions have done greater damage to
the international perceptions of South Africa as an investment destination
than the failure by Mr Mbeki to repudiate attacks by Mr Mugabe on the
institutions and practice of democracy in Zimbabwe. [Interjections.] Mr
Tito Mboweni said recently, and I quote:


  Zimbabwe crops up wherever I go. The LimpopoÃ¿ ...

That is the river which forms South Africa's northern border with Zimbabwe
-


  ... might as well be a river between two South African provinces.

President Mbeki has continued to practice appeasement in the form of silent
diplomacy without being able to produce any positive results. When silent
diplomacy is globally regarded as quiet approval, the question is: Where is
the credibility?

In conclusion, in May last year the findings of a study by economist
Stephen Gelb, commissioned by the President's Office, showed that of the
more than 1 400 large and small businesses surveyed, between 48% and 65%
rated this Government's understanding of their problems as bad or very bad,
and most had little respect for the Government's effort to support
investment. The message for this Government is clear. They are out of touch
with the people who should be creating jobs in our country.

Perceptions can only be improved by credible action. If Government is to
attract and retain higher levels of investment and, by implication,
stimulate the levels of growth required to reduce poverty and unemployment,
then it must first answer the question: Where is the credibility?
[Applause.]

Mr E SALOOJEE: Madam Speaker, when the ANC Government came into power in
1994, we inherited an economy with very serious structural challenges. It
was an economy headed for utter failure. Through fiscal discipline and
efficient management of the economy our Government has turned this around.
[Interjections.] But if one listens to what people on the other side are
saying, it would appear as only ``mismanagement''.

We have improved the collection of revenue by transforming and streamlining
the work of the SA Revenue Service this year, under the leadership of Mr
Pravin Gordhan. We have made sure that we cut Government spending so as to
bring down the Budget deficit to 2,4% of GDP.

We have encouraged systems for good and efficient management of public
funds and they have began to show results. This year 58% of the noninterest
budget goes to social spending, comprising allocations to health, education
and social development. For social development alone this means a national
allocation of just under R191 million.

The allocation to programmes that fight poverty this year stands at R1,5
billion, with the focus on supporting local economic development. Still, we
live with the reality that millions of our people are poor, with 65% of the
more that 20 million poor people in South Africa being African people. They
are women and they live in the rural areas.

Despite all the Government's efforts, the unemployment rate is at 37% and
many people are unable to escape poverty because of a lack of opportunities
to develop their skills. We are still living with the legacy of the past.
We are now focusing on the creation of jobs, but at the same time we must
create the vision for those people who are not being captured in the
employment opportunities and only then, we believe, will the economy start
delivering.

We are talking about the elderly, persons with disabilities, children and
families in need. Currently our monthly social security payments reach more
than 3 million individuals. Government is still stepping up its efforts to
ensure that the payment of grants is made more efficient. We also know that
one grant does not affect only the recipient. It is estimated that each
payment affects up to eight people. The direct impact of such transfers on
poverty is obvious.

When the transition to democracy occurred, we were faced with a social
security system that was deeply flawed. Its provision was hugely unequal.
Because of a lack of funds we had to try and extend the benefits it offered
to all our people. So the democratic Government introduced equity with
respect to most of the grants. We introduced the child support grants as a
means to provide assistance to target 3 million of our poorest children.

While much progress has been made, approximately 1 million children are now
receiving this grant. We were in fact only making adjustments to an
unsatisfactory system. This is going to change. The economy is now on an
upward growth path. With our increasing integration in the global world, we
are for the first time in our history able not only to look at a more
equitable social security dispensation, but to fundamentally redesign the
system so that it should take care of all those people in our society who
are vulnerable because of poverty and unemployment.

To this end, the Government appointed a committee of inquiry to study a
comprehensive social security system. Its recommendations are expected
towards July this year. From the interactions we have had with the
committee, it is clear that it is looking holistically at integrating
measures of social assistance, social insurance and social protection.

We are encouraged that the crisis caused by HIV/Aids has been singled out
for special attention. As a pandemic, it is already aggravating the poverty
situation in our country. It is estimated that there will be 2 million
children orphaned by HIV/Aids by the year 2010. A community's ability to
cope with caring for Aids orphans is severely constrained by the fact that
a large number of the working age adults in that community are likely to
have been infected themselves and poor. In this instance poverty is
directly linked to the crucial impact that the pandemic has and we
seriously have to consider whether communities will be able to assume care-
giving roles without assistance from the state.

While we do not want to pre-empt the outcome of the ministerial committee
work, it seems possible that it would make proposals about broadening the
safety net provided by the social security system. It is imperative that we
start looking at the budgetary implications of a comprehensive social
security system over the medium term. The results of the deliberation will
also have implications for other departments providing social assistance in
one form or another. We need to ensure collectively that these issues are
taken into consideration in the medium-term social spending.

In conclusion, I want to concur with both the President and Minister of
Finance and say no matter how many resources we unlock for the development
of our people, it will have no real impact if those resources are not well
targeted and efficiently spent. There has been criticism that it has taken
the Government a long time to come up with strategies for development. At
the same time those critics sent out a clamour about the underspending of
funds. We as the ANC have a singular commitment through strategic planning
and rational budgetary allocation to put into place those mechanisms that
will ensure that our people are reached and that the quality of their lives
are enriched.

There can be no doubt that we faced huge challenges when we came to
government. Many of those challenges still exist. But it would be
irresponsible of anyone to deny that great progress has been made towards
building the South Africa that we all want. I believe that we are on the
right course. Let us launch the final fight against poverty and, in doing
so, give material expression to our commitment to a better life for all.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mev die Speaker, agb lede, laat my toe om namens die UDM
en ons President, genl Holomisa, baie sterkte toe te wens aan genl Viljoen,
wat vandag sy uittrede uit die politiek aangekondig het, en ook die rol te
erken wat hy sedert 1994 gespeel het. Ons hoop hy lÃª nou homself toe op sy
groot liefde in sy lewe, naamlik sy boerdery, en dat hy ook daar 'n groot
sukses sal maak. Hierdie Raad groet 'n kleurryke en 'n eerlike lid van die
Raad. Generaal, ons salueer u. Sterkte! (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, hon members, allow me, on behalf of the
UDM and our President, Gen Holomisa, to wish Gen Viljoen, who today
announced his retirement from politics, everything of the best, and also to
acknowledge the role he has played since 1994. We hope he will now enjoy
concentrating on the great love of his life, namely farming, and that he
will also be extremely successful in that. This House bids a colourful and
honest member of the House farewell. General, we salute you. Everything of
the best!]
One of the leading newspapers in town, the Cape Times, recently published
that Trevor Manuel's middle name is Consistency. He deserves it, because
for five years now, he has shown his Ministry's firm and fair hand on the
finances of this nation. Not only has he brought greater transparency to
the Budget process, but he is also responsible for providing a basis for
stability in pursuit of a real economic growth rate of greater than 3% per
annum. If the thought of retiring as the Minister of Finance ever crossed
his mind, he must know that his job is not complete yet.

A year ago in this debate on the Appropriation Bill for 2000-01, I
mentioned three issues that needed urgent attention to make us an employed
nation. These steps were fast-tracking the restructuring of the state
assets, increasing assistance to small businesses and imaginative
infrastructure development. I am glad that all three of these aspects have
received serious attention in this year's Budget, thereby providing a
foundation for further expansion over the medium term.

It has been said that the Budget is a government's most powerful economic
instrument. The question is: What impact will this instrument have on the
poor? A leading economist in South Africa, Mr Nic Barnard, recently stated
that while we should be encouraged by the accelerated rise in overall
budget spinning, it must be emphasised that it is one thing to budget for
expanded infrastructure and improved service delivery and another to
actually deliver.

This House and some of its committees, especially Scopa, last year received
many reports of underspending and underdelivery in all three spheres of the
Government. Unless we work towards a zero gap between plans and
implementation, the poor will benefit very little from good intention
budgets. In its submission to the finance committee on Budget 2001, Idasa
evaluated three microeconomic reforms that have been initiated to reduce
poverty through growth. These reforms are skills development,
infrastructure investment and the employment subsidy.

These reforms are being hampered by several deficiencies and problems.
Regarding skills development, it has been reported that R430 million of
moneys collected under the skills development levy went unspent in 2000-01,
pointing to slow implementation. Another important one, the Umsobomvu Fund
announced in 1998 and intended to target unemployed youth, with assets
amounting to nearly R1 billion, all of a sudden went quiet.

Infrastructure investment received a boost with the announcement in the
Budget that R7,8 billion has been allocated to national and provincial
government departments over the medium term. Idasa argues that it is
unlikely that these funds will be spend promptly enough to reduce poverty
in the current MTEF period.

The reasons are, firstly, due to incomplete planning. For example, many of
the divisions of the funds between provinces still has to be decided,
meaning that allocations have not been determined as yet. Secondly, serious
underspending has been reported by departments for the period up to
December 2000. National departments had spent only 51% and provincial
departments only 56% of their capital allocations by December 2000. Of
greater concern is the fact that the largest allocations are going to
departments which have not been able to spend their budgets.

At national level the Departments of Safety and Security, Correctional
Services and Justice had only spent 34% of their 2000 capital spending
allocation by the end of the year 2000. At provincial level the Departments
of Education and Health had only spent 40% and 35% respectively of their
2000 capital spending by the end of that year. Regarding the announced
employment subsidy, namely to spend R600m for a wage tax credit, it is
difficult to evaluate this allocation as details on this plan will only be
available in October.

The problems with the above-mentioned microeconomic reforms manifest
themselves in incomplete budget allocations and lack of implementation
capacity. These problems result in the fact that no immediate benefits will
go to the poor, especially the unemployed. The likelihood of employment
creation substantially reducing poverty in the short to medium term is
therefore quite slim.

I now want to address an important aspect that affects poor people in Third
World countries in general, but also poor people in South Africa. The poor
people of developing countries or nations, the overwhelming majority of
them, have things, but they lack the process to represent their property
and create capital. They have houses, but not titles; they have crops, but
not deeds; they have businesses, but not statutes of incorporation. This is
what Hernando de Soto calls the mystery of capital.

These people work in the extralegal sector, on the streets, from their
homes and in unregistered shops, offices and factories. They are real life
examples of economic life in the undercapitalised sector of our society.
They possess the so-called ``dead capital''. Their resources are
commercially and financially invisible.

De Soto estimates that the total value of property held, but not legally
owned, by the poor in the Third World amounts to $9,3Â trillion, that is
R73,3 trillion. It is more than twenty times the total foreign direct
investment into poor countries during the period 1989 to 1999.

The true heroes in our society are the small entrepreneurs who have
overcome every conceivable obstacle to create a small business, and the
poor family that has painstakingly saved to construct a modest house. They
are not the problem of poverty, they are the solution.

Budget 2001 has been hailed as a pro-poor Budget. The problem is that it
does not go far enough to put the poor on the top of the list of the
Government's programme for growth. Official statistics do not contain the
information we need. We need to put ourselves in the shoes of the poor and
walk their streets.

To assist the poor we need to bring the extralegal entrepreneurs into the
legal system. We need to modify company and property laws to adapt to the
needs of entrepreneurs accustomed to extralegal rules. The same applies to
extralegal property owners.

Formalising the hidden assets of the poor can become a winning strategy,
unlocking billions of rands of dead capital owned by the majority of our
population. They are the people who live mostly in urban and rural informal
houses or dwellings. If we succeed in creating such a strategy of
transforming dead capital, we will move away from jobless and high-skilled
growth to employment-creating growth, unlocking the potential of poor,
unskilled workers.

In conclusion, I want to address the issue of higher, sustainable real
economic growth, addressed in many submissions to the Finance committee,
and also contained in our report to Parliament on the Appropriation Bill.
There seems to be growing consensus that South Africa is indeed capable of
achieving real economic growth rates in excess of 4% per annum. For this to
realise, we need to increase investor confidence, both domestic and
international. We need to create and develop decisive economic leadership
and we need to establish effective co-operation and trust between
Government, business, labour and civil society.

We also need to see the bigger economic picture of how we can contribute to
real and sustainable economic growth in South Africa. We need a ten-year
plan to transform deficits in our society into real gains. Such a plan
should primarily focus on how we can achieve higher economic growth rates
and how we can link it to poverty alleviation. If we succeed, the first
decade of the new millennium will become known as the golden years of our
economy. Let us collectively commit ourselves to such a challenge. The UDM
supports the Appropriation Bill before us. [Applause.]

Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Madam Speaker, hon members, the hon Minister when he
tabled the Budget before us in this House had this to say about the Budget:
  It is the story of an irrevocable and powerful transformation. To restore
  pride and dignity. To lift the crushing weight of poverty and
  disempowerment.


  It tells the story of a young and proud democracy hard at work to improve
  the lives of all its people.

Indeed, this Budget has to improve the lives of all, including the lives of
the young, the children, women, disabled people and those in the rural
areas.

I want us to go back to the year 2000 and look at the Paralympics team who
made us all feel very proud when they brought back the medals into this
country. We want to wish them an even better future. I want us to pause a
little bit and look at the composition of that team. Nafcosa tells us that
28% of the members of that team were black. Surely that is not a good
reflection of the demographics of this country. Something is wrong and it
is not very difficult for us to understand why it is so. This is caused by
the unbalanced location of the facilities and the allocation of the
resources.

The ANC has got to rectify the situation. The world class sports facilities
are found in the suburbs of Johannesburg, Cape Town and Welkom. One does
not find them in Soweto, Khayelitsha, Mitchells Plain or Thabong. If one
does find a few, they are barely equipped and they are ill-maintained. This
results in the majority of the people being denied an opportunity to
participate equally in sports and recreation to stay healthy.

Ntombizanele Situ, the javelin world champion in the Paralympics is today a
champion because she happened to be in a special school equipped with some
of the necessary facilities. It is not correct that only those who are
privileged like Zanele, who happened to be in a special school, or those
who come from the suburbs can be the champions. I am sure that we would
like to see champions coming from Khayelitsha, the villages of Qunu, from
Jozana and from Meloding.

The situation of Zanele is not only true for disabled persons, but it
affects many other young people and children who come from the villages and
townships. They also need to be given an equal opportunity to find their
talent. We will not be able to encourage them off the streets if there are
no facilities close to them, and this Budget has to correct that.

The Building for Sport and Recreation Programme in the Department of Sports
and Recreation aims to construct a sport and recreation facility while, at
the same time, creating jobs through the programme. I believe that the
target will be the rural and the disadvantaged areas.

The SA Sports Commission, through programmes such as Active Youth, Play
Sport, and others, aims to promote wellness through active participation in
dipapadi [sport] and involves kids in physical play at schools. It aims to
educate parents on positive active play. Through the talent identification
programme, it aims to establish an infrastructure that would identify and
nurture sporting talent, and ensure that our national teams are more
representative.

Recently, the commission launched the indigenous games in the Free State,
which was a great success. I have no doubt that some of us here who have
never been champions are going to be champions of Morabaraba, Kgadi and
Tleki. For those who do not know these indigenous games, the Free State
would like to invite them to visit that province, but this time as tourists
and not as a parliamentary committee. [Laughter.]

I want to emphasise the important role that the Department of Sport and
Recreation can play in integrating disabled people into mainstream society,
and the important role that sport and recreation can play in boosting the
image and confidence of all of us.

I am sure that many hon members would like to see Zanele, because when she
became a champion, her image changed. It is unfortunate that she, and other
champions such as Penny Heyns, are not even marketed as role models. We
hardly see her on TV. Perhaps this is a challenge to the SABC and the other
media.

The existing facilities need to be adapted to allow all of us to use them.
Clubs and associations need to open up membership and allow diverse
sporting codes. Schools that are still stuck playing the traditional sports
such as rugby need to change when the profile of the learners change and
accommodate other sports.

This Budget, I believe, is going to address the situation so that all of us
can taste the sweet fruit of liberty. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon members, the ACDP
expresses its best wishes towards Gen Viljoen on the announcement of his
retirement from active politics. We acknowledge the positive contribution
he has made in promoting a peaceful political transition, and we thank him
for being a man of his word.

Ons sal die generaal baie mis in hierdie Huis, en ons wens hom, sy
huisgesin en die boerdery God se rykste seÃ«n toe. Ons wens hom alle sterkte
toe op die pad vorentoe. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We shall really miss the general in this House and we pray that he, his
family and the farm may receive God's richest blessings. We wish him well
on the road ahead.]

There are many areas of need in our nation that are begging for more
resources. Our people are asking for more in order to improve their lives.
Every government department wishes to have their programmes and budget
given priority by the Minister of Finance.

I want to plead for more resources to be allocated to Aids prevention
instead of just the treatment of those who are already infected with the
Aids virus. Much has been said about making the treatment of Aids more
accessible and affordable. Yesterday, the President responded to a question
by the Leader of the Opposition about whether he would consider proclaiming
HIV/Aids a national emergency, and he correctly said that a state of
emergency was not necessary. Not enough is being said about preventing
people from being infected by the Aids virus. That is why I want to
concentrate on a proven solution that would drastically reduce the number
of new infections that are estimated at being about 2 000 per day.

According to a study recently published by ING Barings, some 8 million
South Africans will be HIV-positive by the year 2005. About 250 000 our
people will die from Aids this year. The number of deaths will increase by
180% over the next five years, with 700 000 Aids-related deaths estimated
for the year 2005. It seems that the social and the economic repercussions
of the pandemic will be even worse than already anticipated.

According to an economic impact study of Aids in South Africa, by the year
2006 nearly 17% of the entire population will have HIV/Aids. This is very
serious. Drastic steps have to be taken to ensure that we do not have as
many people with the HI-virus as projected.

The population growth rate currently stands at 1,9%. According to ING
Barings' April 2000 report the growth rate would have been around 2,3% in
the absence of Aids. Their projections indicate that the growth rate will
drop to below 1% by 2004 and reach 0% percent by 2011.

These projections demand a bold, drastic and well defined response by
Government. This is a war that can and must be won. Decisions that may not
necessarily be popular and politically correct have to be taken to save our
nation.

The nation of Uganda, which is a classic example, once faced the national
Aids crisis that South Africa is facing today. Their government effected
the most dramatic reduction in Aids with the incidence of disease falling
from 30% of the population to about 9%. This was a major achievement. If
they could do it, then we can also do it, provided there is a sense of
urgency in our Government and a will to apply the workable and reliable
solutions that were applied by the people of Uganda.

An obsession with a desire to win the war over aids in Uganda caused that
government to start what they called the ABC campaign, with a major
emphasis on the letter ``A'', which stands for abstinence from premarital
sex. Huge billboards were erected throughout the country. Millions of
educational pamphlets were distributed nationwide. Both radio and
television were used to spread the message of abstinence from premarital
sex, especially among young people.

Although our Government has also embarked on a similar campaign with the
ABC message, the major difference between the Uganda strategy and the South
African strategy is in emphasis. While they spent more money on billboards
with a message of abstinence, our Government does not have such billboards,
but just spends money on condoms and what they call advocating safe sex. I
have heard some politicians, even over the radio, refer to the ``A'' in
this ABC campaign as abstinence from unsafe sex. This is misleading the
public. Premarital sex and extramarital sex are always unsafe sex,
regardless of how many condoms one uses.

Although Uganda has less money to spend than South Africa, they have
achieved much more in their fight against Aids. This was done by spreading
the simple message of responsible living and the fact that Aids kills.
[Interjections.] Unlike South Africa and the USA they have not handed
condoms out freely to children who do not have enough facts to make mature
decisions.

As a concerned South African, I am appealing to our Government to spend
more money on pamphlets, booklets, brochures and bill boards promoting the
message of abstinence from premarital sex. Let this information be freely
available in every school. Sexual activity amongst school children must be
vigorously discouraged, instead of being promoted.

The impact of the HIV/Aids pandemic on the economy will lead to substantial
declines in productivity, skills and available expertise in South Africa.
The impact on the household begins as soon as a member of that household
starts to suffer from HIV-related illnesses. The impact can be seen in
various areas.

We need to save our nation. Government must change strategy and move into
higher gear. Action and drastic action is needed before it is too late.
More money must be spent on promoting abstinence from premarital sex in our
communities, schools and institutions. National television must also be
used to spread this proven solution. I want to tell the hon the Minister of
Finance that this is one area that is worth spending more money on.

Let us save our children from this scourge and thus enable them or give
them the opportunity to develop into a skilled and professional workforce
that will improve our economic prospects and bring prosperity to our
beautiful country of South Africa. The ACDP will support the Appropriation
Bill. [Applause.]

Mnr I S MFUNDISI: Mev die Speaker, ek wil genl Viljoen, namens die UCDP,
sterkte toewens met sy aftrede. Hy het hom waardig en ywerig teenoor almal
gedra, en 'n mens hoop dat sy bydrae tot die verbetering van mense- en
rasseverhoudinge in ons vaderland nooit vergeet sal word nie. Ons bedank
hom vir sy goedgesindheid. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the UCDP I want to wish Gen
Viljoen everything of the best on his retirement. He behaved in a dignified
and diligent manner towards everyone, and one hopes that his contribution
to the improvement of human and race relations in our fatherland will never
be forgotten. We thank him for his goodwill. [Applause.]]

A scrutiny of the Appropriation Bill brings to light that there is truth in
the saying that the legitimate object of Government is to do for a
community of people whatever they need to have done, but cannot do at all
in their separate and individual capacity.

Government strives to ensure that the nation is educated, lives in safety,
has water and enjoys good health. Each individual member of society is
entitled to these and others, but may not access them on their own, hence
the need for the provision of the services by Government.

The R98,8 billion from the National Treasury Budget which has been
allocated to the Minister for the needs of the nation, is something that is
laudable. We take note that, amongst the first 10 votes that have been
allocated the highest appropriations, is Safety and Security. This will
surely see to it that levels of crime are brought down and, hopefully, the
police service and their salaries will improve. We hope that, thereafter,
their morale will also be very high.

The appropriation lays emphasis on infrastructure investment which will
translate into job creation. Fifty eight percent of the Budget is allocated
to social services, namely education, health and welfare. This allocation,
however, shows the extent to which Government is people-centred. As for
this commitment, it can be implied that there is hope for economic growth
in the long run, as the people so prepared will be the driving force of the
economy.

It is gratifying that the Government recognises that progress in the
quality of schooling, promotion of early learning opportunities and the
deepening of further education and higher education sectors are important
investments in future prosperity. It is also good that skills development
will receive a further boost this year, and we hope that the money so
accrued will be put to proper use.

We look forward to more young people benefiting from the Umsobomvu Fund, in
that employment opportunities will be created for them. This venture should
not be allowed to recede like a mirage in the desert, while other young
people are left desolate. The R916 million of the fund that has been
invested should help see to the creation of jobs. This should be very
urgently done.

There is great concern in the area of employment. According to the Reserve
Bank quarterly bulletin released yesterday, formal employment in the
nonagricultural private sector dropped from 9,2% in gold mining to 0,3% in
the services sector in the nine months of last year. Much has to be done in
this regard if we hope to have a very fine way of living.

May I appeal to delegates that go abroad to represent South Africa to
ensure that their plans are compact and intact, to avoid the situation
which is currently obtaining in Nigeria. Such inept arrangements reflect on
the country and will, in the long term, affect our economic success.

The national Treasury has done its bit, the cake has been split
accordingly, and it is for each of the departments to look after its share
properly and spend it prudently. The UCDP supports the Bill.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Chairperson, the President, in his state-of-the-nation
address, opened his speech with the following remarks, and I quote:
``Gradually, step by step, our country proceeds further away from its
painful past.'' Nowhere can one experience this feeling but in local
government.

Local government, after the local government elections of 5 December, has
undergone significant changes within the South African political system.
These local government elections marked the completion of the process of
rationalising the number of apartheid municipalities from 843, to the
current, nonracial, democratic municipalities of 284.

Its objectives are to build and strengthen nationhood, deepen democracy and
assist with the economic advancement and social development of our people,
particularly the poor and disadvantaged. The new system of local government
will also significantly advance our national, democratic transition, more
so than in the provincial and national government. We have also now entered
our final phase of transformation.

Obviously, the new system will not be fully implemented immediately, but
rather in phases. The new system defines local government as a sphere of
government, with its constitutionally enshrined powers and functions not
completely independent, but interrelated with provincial and national
governments in one overall system of co-operative governance.

Local government is not just a mechanism for the delivery of services, but
it is also of paramount importance for the economic and social development
of our people. The key factor of this development role is the requirement
in the new system that all municipalities need to adopt the integrated
development plans, known as the IDPs. These IDPs must clearly set out
divisions, needs, priorities, goals and strategic plans to develop
municipalities as tools for sound delivery. An IDP is not only a plan, it
is a strategic instrument, a management tool, and a method of running a
municipality. In terms of the law, community participation is an essential
element in both the content and the drafting of the IDP process.

In so doing, the Act is clear that the residents have the right to
contribute to the municipality's decision-making process. They also have
the right to do the following: preparation, implementation and the review
of IDPs; establishment, implementation and review of a municipality's
performance management system; monitoring and review of that performance;
preparation of a municipality's budget; decision-making about the provision
of the different municipal services; and also monitoring and reviewing the
quality and effect of that particular service.

The 5 December elections were the first truly nonracial and democratic
local government elections, as they have done away with the racial quotas
of previous elections. With the new demarcation of municipal boundaries on
the basis of rational criteria, the old racially determined apartheid
boundaries have now finally been done away with. With the integration of
racially separated areas and the merger of urban and some rural areas,
these municipalities represent a further deracialisation of our South
African society.

In terms of the Act, municipal councils must promote gender equity in the
exercise of the municipality's executive and legislative authority. In the
same vein the needs of the disabled must be catered for on an equal basis.
New powerful and democratic district municipalities must ensure that
development, growth and delivery takes place. These councils will be
crucial to the advancement of the rural integrated development strategy.

The Minister of Finance has made substantial financial provisions to ensure
the smooth implementation of our new system of local government. We
appreciate the additional allocations for both the urban renewal and rural
development strategies over the next three years. Furthermore, we greatly
appreciate the commitment made by the Minister of Finance in his speech:


  As Team Finance, we stand ready to work with local government to manage
  this complex and challenging transition.

There are still many challenges which we have to face, but most urgent and
important are to produce councillors with a more developed sense of
leadership, civic commitment, and who are well-equipped and empowered to
face these challenges.

Immediately after the President has launched the ANC's local government
manifesto in the small rural town of Beaufort West last year, that council
implemented free basic services for that community. We want to congratulate
them, and tell them that we are proud of them. [Applause.] That happened
even before the local government elections. Well done, Beaufort West!

On the other hand, the DA's manifesto also claims to provide free basic
services. Yet, they went ahead and cut water and electricity in poor and
disadvantaged places like Mitchells Plain, Macassar, Manenberg and
Atlantis. [Interjections.]

The DA claims to be for all people and yet they are about to establish
subcouncils within the unicity of Cape Town, which are totally racially
biased. The DA made a deliberate choice to establish subcouncils to ensure
that very little community integration takes place on a nonracial basis and
thus ensuring very slow growth in our disadvantaged areas. [Interjections.]
Those members must listen and they will learn.

Unlike the DA, we, as the ANC, have been consistent with our policies and
objectives for an integrated South Africa. This was demonstrated by the ANC
which contested all the wards in the country. This also resulted in our
winning them all, including the metros. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I will not allow
running commentaries. You may make interjections, but they cannot be
running commentaries. [Interjections.]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Chairperson, they have little or nothing to say. That is
why they act like that.

It is clear to us, as we rapidly move away from our terrible and painful
past, that the DA is still trying at all costs to maintain the status quo.
This, again, was demonstrated the other day. Was it not a DA strategist who
told a foreign journalist that their strategy during the local government
elections in the Western Cape was to scare the hell out of white people to
get them to the polls? Was it not so?

We wish to congratulate the Minister on an excellent job done with the new
Budget. We support the First Reading of this Appropriation Bill.
[Applause.]

Mr C W EGLIN: Mr Chairman, as a rifle-carrying corporal in the war which
ended when the general was a schoolboy, it is an honour for me to salute
him on behalf of the DP. We want to thank him for his contribution which he
made to the debates in Parliament and for his contribution to the
negotiations on our new Constitution. However, more than this, we want to
thank him for the way in which he has conducted himself.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I wonder if the volume is
sufficient for hon members to hear the hon member who is at the podium. I
would like to request that the volume be increased. Order! Hon member, you
can resume your speech now.

Mr C W EGLIN: Mr Chairman, start the clock from zero again. I am saying to
the general that his modesty, thoughtfulness, genuineness and sensitivity
towards other people have endeared him to all the members of this House.

Generaal, mag dit goed gaan met u en u gade in die jare wat voorlÃª.
[General, may all go well with you and your wife in the years ahead.]

Our country's foreign policy has an important bearing on the economic
growth rate which we have achieved in the past and which we will achieve in
the future. Factors like foreign trade, foreign tourism and foreign direct
investment can make the difference between our economy trundling along at a
3% growth rate, with us barely holding our heads above water, or advancing
to a 6% growth rate where we can start rolling back poverty, reducing
unemployment and delivering better services for all our people.

Here in the Southern African region, where our foreign policy should be at
its most focused, the Government's foreign policy - viewed from an economic
point of view - has simply failed to deliver. Indeed, here in the region
with so much potential and untapped natural resources, economic development
is in jeopardy. Foreign tourism, trade and investment are being undercut by
a never-ending civil war in Angola. It is being undermined by the war and
political instability in Congo. It is being further damaged by
presidentially condoned violations of the rule of law in Zimbabwe.

The harsh reality is that in this region, where we are about to establish a
free trade area and move towards economic integration, we have not
succeeded in establishing the political fundamentals which are essential to
economic growth. These political fundamentals are peace, stability,
democracy, the rule of law, human rights and good governance. By failing to
do this, we are not only denying the region the benefits of internally
generated growth, but we are making it impossible for the countries of the
region to achieve their maximum add-on benefit of foreign trade, tourism
and direct investment.

Let us all be aware of the fact that the more our economy is integrated,
the more we stand to gain. But equally, the more we are integrated, the
more we will suffer economically by violations of the political
fundamentals in any one of the countries of this region.

Zimbabwe is a case in point. There can be no doubt that the events in
Zimbabwe have damaged the economy of the region. There can be no doubt that
they have tarnished the image of the countries of this region in the eyes
of foreign investors. The Governor of the Reserve Bank says they have. The
members of the President's Investment Advisory Council say they have. And
the President himself has said certain events impact negatively on South
Africa.

Yet, to date the policy adopted by the South African Government on the
Zimbabwean situation has failed to produce positive results. Yesterday the
President announced that a ministerial delegation will be going to
Zimbabwe. I have no doubt that it will find that there is nothing wrong
with the fundamentals of the Zimbabwean economy that cannot be put right
within the framework of the law. But it will find that the once vigorous
economy has almost been brought to its knees by the reckless political
actions of that country's President.

What is distressing is that, in spite of the Government's communication
facilities, the Government has failed to spell out, in a clear and
unambiguous manner, where it stands on key issues holding centre stage in
Zimbabwe. Ironically, recently it was not the Government, but the leaders
of our courts, supported by their judicial colleagues, who spelled out in
unambiguous terms their commitment to the rule of law and the independence
of the judiciary. South Africans have reason to be proud of their judges
for speaking up. By contrast, the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development has reason to hang his head in shame!

If the South African Government wants to reassure foreign investors,
tourists and traders that, in spite of what is going on in Zimbabwe, South
Africa remains a country worth doing business with, it must show, beyond
all doubt, that there is a very clear distinction between Mugabe's Zimbabwe
and Mbeki's South Africa.

The Southern African region remains one of great potential. Its economy has
been bruised and damaged, both by its past history and by current events.
South Africa has a responsibility to try to ensure that the potential of
this region is realised. It has to be proactive in seeing that the
political fundamentals which are essential to economic confidence are put
in place and kept in place. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: I would like to raise
a point of order on the speech that has just been delivered by the hon
Colin Eglin. In his deliberation he said that the President condoned the
breakdown of the rule of law in Zimbabwe. To condone is an act of
acquiescence. Condoning is a deliberate act of endorsing an action or
behaviour by the particular person, and I do not think the President can do
that. I would like you to make a ruling on that, Mr Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, I think it would
be appropriate for me to look at the Hansard, to see if what you are saying
was in the context of that or in a different, broader context. If there is
any point of order that needs to be taken up, I will then rule accordingly.
But first, let me look at the Hansard.

Mrs S F BALOYI: Mr Chairperson, hon President, hon Minister and hon
members, there can be no sustainable economic growth without paying
attention to developmental issues. Growth and development are deeply
interconnected.

We do not view spending on public health as a subtraction from the economy,
but as a contribution to it. This Government has taken important steps to
ensure that there is a systematic approach to the adoption of public health
interventions to produce a coherent national health service in this
country. The promotion of integrated strategies amongst Government
departments is especially important, given the emphasis on prevention and
improved quality of life.

Allow me to commend the Government for the structural transformation it has
achieved in the public health system. In Mpumalanga and in other provinces
hundreds of clinics have been built and upgraded. Facilities now exist
where they have never existed before.

This has benefited especially those who, in the past, had to cross rivers
to reach a clinic. Now clinics are closer. I can quote from my province a
place like Driefontein, where they now have a very big health centre. To
the mothers whose babies used to die in their arms because there was no
service, this is delivery. This is what the ANC promised.

There has been an increase in the allocation this year to the hospital
construction and rehabilitation programmes. This shows an improvement in
making resources available to fast-track the elimination of backlogs. This
is in fact redressing the decades-long impact of apartheid planning in our
hospitals. There are new facilities, such as the Inkosi Albert Luthuli
Hospital replacing the King Edward VIII Hospital in Durban. The new Umtata
Nelson Mandela Hospital in the Eastern Cape is nearing completion as well.
This will provide efficient quality care and also assist in the academic
training of our health personnel.

It needs to be mentioned that improvements that have been made to hospital
upgrading and rehabilitation are resulting in the improvement of the
quality of delivery of care and the efficient functioning of hospitals and
clinics. To prevent a deterioration of facilities, funds have been
allocated for the maintenance of buildings, equipment and so on. This,
however, is a process. Currently interprovincial and provincial inequities
remain. Tighter co-ordination between provincial and national departments
of health is necessary to reduce these gaps.

We welcome the Government's approach to targeting and co-ordinating
interventions in rural areas in pursuing the integrated approach. The
advantages are of major benefit for the improvement of the quality of life,
especially when guided by health indicators. For example, where roads,
water and clinics are part of the planning project, and co-ordination
exists, our people experience a value-for-money product that can be
optimally used.

The rising HIV/Aids epidemic makes this issue a top priority for the
Government. The Government has introduced an HIV/Aids and STD strategic
plan that creates mechanisms for an integrated response, with other
Government departments, NGOs and CBOs being responsible for the delivery in
certain areas. The increase in the allocation of funds for this year and
the coming year indicates the commitment of our Government to dealing with
this epidemic. By allocating funds across line departments, the Government
is showing a commitment to the principle that Aids is not only a health
matter, but cuts across all sectors and spheres of society.

The Medical Research Council of South Africa receives special funding for
research purposes, and we are encouraged by the MRC's announcement that
they are in fact ready to produce the first phase of a vaccine trial. We
know that the HIV/Aids epidemic increases the incidence of TB and
complicates control. Therefore, the allocation to Santa will assist in
reducing the TB burden through increased collaboration with role-players at
local and regional levels.

I do, however, want to point out that we are extremely worried about the
high TB infection rate in the Western Cape, especially in areas like
Uitsig, Ravensmead and Khayelitsha. I want to urge the provincial
department of health to prioritise TB control, increase compliance rates
and strengthen the management of their supervised TB Dots programme.
[Interjections.]

The Government has been concentrating on ways to ensure that our doctors
and nurses are used efficiently and equitably. The introduction of
community service for doctors, pharmacists and dentists results in a
reduction in the shortages of personnel in rural areas and an improvement
in the quality of care for many who never had such services before, unlike
our opposition members, who sit in the comfort of their mansions and call
on the best specialists in the country to be at their beck and call
whenever they have a minor illness or complaint. [Interjections.] Now, for
the first time, many of our people are experiencing the services of nursing
and medical personnel as well as clinic facilities. This they greatly
appreciate and recognise as making a difference in their lives. I will
quote an example from one doctor, who said:


  Community service has provided young professionals with an opportunity to
  develop skills, acquire knowledge, behaviour patterns and critical
  thinking that will help their professional development.

This is contrary to what some of my colleagues on the left want us to
believe. We are considering various options to ensure that we train enough
doctors and nurses to work in the public sector. At the current moment the
ratio of white to black doctors is about 20:5000.

This situation cannot be tolerated and needs to be addressed urgently. The
existence of the wide income disparities has left a large number of South
Africans living below subsistence levels. The result is higher levels of
poor nutrition. It is here that poverty alleviation strategies will have a
major impact in the long run.

The feeding of 5 million school children through the implementation of
community nutrition projects over the last five years, is commendable. We
need new tools to allow the transition from food and handouts to projects
that are sustainable at community level. The allocation for nutrition is
welcome as it helps to intensify the efforts to implement the integrated
nutrition programme in provinces. We are already seeing results among our
children in terms of improved health status and attendances at schools.
This programme needs to be supported.

During the reign of the past regime, nutrition projects were stopped to
ensure that our children remained malnourished and underperform at school.
The intention was to have a cheap and unskilled labour force to serve the
regime's needs. The allocation for cholera and poverty alleviation projects
to assist the health sector in dealing with health occurrences that have
not been budgeted for is welcome. An example is the outbreak of cholera in
KwaZulu-Natal and other areas. The integrated strategy is also commended
with the allocation to Water Affairs for speeding up the provision of water
and sanitation especially in rural areas. This is to speed up the health
status of the population and curb the spread of infectious and contagious
diseases.

We thank the hon the Minister for a people's Budget, a Budget that shows
the sweet fruit of good policies, planning and vision. Our people are now,
for the first time, tasting the sweet fruits of their liberty, won through
years of oppression and struggle.

I support the First Reading of the Appropriation Bill. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, I am sure that hon members would wish to join me
in congratulating the hon Minister of Home Affairs and president of the
Inkatha Freedom Party, Prince M G Buthelezi, on receiving the Charlton
Heston Under Fire Bravery Award recently in the United States of America,
in recognition of his distinguished service to our nation.

On this upbeat note, may I also extend a congratulatory note to the hon the
Minister of Finance on the physically prudent and well-crafted framework
that has helped put South Africa on a sound economic basis to compete in
the global economy and work towards a more prosperous and just society.

In putting the microeconomic fundamentals in place, we agree that it is now
appropriate to switch emphasis to focus on the micro side of the economy.
We particularly welcome the reduction in interest rates, which will reduce
the cost of borrowing for homeowners and increase their disposable income,
and further stimulate aggregate demand.

Whilst the increase in pensions is also to be welcomed, the IFP believes a
more substantial increase was required to help alleviate poverty and
provide a higher standard of living and greater dignity for pensioners. The
reduction in the cost of paraffin is to be especially welcomed as it is a
measure targeted at the poor. Attention should also continue to be focused
on alleviating the plight of the homeless, and to speed up the process of
housing provision.

Noting that there has been a concurrent increase in the fuel price with the
reduction in the paraffin price, it was unfortunate that the toll road
increases coincided with the rise in petrol prices. In this regard, policy
consideration needs to be given to encouraging the use of railways to ease
road congestion in the provinces with really poor roads. The Government
must turn its attention to the formulation of an integrated transport
policy that addresses this and environmental consideration.

We are encouraged that the commendable Budget is subject to the process of
procedural scrutiny to ensure that any necessary adjustments are made by
the end of the financial year to avoid overshooting expenditure targets.
The vast majority of our consumers in this country are relatively
unprotected. Therefore we welcome Consumer Rights Day, as it would help
consumers to know their rights and be able to seek protection.

Let us remember the three miners who were killed at the Coronationville
mine. We also pray for their families and their loved ones.

Finally, the issue of unemployment is and remains a major problem in this
country. It is time that we all did our best to help resolve the situation.
We need development, not only spoken about, but an effort to implement the
wonderful ideas, which is a sure way of creating jobs. Let us work together
towards this end. [Applause.]

Ms N E HANGANA: Mr Chairperson, Comrade President, members of Parliament,
the time has come that we launch a sustained offensive to wipe out poverty
in our country and continent. Millions of our people are still condemned to
suffer from hunger, malnutrition and diseases. We have to strive to rebuild
Africa's economies, ensure that they are able to generate the necessary
volumes of wealth and employment for the people so that we can take our
rightful place within the global economy. This we must do as an essential
part of the continued struggle for the assertion of the dignity of Africa's
people.

We as the ANC repeat our commitments to the masses of our people to make
every effort to ensure that we continue to address their needs and concerns
in a continuous pursuit of the goals of a better life for all. In the six
years of democratic governance, we have steadfastly redrawn the settlement
patterns, removed barriers by extending the security of tenure to
farmworkers and outlawed all forms of discrimination. A multipronged
strategy saw the implementation of a diversity of programmes honing in to
address the heart of the problem and producing positive results.

Our successes were underpinned by the national housing vision, which
catered for the country's poor without fear of favour. We view housing
delivery as part of the broader developmental process, and we renew our
commitment to housing delivery that makes use of all available capacity and
resources. Eradication of the backlog is the most ideal state that any
country can aspire to, particularly if it means the eradication of
homelessness and poverty alleviation.

Our primary charter consists of people whose earnings are low and to
compound the problem we are regarded as high risks by financial
institutions. However, most of them are either members of saving clubs or
have been effecting some methods of saving individually or through groups.
Since the election of a democratic national Government, the development
needs of rural South Africa have been recognised and addressed in terms of
state policy and allocation of resources.

The current challenge of rural development remains the improvement of the
quality of people's lives and livelihood. There is now more dedication to
achieve these aims and a clearer realisation that this will require better
co-ordination of efforts, communication and strengthened capacity. Equal
access by women to adequate housing, ensuring equal and effective
participation of women and their organisations is but one of the key
strategies of our Government. Women have also been targeted as
beneficiaries of training programmes and the housing service census.

The incidents of violence against women result in many women having a
particular need for shelter and safe housing. Housing is not only a
residential site, but for many women it is also a site of production.
Therefore, the planning and design of housing need to take these socially
prescribed roles into account. Women's marginalised position within the
macroeconomy mediates the access to housing in several ways.

The distribution of income is substantially skewed along gender lines. This
impacts on the effective demand for housing for women. Women's position
within the formal economy further hampers their ability to participate
equally within the housing market. Their dominance within the informal
economy creates specific needs with regard to accessing housing finance.
Women's low income levels impact on their ability to save, and this in turn
affects their ability to participate in the banking sector.

Poverty also has a different impact on different groups of women: Young
women, elderly women, women with disabilities, women living with HIV/Aids
and female-headed households. In addition, access to adequate housing under
the apartheid regime was historically racially engendered.

In terms of a review document by the development action group, housing
delivery in the Western Cape has taken place on a significant scale, but
this so-called prosperity is not felt amongst the poor. The same applies to
the last matric results, where there were outstanding results only in
predominantly white schools. [Interjections.] In predominantly white
schools ... I direct this to that stupid ...

In one of the housing Minmecs, the Western Cape complained that this
province is faced with heavy migration of people from other provinces.
[Interjections.] This concern could be ascribed to a number of reasons. If
one compares the migration of people into Gauteng province, at a rate of 20
000 people a month, it is not because the Western Cape is the best
province. Movement of people from rural to urban areas is as old as the
hills. [Interjections.] The hon member is too stupid to understand that.
[Interjections.] Rather than complain, the Western Cape should rise to the
challenge and build more houses. The ANC supports the Appropriation Bill.
[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairman, hon President, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, hon members, one of the characteristics of the of the Budget for
2001, when analysed from a macroeconomic level, is fiscal discipline. In
particular, inflation targeting of between 3% and 6% is commendable.
Another aspect which must be mentioned is privatisation, which will allow
something like R18 billion to be made available. That is also welcome. The
crucial question, however, is whether South Africa will be able to attain a
growth rate of 6% in order to reduce the deplorably high rate of
unemployment and poverty, and also to encourage domestic and foreign direct
investment within our country in a sustainable manner.

Our present growth rate, however, is 3,5% of the GDP, and our economy may
be adversely affected by the forthcoming possible downturn. The rand has
also weakened substantially against the dollar over the past 18 months. The
possibility of an increase in crude oil prices cannot be negated, and might
also have an effect on our overall economic growth.

The Budget emphasises expenditure on health, education and welfare. The
rebate on diesel fuel for a number of sectors of the economy is noteworthy,
particularly for rural areas which are dependent on agriculture as a mode
of existence. More than 19 million South Africans today live in rural
areas, and the zero vat on illuminating paraffin will save R400Â million.
This concession will ease the financial burden on the needy South Africans
who rely on paraffin for domestic purposes.

The question, however, that millions of South Africans must ask themselves
is whether there is adequate tax relief in the present Budget. It is
generally acknowledged that something like 750 000 South Africans have lost
their jobs since 1994, and this is a conservative figure.

All sectors of our economy at present are suffering from a skills shortage
partially caused by an alarming exodus of skilled South Africans. Whether
the informal sector of our economy is able to absorb the present labour
excluded from the formal sector as a result of jobless growth, is
questionable.

A number of reasons are often furnished why highly skilled South Africans
emigrate. Crime, violence, rigid labour laws, negative tax laws, the
decline in educational standards, are some of the reasons. Clearly the
emigration of skilled South Africans is in nobody's interest.

The hon the Minister allowed net tax reductions in his Budget to the order
of R9,1 billion. This is realised in the decreases in personal income tax
for taxpayers earning underÂ R80 000 per annum. Whether these deductions
will spur growth by increased savings and investment in certain economic
sectors, is questionable, because if we analyse the issue in a holistic
manner, we find that there is little tax relief for middle and high income
categories of taxpayers.

The present tax burden on households representing all income categories has
escalated at an alarming rate over the past seven years. If all taxes and
charges levied at other levels of Government are taken into account, the
net tax burden, taxes paid less services received has resulted in household
savings becoming virtually nonexistent. Household debt levels have also
soared. South Africa is becoming a part of the economic global order.

Tax reforms in others countries are increasingly drawing skilled South
Africans towards their economies. The present system of taxing retirement
funds at 25% on gross interest is unfair and impacts negatively on lower-
income categories. The negative impact of tax on retirement funds is made
worse by inflation. The Government intends to recover an additional R500
million from retirements within this particular fiscal year.

The figure goes up, and if we analyse this particular figure in context we
will see that approximately 12% of the taxpayers assessed in 1998 - the tax
year up to 31 December 1999 - had an income below the tax threshold of R16
920. At present it is R23 111. This percentage does not reflect the number
of retirement fund members whose taxable income is less than R60 000 per
year and who are not required to submit a tax return.

Many lower-income earners are, as a condition of employment, forced to
invest in retirement funds. What this, in actual fact, means is that they
are at present subjected to tax at 25% on their investment income. May I
also point out that from 1 October all members of retirement funds will
also be subjected to capital gains tax. The introduction of tax through the
medium of their retirement funds acts as an disincentive to investment in
formal retirement instruments. It is calculated by Prof Alwyn de Koker,
Professor of Accounting at Wits, that the long-term result of the present
tax on retirement funds will reduce the annual return of the retirement
fund by between 1% and 1,4% each year.

Capital gains tax is expected to reduce the annual return by a further 0,4
to 0,05% each year. The negative effect is further pronounced because part
of the return of the share of the fund is also lost to tax-related costs of
administering the fund. The present tax rate of 25% on retirement funds may
force a number of retirees, despite years of work, to become partially
dependent upon the state for retirement income, because they were forced to
participate in a tax purative retirement system.

An urgent appeal is made to the hon the Minister to request competent
individuals, well-versed in tax laws, to thoroughly investigate the taxes
that relate to retirement funds. If the present tax rate of 25% is to be
retained, consider allowing members of pension funds who have been
negatively affected by our taxes to be compensated through adequate tax-
free retirement benefits such as, for example, a tax-free portion of 20% to
25% of any lump sum or annuity.

Capital gains tax will be implemented on 1 October. The reason given by
Government is that this tax will improve social equity by increasing the
progressiveness of the tax system. The DA opposes this tax. The question we
have to ask ourselves, however, is whether the Government will need the
extra money this tax will generate considering the immediate and long-term
expenses it will involve. Capital gains tax is a very complex tax. It is
generally acknowledged that tax consultants will spend hundreds of man
hours to help clients to deal with another new tax, time which should have
been used on more productive activities which can generate economic growth
and provide employment opportunities.

A prerequisite for a growing economy is a fair and equitable tax system
which encourages savings by means of tax incentives. By implementing the
capital gains tax, the Government is introducing an inefficient and very
low yielding tax. Figures mentioned in this regard vary from 0,1 to 0,2% of
GDP. Serious thought must be given to the scrapping of all low yielding
taxes in general, such as estate duty and the donation tax, which consume
scarce resources.

Total tax revenue to be collected by Sars is expected to be 1,44% or R3,1
billion more than the original estimate of R213,7 billion. Still the tax
gap, the difference between what is owed by taxpayers and what revenue
collects, is vast. The Financial Mail of 23 February 2001, estimated that
more than R30 billion or about 15% of total tax revenue is not collected.
The mission of Sars is to concentrate on tax evasion, ruling out
corruption, and to implement the new residence-based tax system, not to
struggle and implement a very complicated tax system.

The New NP opposes this Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr N M NENE: Mr Chairperson, the hon the President of the Republic of South
Africa, hon members, it is that time of the year again when we have to
reflect on our Budget and its impact on the citizens of this country.

In his Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance dealt with a wide spectrum of
issues, more particularly, the progression towards microeconomic reform
from macroeconomic stabilisation. This is characterised in his Budget by,
among other things, the tax proposals that were announced.

Measures announced in this Budget will stimulate economic activity by,
firstly, raising personal disposable income through income tax cuts;
secondly, promoting employment creation through wage incentives; thirdly,
encouraging investment in the small business sector and specific strategic
investment projects through investment tax allowances; fourthly, enhancing
the competitiveness of the primary production sector by providing a diesel
fuel tax concession; and fifthly, reducing energy costs for the poor by
zero rating VAT on illuminating paraffin.

The income tax cuts amounting to R83 billion will mostly benefit the lower
to middle-income groups. This is in addition to the R25 billion already
given back to those income groups. Taxpayers earning up to R80 000 per
annum will enjoy a tax cut of up to 12% of their taxable income.

A lot of criticism has been levelled at our Government for lack of delivery
by the opposition, especially the apartheid partners who, during their
time, collected taxes from everyone, but only delivered services to the
few. Hence the imbalances that this Budget seeks to address. The ANC
Government is expanding its efforts to address poverty through job creation
and economic growth.
In the state of the nation address on 9 February 2001, the President
referred to the reduction of the cost of production whilst stimulating
employment. The national Treasury and Sars are investigating economically
and administratively efficient tax measures that will encourage job
creation by reducing the cost of hiring new workers and of offering
apprenticeships or learnerships and encourage the formalisation of
employment that is currently in the Government programmes, for example, the
Unemployment Insurance Fund, and ensure that their benefits are more widely
available.

It is envisaged that this tax relief measure will be operational by October
2001, and will result in a revenue loss of about R600 million in 2001-02.
The exemption on income dividends has been increased by R1 000 per person,
ie R3 000 for persons under the age of 65 and R4 000 for persons over the
age of 65. With regard to state duty and donations tax, these have also
been reduced to 20% to allow for capital gains tax.

On capital gains tax, after listening to all the submissions with regard to
the introduction of capital gains tax, the coming into effect thereof was
postponed to 1 October 2001 instead of 1 April 2001. This will allow
institutions to get their systems ready for this tax and also finalise some
outstanding issues that will be dealt with when this Bill is brought to
this House.

Umbuzo ogulisa abantu bakithi ngale ntela ngukuthi sekunemfundisoze
esakazwayo yokuthi izokhinyabeza umnotho, ixoshe abatshali bezimali iphinde
futhi icindezele labo bantu abahluphekayo.

Iqiniso-ke lithi le ntela izosiza ekuthini labo abadla izambane likapondo
bangayithukusi imali ngaphansi kohlelo lwe-capital gains kepha nakuyo
kukhokhwe intela njengalokho kwenzeka kuyo yonke inzuzo. (Translation of
Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[The disturbing thing to our people about this tax is the rumour that it
will cripple our economy. They say it will chase away investors and oppress
the poor.

In fact this tax will help to prevent the rich from hiding money through a
capital gains scheme. It will make it possible to pay taxes even in this
scheme, as happens in all investments.]
In order to realise our dream of service delivery, sufficient revenue needs
to be raised in an equitable and fair manner. According to the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework it is estimated that the consolidated national
revenue will be R242,615 billion and, looking at the track record of Sars,
there is no reason to doubt that this target will be achieved and even
beyond.

I, once again, take this opportunity to commend the South African Revenue
Service for the significant progress this institution has made in enhancing
its capacity and overcoming important challenges to tax collection. Some of
the key achievements of the South African Revenue Service are outlined in
the Budget Review, and I invite members to take a few minutes of their time
to read them.

The most striking ones are the following: The implementation of the new
trade agreements; a successful campaign against tax fraud in the retail
industry; the launch of a major internal restructuring programme known as
``Siyakha'', which is being piloted in KwaZulu-Natal; and the
implementation of the residence-based taxation which was introduced last
year.

We all agree that the tax increases have been kept to a minimum and there
will only be a slight increase in the fuel levy, which is below the
inflation rate, normal excise duty increases, which affects alcoholic
beverages and tobacco, the increase in the skills levy, the closing of the
income tax loopholes, and the change in Eskom's tax status, as well as the
review of tax on banks. The other source of income will, of course, come
from the unbundling transactions and the restructuring of state assets. To
name but a few: Telkom, the sale of M-Cell shares, Denel and others.

The ANC's commitment to a better life for all is unwavering and no one will
deter us from this course. This Budget is living testimony to this and our
people can only reap the sweet fruit of liberty year after year. The ANC
supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Mnr die Voorsitter, Agb President, die goeie
funksionering van die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie is noodsaaklik as die
Regering die planne om armoede te beveg, wil verwesenlik. Ons ekonomie
staar 'n paar ernstige bedreigings in die gesig. Een daarvan is die bek-en-
klou-seer probleem, nie net in Suid-Afrika nie, maar ook dwarsdeur die
wÃªreld. In Suid-Afrika is dit onder beheer, danksy vinnige optrede deur die
departemente, wat ek wil gelukwens daarmee, maar in die res van die wÃªreld
versprei dit amper asof dit buite beheer is.

Die siekte kan, soos in die Camperdown geval, maklik die land binnekom via
wettige en onwettige invoere, of selfs deur toeriste wat van besmette
gebiede af kom. Dit is dringend noodsaaklik dat verskerpte maatreÃ«ls op
Suid-Afrika se grense spoedig ingestel en toegepas word om die verspreiding
van die siekte vanaf die buiteland te keer. Verdere verspreiding van die
siekte kan ons handel ernstig knou, en ons ekonomie erg benadeel. Ek hoop
dat die Minister die nodige steun sal gee dat hierdie maatreÃ«ls in plek kan
kom.

Die tweede probleem het te doen met die herverdeling van grond in Suid-
Afrika. 'n Versnelde herverdelingsproses is noodsaaklik om vreedsaam in die
toekoms in te gaan, en ek dink nie ek hoef daaroor uit te brei nie. Die
potensiaal vir konflik is groot indien ons nie op hierdie gebied presteer
nie. Die gevaarligte flikker egter as die staat, soos in die Lydenburg-
geval, nie daarin kan slaag om deur onderhandeling 'n kompromis te bereik
vir 'n oplossing van die probleme aldaar nie.

Deur die roete van geregtelike onteieningsproses nou te volg, word emosies
onnodig in die verkeerde rigting gestuur. Dit skep 'n wantroue tussen die
verskillende rolspelers wat by die saak betrokke is. Dit vertraag nie net
die grondverdelingsproses nie, maar veroorsaak die verslegting van
gesindhede en dit moet vermy word. Voorbeelde soos in Zimbabwe waar die
herverdeling van landbougrond nie reg bestuur is nie, het 'n groot invloed
op die ekonomie. Suid-Afrika kan dit nie bekostig nie. In hierdie geval sal
ons vinnig moet presteer om die plaaslike probleme te probeer vermy.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, hon President, the good functioning of
the South African economy is essential if the Government wants to bring the
plans to combat poverty to fruition. Our economy is facing a few serious
threats. One of these is the foot-and-mouth disease problem, not only in
South Africa, but also throughout the world. It is under control in South
Africa, thanks to quick action by the departments, which I wish to
congratulate on this, but it is spreading in the rest of the world almost
as though it is out of control.

The disease can, as was the case in Camperdown, enter the country easily
via legal and illegal imports, or even through tourists arriving from
contaminated areas. It is vitally important that stricter measures be
introduced and implemented speedily on South Africa's borders to prevent
the spread of the disease from abroad. A further spread of the disease
could be a serious blow to our trade, and have a very adverse effect on our
economy. I hope that the Minister will give the necessary support for these
measures to be put in place.

The second problem concerns the redistribution of land in South Africa. An
acceleration of the redistribution process is essential if we are to enter
the future peacefully, and I do not think I need to elaborate on this. The
potential for conflict is great if we do not achieve results in this
sphere. However, the danger lights are flashing if the state, as in the
Lydenburg case, cannot succeed in reaching a compromise through negotiation
to solve the problems there.

By going the route of judicial expropriation emotions are unnecessarily
stirred up in the wrong direction. This creates mistrust between the
different role-players involved in the case. It not only delays the land
redistribution process, but causes a worsening of attitudes and this should
be avoided. Examples such as Zimbabwe, where the redistribution of
agricultural land was not managed properly, have a great influence on the
economy. South Africa cannot afford this. In this case we will have to
achieve results quickly in an attempt to avoid the local problems.]

Mr M A MAPHALALA: Chairperson and hon President, at its 50th conference in
Mafikeng in 1997, the ANC resolved that transformation should be carried
through with minimum interruption of our ability to continue to administer
to the needs of all our citizens. The state should make institutional
interventions that bring about development and infrastructural
transformation in society.

For the first time in the history of South Africa, we have a state and a
Government that plan the economic development and growth path with the
interest of the poor people as the centre of such plans, as opposed to what
was happening in all the regimes prior to 1994. I think that the state and
the Government are making all the necessary interventions that will bring
about developments in the rural communities, which was the directive from
the conference.

In the June 1999 elections the people of South Africa said: ``ANC, you are
on the right track, but you are moving at a slow pace. We want speedy
change.'' I believe this is what this Government is doing - speeding up
change.

NgoMsombuluko mhla ka-12 Mashi 2001 nganginomhlangano eMsinga noMnyango
wezeziMbiwa naMandla kanye nabakwa-Eskom. Lo mnyango wawulethe uhlelo
lokufaka ugesi. Lo gesi uzofakwa endaweni lapho kukhona khona omama
abaneminyaka engaphezu kweminyaka engama-90. Bathi labo mama: Asikaze
siyazi into okuthiwa ugesi kule ndawo. Sigugile namhlanje sibe sigugele
emahlathini siyotheza izinkuni futhi sigugele emifuleni siyokha amanzi.
Namhlanje uHulumeni usilethele ugesi ezindaweni zasemakhaya. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[On Monday 12 March 2001, the Department of Minerals and Energy, Eskom and
I held a meeting in Msinga. This department was presenting a plan for
supplying electricity. Electricity will be supplied in areas in which women
over 90 years of age live. These women said they had never had electricity
in this area before. They said: ``Today we are old and we have spent all
our lives cutting wood in the forest and fetching water in the river. Today
the Government is giving us electricity in the rural areas.'' [Applause.]]

That is speeding up change. That is bringing a better life for all our
citizens. Without focus and concrete programmes aimed at rural development,
as well as poverty alleviation plans, the directive given by the conference
in 1997 will not be of any meaning to the people of our country. The
greatest need of our people these days is that of a better life. In the
rural areas, if one speaks of a better life, it is meaningless unless it
means access to usable land and resources such as finances and implements
for agricultural and farming purposes. [Applause.]

A better life will be meaningless, unless it means access to research
information for people to develop their capacity, their capabilities and
their potential. It will be meaningless, unless roads are built in the
rural areas.

Ngikhulele emakhaya, lapho ngangihamba khona ngezinyawo uma ngiya esikoleni
... [I grew up in the rural areas. I used to walk to schoolÃ¿... ]

... probably not because it was the choice of my parents that I should walk
20 kilometres to school. I had to walk, because there was no road access to
that school. Today this Government is building roads deep in the bundu,
right down the cliffs. People are able to use buses and other means of
transport to those areas. [Applause.]

A better life will mean nothing, unless it means access to health and
recreational facilities in those rural areas.

Abantwana bethu akufanele badlale ngamatshe. Abantwana bethu akufanele
bahlale emahlathini. Kufuneka kube khona izinkundla zezemidlalo ... [Our
children should not play with stones. They should not stay in the bush.
Playgrounds should be built ... ]

... and all those sorts of things. This Government makes it a central
programme to develop such resources. [Interjections.] On 9 February, the
President stated the following in his address, and he quoted from the
Millennium Declaration:


  We will spare no effort to free our men, women and children from the
  abject and dehumanising condition of extreme poverty to which more than a
  million of them are subjected. We are committed to making the right to
  development a reality for everyone, and freeing the entire human race
  from want.

Comrade President went on to say:


  We are resolved, therefore, to create an environment conducive to
  developing and eliminating poverty.

This is what is happening. Those are not empty words. We see them in
reality. We see them in practice. We very clearly see the commitment to
bring about a better life for our people in the country. Only the ANC-led
alliance is committed to this kind of development in the country.
[Interjections.] Before this we have never seen this kind of programme
developed by a government. It is a programme that has the interest of
people at heart and as its central driving force.
Indeed, we are a nation at work. We are steadily moving away from the
painful past, a past where, if at all the government were to have a budget
that had something to do with the rural communities, it would have been for
the forced removal of our people from areas where they were.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] We are moving away from that past that had a
government that regarded people as instruments for generating profit, and
that used the rural areas as dumping areas for the unemployed.

We are moving into a society in which our people in the rural areas have
the right to vote for the first time in the history of this country. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Before I recognise the
next speaker, I wish to make a ruling on the point of order taken by the
hon Gogotya. I have said that I would like to look at the Hansard, but
having reflected on the matter, I am now in a position to give you a
ruling.

The hon Gogotya raised a point of order regarding a statement by the hon C
W Eglin. At issue was whether the hon Eglin could hold that President Mbeki
was condoning certain acts of President Mugabe of Zimbabwe. Freedom of
speech, as practised in Parliament, is only constrained to the extent that
it does not reflect on the integrity of another member or, for that matter,
on the President - when the President is in the House.

If the hon member Colin Eglin had used the word ``conniving'' it would
indeed have reflected on the integrity of the President. The word
``condoning'', however, is a perspective that one side may have. It is
counterbalanced by the other side, equating the same activity with
diplomatic engagement. That one side can put a negative construction to a
political act and another side a positive construction, is legitimate in
parliamentary politics.

Individual members may disagree on how they see South Africa dealing with
problems in Zimbabwe. The hon Eglin, therefore, may not be precluded, in
terms of our Rules, from using the word ``condoning''.

Mr C W EGLIN: Mr Chairperson, I would like to address you on that. I think
that all the hon members heard me. I said that certain things were
happening in Angola and Congo ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, can you not hear?
Order! Hon member, could you please speak into the microphone so that the
members can hear.

Mr C W EGLIN: Mr Chairperson, I said that there were certain problems,
first of all in Angola, and then that there were problems in Congo and also
that it was the presidentially condoned rule of law in Zimbabwe. I never
mentioned the President. He was sitting here. I did not refer to the
President. I was talking about what was happening in each of those three
countries. That had no reference, whatsoever, to President Mbeki.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you. I think that that clears
the matter up further.

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chairperson, the greatest challenge that this country is
facing today is to alleviate poverty and provide adequate safety nets for
the poorest of the poor.

Human dignity demands that all people should have the means to meet their
basic needs of food, clothing, housing and health care. Every child must
have access to education and every adult must have the opportunity to
participate fully in society and pursue goals of personal development.

Everybody in this House agrees with these ideals in principle. In the
turmoil of our daily political and economic reality, however, these ideals
seem to get lost. The Convention on the Rights of the Child says, in clause
24 (1) and (2), that every child has the right to benefit from social
security, including social insurance. The Constitution of South Africa
says, in section 27 (1)(c), that everyone has the right to have access to
social security and where appropriate, social assistance. Section 28 (1)(c)
says specifically that children have the right to shelter, basic health
care services and nutrition.

Just the other year, 1994, the ANC screamed at every street corner, ``We
will provide houses, jobs, free education and free basic health care''.
[Interjections.] Instead, most of these people became poorer. Retrenchments
and forced retirement packages became the order of the day. Children
stopped being children at the age of seven. Children who are seven to 18
years fall through the safety net of the state and must now survive on
fresh air. [Interjections.]

Consequently, I can safely say that, with no provision for 70% of poor
children, this Government forces these children to the streets to become
street children. They are forced to steal, thus the large number of
juveniles in the prisons. Children are forced to head households because of
the traumatic results of Aids and they are also forced to become child sex
workers and are exposed to child labour and abuse. It is true. Did the
Minister of Finance bother to mention any of these children in his Budget
Speech? No, he did not.

Die kinders van arm huisgesinne en wie se ouers min of geen opvoeding het
nie, spandeer steeds agt jaar en minder op skool. Hulle word blootgestel
aan die arbeidsmark as ongeskoolde en ongekwalifiseerde arbeiders. Ons het
verskillende kategorieÃ« van kinders wat daar buite skree om hulp.

Verder het die Minister van Finansies met groot bravade aangekondig dat die
pensioentrekkers 'n verhoging van R30 per maand kry. Wat is die werklike
inpak van daardie R30 op hulle daaglikse lewe? Ons moet ook in gedagte hou
dat pensioentrekkers blootgestel is aan verwaarlosing, mishandeling en
diefstal. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Children from poor families whose parents have little or no education are
already spending eight years and less at school. They are exposed to the
labour market as unskilled and unqualified labourers. We have various
categories of children out there who are crying out for help.

The Minister of Finance further announced with great bravado that
pensioners would be receiving an increase of R30 per month. What is the
real impact of that R30 on their daily lives? We must also keep in mind
that pensioners are exposed to neglect, abuse and theft.]

The Minister announced in his Budget Speech that grants would be inflation-
linked over the medium term. However, the allocation to social development
over the medium term only indicates an increase of 0.8% annual average
growth. It does not adequately take into account the inflation-linked
increases since grants constitute 90% of the social development budget.
Given that the take-up rates were increased over the medium term, the 0.8%
increase remains insufficient. The Democratic Alliance says that this
Government must find a way of giving hope to those people of this country
who no longer have any hope.

In order to alleviate poverty, we would first have to revisit and amend our
ways in trade policies to make this country investor friendly. We must
reduce crime. We must provide free education, and a really free education.
We must treat our children of 7 to 18 years as dependants of the state
where it is applicable. We must ensure capacity-building and sufficient
training for civil servants, to enable them to cope with the transformation
in all the departments. We must ensure proper management and commitment at
the most senior levels, including the Ministries. We must get rid of
obstacles in the departments.

In conclusion, this Government must ensure that all available state support
reaches the poorest of the poor at grassroots level. We must ensure
successful delivery. We must improve our delivery mechanisms.

Miskien is 'n daadwerklike transformasie van die Kabinet die antwoord vir
die land se probleme. [Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.] [Maybe the actual
transformation of Cabinet is the answer to the country's problems. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr S K LOUW: Mnr die Voorsitter, die enigste opmerking wat ek kan maak
betreffende die vorige spreker is, die navorsing wat aan haar gegee is, van
watter aard ookal, is ernstig misleidend. [Mr Chairman, the only remark
that I can make in respect of the previous speaker is that the research
that she has been given, of whatever nature it may be, is seriously
misleading.]

It is indeed an honour to participate in this Appropriation debate. I have
listened to our President during the state of the nation address, and also
to the Minister during the discussion of his Vote. I can tell hon members
that there is hardly any opening for criticism. The Minister has certainly
earned himself the title of the people's Minister during his Budget Speech.
Vast numbers of South Africans are enthusiastically welcoming the Budget.
They have been waiting for a sign of economic relief. And that is precisely
what this Budget does!
We are turning our backs on the ugly past of colonialism, apartheid,
hunger, disease and poverty. We are turning our backs on underdevelopment
and economic dependency. We are constantly reminded about our past, where
we come from and the direction in which we are going. We need to remind
ourselves that our mandate is to ensure a better life for all. Therefore,
it is necessary for us convincingly to conquer poverty, in order to make
real the dream of the African Renaissance, and to position ourselves in the
African century.

We must bear in mind that the Minister's efforts, approach and strong
vision in addressing social needs, which are accompanied by strong social
programmes and macroeconomic discipline, have maintained the high and
strong vision that our country needs, and that is to uplift us from the
ashes of apartheid's past. Now is the time to build on the foundation laid
by our heroes and heroines, those great revolutionaries who conquered
apartheid oppression. Poverty is a priority that needs to be tackled and I
want to commend the Minister for that.

Wat opvallend was gedurende die President se toespraak, sowel as die
Minister se begrotingsrede, is dat die klem herhaaldelik geval het op die
ontwikkeling van die plattelandse gebiede en werkverskaffing in daardie
gebiede. Die programme om daaraan te voldoen, is duidelik met die nodige
prioriteite uiteengesit. Die Minister het ongetwyfeld die opposisie met hul
tong in die kies gevang.

Een stukkie advies wat ek aan die opposisie kan gee, is dat hulle moet
wakker skrik en saam met die stroom beweeg. Hulle moet ophou om met
moedswillige politiekery vorendag te kom en vinnig hulle oogklappe afhaal.
Ons land is besig om sy posisie in die globale ekonomiese mark in te neem,
en die begroting van die Minister pas soos 'n legkaart inmekaar.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[What was obvious during the President's address, as well as the Minister's
Budget Speech, was that emphasis was repeatedly placed on the development
of the rural areas and the provision of jobs in those areas. The programmes
to give effect to this have clearly been expounded with the necessary
priorities. The Minister undoubtedly caught the opposition tongue in cheek.

One piece of advice that I can give the opposition is that they should wake
up and go with the flow. They should stop their wilful politicking and take
their blinkers off quickly. Our country is taking its place in the global
economic market, and the budget of the Minister is like the interlocking
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.]

There has been an overwhelming outcry from communities for grid
electrification which, from the perspective of consumers, is cheaper and
more versatile, and also allows a range of appliances to be used. More
extensive grid electrification would revolutionise domestic and economic
activities in some areas. Some already have it.

Many people in rural areas can afford electricity, but do not have access
to it. These include many existing and potential small and micro-
entrepreneurs. There is also a bigger group that cannot afford electricity
at current prices, even if electricity were to be provided. These groups
meet their energy needs by using a combination of different energy sources
such as firewood candles and paraffin.

Paraffin is an important energy source for low-income households. I want to
applaud the Minister for alleviating the plight of those poor people. The
zero rating of paraffin certainly saves people many rands. Millions of our
brothers and sisters are still using paraffin. There are also other
independent power providers who have shown an interest in entering the
electricity distribution market, and rural areas are going to benefit from
the natural gas pipeline from Mozambique.

One needs to look at the massive spin-offs of such activities, which will
contribute to the culture of entrepreneurship. Another project which is in
the pipeline is the new form of nuclear energy that will certainly be a
massive income generator for our country. And to crown it all, it is very
cheap and affordable. Poor people will definitely benefit from it.

Allow me to use this opportunity to highlight one of the historic shifts
that has taken place in our political era. The mineral development Bill
that will be debated later this year will certainly be one of the most
important economic Bills in this House. It will ensure a radical shift from
the past, and will certainly unlock national wealth and create new jobs and
prosperity. No longer will we be observers of mining activities, but
creators of wealth, co-owners and co-employers. We shall be able to
stimulate the exploitation of untapped resources of mineral wealth.

Allow me to quote from a scroll in my office:


  When the race is run, all humanity and ourselves will acknowledge the
  fact that we only succeeded because we believe in our own dreams. Every
  year the rains will fall to bless our efforts; that too is a dream. But
  because it is our dream, we are able to demand of our ancestorsÃ¿ ...
  Pula, nala. Ke a go leboga. [Legofi.] [Prosperity. I thank you.
  [Applause.]]

Mr M F CASSIM: Chairperson, colleagues, yesterday when the President was
responding at question time, he called on us as members of Parliament to be
directly involved in the mobilisation of the South African society. This
afternoon the hon Viljoen, when he was making his swan song address, once
again called on South Africans to remember what was achieved during the
multiparty conference, and to find common purpose and common ground.

My colleagues, the hon Lucas and hon Bekker, who spoke this afternoon, were
able to do something from the side of the opposition which is really
unusual. [Interjections.] They think that we are not an opposition, but I
would like to engage them someday in a very detailed discussion of the new
politics and political signs that are evolving in South Africa. It is
important for them to understand that adversarial politics is not the only
line of opposition in politics. The ability to be able to sit on the
opposition side and be able to openly admit that one agrees, is a moral
stance. It is not necessary for the opposition to always oppose everything
that is being said and done.

The hon Feinstein, in a very fine speech indeed, indicated to us this
afternoon the need to talk this country up.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: [Inaudible.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Yes, I know. If one were to ask that particular individual
what his contribution was in terms of rolling up his sleeves and working
for the rural, common and ordinary poor people, there would be snide
remarks. He finds himself in a very privileged position and has a good
education. He has a haughty attitude that he has brought from the past. It
is irrelevant now, but he continues to show this haughty attitude.
[Applause.]
I would like to encourage him to come forward in the spirit of the new
South Africa and participate. There are at least 39 million people in this
country who are waiting for a new transformation that will see the creation
of job opportunities. The hon Feinstein made the point this afternoon that
we needed to talk this country up. Yesterday the hon President also invited
members of Parliament not merely to resort to words, but to translate these
words into action. The time has come for us to roll up our sleeves and
build our country together.

It is remarkable that in seven years we have come this far. We could go so
much further if we are to begin to show our common loyalty, dedication and
commitment to South Africa. How can we do this? The IFP believes that this
Parliament should go back into workshops to determine how we can deal with
issues such as crime and the disproportional education that is still being
dished out in South Africa. How can we deal with the lack of skills in the
IT sector, so that we can add value to the good Budget that is already in
place. We should build this country block by block.

We need not only the ability to stand and enjoy the privilege of speaking
in Parliament, but to have the greater right of knowing that we are
directly involved in the building of this country. That is the challenge
which we should face. Therefore, I am telling this House and the ANC in
particular, to take up what was offered yesterday by the President when he
called on us as members of this Parliament to actually begin mobilising the
people. We can mobilise our people to ensure that crime is tackled, better
skills become available and we do not only engage in negative sentiment.

The right to speak is one thing, but the right to listen and afford the
next person or party an opportunity to be heard is an equally compelling
right. If one says that one is democratic, then one should show what that
means more than anyone else. One should be the first one to say what
democracy is. But to be constantly hectoring, lecturing and pointing out
faults without saying that we should be first in the line is not right.
This my challenge to the House: we should be first in the line to serve our
rural communities, the people who need uplifting, because the Minister has
given this Parliament and country a platform from which we can go forward.

In all the years of NP rule, they were not able to produce one budget that
was as good as the one he has produced. That is a telling point.
[Applause.] Therefore, instead of harping on the criticism, they should
recognise that we are fortunate in this country to have someone here of the
ilk of Trevor Manuel who has given us the basis. Now, having done that, it
is not only what he and the President can do, but what we can do.
Therefore, we are asking for the opportunity to be given a role, to do much
more than talking, to roll up our sleeves, ensuring that we deliver to
South Africa. We have here, within our country, people who are committed by
goodwill and dedication to achieve the greater good for South Africa.
[Applause.]

Ms G L MAHLANGU: Mr Chairperson, hon President, colleagues, ladies and
gentlemen, I am a proud African woman born and bred in rural South Africa.
Like most rural women, I was trained and prepared to spend long hours
preparing food for my family as a daughter and later as a wife and mother.
When one's immediate aim is to find resources to sustain one's family, it
is very easy to miss the connection with the environment. One has to know
where to get water and firewood for survival.

The Magaliesburg mountains, which are the backdrop of the area where I grew
up, renowned for their scenic beauty, have held a different meaning in my
life, dictated by prevailing realities in our country at that point in
time. The Pilanesberg National Park had an equally different meaning to me
and other Africans at the time when this country was held hostage by
overplayed racial differences. I am mentioning this so that members
understand the constant beam on my face and that of my colleagues as we
deal with business discharged to us by this House.

As the President said in his state of the nation address: ``We are a
country united in action for change.'' So often the current and potential
role that the environment can play in healing our land is underestimated.
Our forefathers usually held meetings under a tree, which I am sure played
a role in neutralising tempers and providing shade from the harsh African
sun. The green environment has, for centuries, had a special place in our
hearts as Africans for cultural and customary practices. This is what the
previous governments deliberately neglected - in fact, sought to destroy.

I am not in any way trying to polarise races and hit back on the gains that
we have made in uniting the people of our country. We have made strides as
a country towards reconciliation. In his state of the nation address,
President Mbeki articulated well the current manner in which the South
Africans perceive themselves. He stated:


  We share a common destiny from which none of us can escape because,
  together, we are human ...

What I am saying is that the environment, which has a special role to play
in our lives, can and will be a major contributor in strengthening the bond
or common destiny that we share as South Africans.

In acknowledging the significance of the role that the environment can play
in nation-building, we equally have to acknowledge the inherent need to
address the past injustices that were perpetrated under the guise of
environmental conservation. Such injustices were carried out in the form of
forcibly fencing people out of their natural resource base in an attempt to
establish nature reserves. Those who were forcibly removed or excluded from
their resource base remain to be reunited with it. We are working closer
with departments that are dealing with issues of land restitution and
towards full integration of the African majority to play a meaningful and
active role in the South African economy.

The challenges facing all governments are, firstly, the establishment and
management of democracies, and secondly, building and managing the economy
towards prosperity and poverty reduction and its final elimination. In as
far as these two are concerned, we have done extremely well as a country.
In South Africa, the challenge is greater, because of the apartheid legacy
and challenges of transition towards a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and
prosperous country. The task is even more difficult, given the continued
resistance against transformation by backward sections represented by the
DP and the New NP.

The South African miracle, launched in 1994, has been further enhanced by
the Government in its management of both our democracy and the economy. The
present can only be growth-oriented, because of these successes. We are now
able to talk sensible macroeconomics in the area of tourism and so on. We
are confident of the future in this regard, given the world economic trends
indicating that super service industries like telecommunications,
information technology and tourism are on the rise.

This Budget and the President's state of the nation address create a
conducive national, social and political framework for an effective
engagement with these global trends. Increased spending on infrastructure,
flexible labour markets and continued tax reform, in the context of
macroeconomic stability and good governance, could only make our country
even more attractive to tourists and foreign direct investors. Minister
Manuel's latest Budget Speech is a tool that seeks to unlock the potential
of our country, especially in spheres aimed at emancipating the
marginalised.

We enter this century, which African people declared a century in which
Africa would reclaim the centre stage, from where she was pushed by the
merciless plunder of her resources by those who sought to fragment and
colonise her. With each day that passes Africa takes a step forward in
reclaiming her rightful place in our international society. President Mbeki
mentioned in his state of the nation address, and I quote:


  Together, we must turn into reality a new internationalism that does not
  permit of the coexistence, within human society, of opulence and grinding
  poverty, of thriving modernity and a dehumanising underdevelopment.

We welcome the well-thought plan of the Millennium African Recovery
Programme with its challenges, and commit our utmost energies in realising
the African dream. We will continue to fight with every ounce of our
energies in giving our people the better life that they so much deserve.
This collective desire and effort to take our country and continent to
higher levels of prosperity occupies the heart of all our peoples.

As a country, we have made ourselves available to provide a gateway for
goodwill ventures to the rest of our continent. I mention goodwill with the
thought of what our shores were used for in the past. We will not allow
exploitation of this country and the continent anymore.

Through this Budget, we will be able, amongst other things, to enable the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to package and offer the
rest of the world the wonder that lies waiting in South Africa. I am proud
to be South African, and even prouder to be an African.

In September of next year our country will be hosting the UN Earth Summit.
We are hosting this summit ten years after crucial and groundbreaking
decisions were taken in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.

In my conclusion, I would like to reiterate what President Mbeki said:


  Ahead of us is a new century and millennium. We march into the new era of
  the African Century as Africans who have made the determination that this
  century will be a hundred years in which we cease to be victims of our
  circumstances but become victors.

I am honoured to work with those who are charged with the task of steering
South Africa away from its painful past. [Applause.]

Debate suspended.

The House adjourned at 18:18.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and to
         the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         22 - Land Affairs and the Registration of Deeds Trading Account
         for 1999-2000 [RP 131-2000].
     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts, Culture, Science and Technology and to the Select Committee
         on Education and Recreation:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Board of Control of the
         Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal for 1999-2000.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Select Committee on Finance:


         (a)     Report of the Registrar of Short-Term Insurance for 1999-
              2000.


         (b)     Report of the Registrar of Long-Term Insurance for 1999-
              2000.


     (4)    The following paper, submitted to Parliament on 8 March 2001 in
         terms of section 92(2) of the Promotion of Access to Information
         Act, 2000 is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
         Constitutional Development and to the Select Committee on Security
         and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


         Regulations in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information
         Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security:


     Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate in compliance with the
     Domestic Violence Act, 1998 for the period June to December 2000,
     submitted to Parliament in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic
     Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).


     To be referred to the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security,
     Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs and to the
     Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and
     Status of Women.

