---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 12 June 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2001-06-12
---

TUESDAY, 12 JUNE 2001
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS see col - 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Judging from the fact that the usher
announced ``Madam Speaker'', the staff are clearly in very urgent need of
serious self-motivation and reflection, since they are cooing me out of my
job. [Laughter.] I am not sure whether it is recent events that encourage
this approach, but I must say I got a bit of a shock. It could be a
Freudian slip.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) commends the Department of Correctional Services for their prompt
       handling of the outbreak of cholera in the Durban Central Prison;


  (2) acknowledges the fact that cholera is a stubborn communicable
       waterborne disease which is not easily controlled; and


  (3) appreciates the work done by the department with other stakeholders
       who were involved in combating this dreadful infection in the prison.

        CONGRATULATIONS TO SANDRA BOTHA ON HER ROLE IN UN CONFERENCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates Sandra Botha on being invited to deliver a paper at the
       United Nations Expert Group Meeting on the Situation of Rural Women
       in the Context of Globalisation, held in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia; and


  (2) further congratulates Sandra Botha on being elected as chairperson of
       the conference.

[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We congratulate Ms Botha and wish her
well in this responsibility.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   ALLEGATIONS AGAINST MAYOR PETER MARAIS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) notes with concern the latest allegations against Mr Peter Marais,
       the Democratic Alliance mayor of Cape Town, who is alleged to have
       presided over a vote-rigging exercise to have two prominent streets
       named after former presidents Nelson Mandela and FW de Klerk;


  (2) further notes that the ANC has brought to the attention of this
       Council a string of other allegations against Mr Marais prior to this
       one, including -


       (a)  his sexist remarks against a female colleague;


       (b)  the preferential treatment of his family members in obtaining
           accommodation in state housing complexes while they have homes
           of their own; and


       (c)  his call on people to ignore the Constitution of this country if
           it conflicts with their own views;


  (3) believes these errors of judgment place a serious question mark over
       the continued suitability and competence of Mr Marais to occupy the
       important position of mayor; and


  (4) further believes that failure of the DA to keep his despotic
       tendencies in check will lead to the inescapable conclusion that they
       condone his actions.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] There is objection. The motion therefore becomes notice of
a motion.

   SIGNING OF MALOTI-DRAKENSBERG TRANSFRONTIER CONSERVATION AREA AGREEMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) welcomes the signing of the historic Maloti-Drakensberg Transfrontier
       Conservation Area agreement between South Africa and Lesotho;


  (2) notes that this mountain range -


       (a)  is rich in biodiversity;
       (b)  has unique vegetation;
       (c)  is known as the water basin of Southern Africa; and
       (d)  has one of the world's greatest collections of rock art;


  (3) further notes that most of the people living in this area are poor;


  (4) believes that the signing of this agreement has opened a door of
       opportunity for the poverty-stricken people in the area to create job
       opportunities through tourism; and


  (5) recognises the role of the Peace Parks Foundation in facilitating the
       creation of the conservation area.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I move as an amendment:
  That the following paragraph be added after paragraph (4):


  (5) recognises the role of the Peace Parks Foundation in facilitating the
       creation of the conservation area.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is a proposed amendment to the
motion. Mrs Lubidla, do you accept that amendment, recognising the role of
the Peace Parks Foundation?

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Yes, Chairperson.

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely:


  That the Council -
  (1) welcomes the signing of the historic Maloti-Drakensberg Transfrontier
       Conservation Area agreement between South Africa and Lesotho;


  (2) notes that this mountain range -


       (a)  is rich in bio-diversity;
       (b)  has unique vegetation;
       (c) known as the water basin of Southern Africa; and
       (d) one of the world's greatest collections of rock art;


  (3) further notes that most of the people living in this area are poor;


  (4) believes that the signing of this agreement has opened a door of
       opportunity for the poverty-stricken people in the area to create job
       opportunities through tourism; and


  (5) recognises the Peace Parks Foundation in facilitating the creation of
       the conservation area.

    DEATH OF ABE WILLIAMS'S DAUGHTER AND OTHERS IN MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) met skok kennis geneem het van die motorongeluk wat verlede Vrydag
       hier in die Kaap plaasgevind het;


  (2) sy medelye uitspreek teenoor die ouers en naasbestaandes van die
       volgende jongmense wat in die ongeluk gesterf het;


         (a)     Yolandi Williams;
         (b)     Henry Africa;
         (c)     Shaun Moses;
         (d)     Gail Williams; and
         (e)     Vernora Pieterse;


  (3) veral dink aan oud-kollega mnr Abe Williams van die Wes-Kaapse
       Wetgewer en spesiale afgevaardigde na die Raad, wat verlede Vrydag
       uit die Raad geroep is om te verneem van die afsterwe van sy dogter;
       en


  (4) se gedagtes en gebede met hulle almal gaan, in die hoop dat hulle
       vertroosting sal vind by die Enigste werklike Bron daarvoor.

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with shock the motor vehicle accident which took place in Cape
       Town last Friday;


  (2) expresses its condolences to the next-of-kin of the following young
       people who died in the accident:


       (a)  Yolandi Williams;
       (b)  Henry Africa;
       (c)  Shaun Moses;
       (d)  Gail Williams; and
       (e)  Vernora Pieterse;
  (3) thinks in particular of former colleague Mr Abe Williams, member of
       the Western Cape legislature and special delegate to the Council, who
       was called from the Council last Friday to learn of the death of his
       daughter; and


  (4) extends its thoughts and prayers to all of them, in the hope that
       they will find comfort in the Only true Source thereof.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                 RETRACTION OF STATEMENT BY NOSEWEEK EDITOR

                             (Draft Resolution)

Prince B Z ZULU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with concern the recent report in the news about the Noseweek
       editor, Mr Welz, who had to retract the lies he reported about the
       meeting between the NA Chief Whip and the organs of state entrusted
       with the duty of investigating the arms deal;


  (2) believes that such lies would potentially destroy the image of our
       legitimate organs of state;


  (3) further believes that this withdrawal and the incident in KwaZulu-
       Natal confirms what we have always been saying about certain
       individuals in the media who are intent on destabilising the
       Government's efforts towards  reconciliation and nation-building; and


  (4) calls upon those politicians who made press statements on the issue
       and in support of Mr Welz also to withdraw their statements.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] There is an objection. The motion therefore becomes notice
of a motion.

  INTERVENTION OF PRESIDENT AND MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY IN IMPASSE
                    SURROUNDING MINERALS DEVELOPMENT BILL
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D M KGWARE: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) calls upon its members to show appreciation for and applaud the
       successful interventions by the President and the Minister of
       Minerals and Energy in the impasse over the Minerals Development Bill
       since last year, November 2000;


  (2) believes that through ongoing negotiations with all relevant
       stakeholders this country will achieve its transformation objectives;


  (3) believes that the Government's intervention was a step in the same
       direction and an indication of how best it would deal with
       contentious issues of this country; and


  (4) calls upon all those South Africans who are still uncertain about the
       future of this country to join our Government in its quest to unite
       all South Africans for change.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

         PRIORITY DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS LAUNCHED IN VARIOUS PROVINCES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G A LUCAS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that President Thabo Mbeki identified a number of provinces in
       this state-of-the-nation address in February that would be
       prioritised for development;


  (2) further notes that since then the Government has -


       (a)  launched the R1,5 billion Alexandra Renewal Project in Gauteng
           which will improve sanitation, schools, roads and clinics, will
           involve the building of 56 000 more houses in the area and will
           generally provide an environment where the people of Alex can
           find jobs and look after their families;
       (b)  set aside R18 million for the establishment of water projects in
           the Bushbuckridge area in the Northern Province as part of the
           Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Strategy which is
           scheduled to start in the province at the beginning of July
           2001; and


       (c)  visited Sekhukhune, which borders Mpumalanga and the Northern
           Province, to assess the readiness of municipalities in the
           district to receive funds for the Integrated Sustainable Rural
           Development Strategy which is due to start within the next two
           months;


  (3) acknowledges the important contribution these projects will make in
       promoting economic development, job creation, social development and
       capacity-building in those provinces; and


  (4) believes that these projects once again confirm the commitment of the
       Government to speed up the delivery of services and to eradicate
       poverty.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    REDUCTION IN NUMBER OF PRISON ESCAPES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the Department of Correctional Services has managed to
       decrease the number of prison escapes by 46%;


  (2) further notes that the number of prisoners who escaped from custody
       were 1 244 in 1996, 989 in 1997, 498 in 1998, 459 in 1999 and 250 in
       2000; and


  (3) highly applauds the security enforcement implemented to bring down
       the number of prison escapes.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
     INVESTIGATION BY SOUTH AFRICAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION INTO LIVING
                         CONDITIONS OF FARM WORKERS

                             (Draft Resolution)
Chief M L   MOKOENA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that since 1994 the South African Government has initiated a
       number of legislative and other interventions to improve the living
       conditions of farm workers;


  (2) also notes that these included the establishment of the Land Claims
       Court, the extension of security of tenure to farm workers, the
       prevention of unlawful eviction of farm workers and the provision of
       agricultural land to farm workers;


  (3) expresses its concern that, despite these interventions, farm workers
       are still subjected to brutality at the hands of their employers,
       shocking employment and living conditions, child labour and other
       violations of their basic human rights;
  (4) believes that farm workers are entitled to the same enjoyment of
       their basic human rights as all other sectors of our society; and


  (5) therefore welcomes the decision by the South African Human Rights
       Commission to launch an investigation into the living conditions of
       farm workers.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I move as an amendment:


  That, in paragraph (3), before ``their employers'', be inserted ``a small
  minority of''. [Interjections.]

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, unfortunately I do not accept that
proposal.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! The amendment has not been accepted.

Amendment negatived.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I think a reasonable amendment
would be:


  That, in paragraph (3), before ``their employers'', be inserted ``some
  of''.

We do not want to generalise.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Matthee, it has been proposed that
your amendment be amended further, not to ``small minority'' but to ``some
of''. Could you think of that while I hear Mrs Versfeld?

Mrs A M VERSFELD: Chairperson, I move as a further amendment:


  That, where the motion says ``farmworkers'', ``and people in the fishing
  industry'' be included.

[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mrs Versfeld, I am not sure that that
particular amendment falls within the spirit of the motion as set out. Mr
Matthee?
Mr P A MATTHEE: Yes, I agree with the amendment, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Mokoena, do you accept that
amendment?

Chief M L MOKOENA: Yes, Chairperson.

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely:


  That the Council -


     (1)    notes that since 1994 the South African Government has initiated
         a number of legislative and other interventions to improve the
         living conditions of farm-workers;


     (2)    also notes that these included the establishment of the Land
         Claims Court, the extension of security of tenure to farm workers,
         the prevention of unlawful eviction of farm workers and the
         provision of agricultural land to farm workers;


     (3)    expresses its concern that, despite these interventions, farm
         workers are still subjected to brutality at the hands of their
         employers, shocking employment and living conditions, child labour
         and other violations of their basic human rights;


     (4)    believes that farm workers are entitled to the same enjoyment of
         their basic human rights as all other sectors of our society; and


     (5)    therefore welcomes the decision by the South African Human
         Rights Commission to launch an investigation into the living
         conditions of farm workers.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 15 - Health:

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! It is a great pleasure to welcome the
Minister of Health, Dr Tshabalala-Msimang. I understand a number of
journalists in the United Kingdom are wondering why you are not there. I
wish we could tell them you are in the National Council of Provinces.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I shall do so. There is before hon
members the national health budget amounting to R6,61 billion for their
consideration. Given the special character of this House, I expect that we
will not view this budget in isolation but we will assess how it interacts
with and adds value to the provincial health budgets, which exceed R28
billion in total.

About 90% of the national health budget is directly allocated to provinces
in the form of conditional grants to run central hospitals for high-level
care, to fund the training of health professionals, to develop HIV/Aids and
STD programmes, to develop poverty relief and nutrition programmes, to
build tertiary services outside central hospitals, to develop health
systems management and to undertake capital projects.

In considering this budget we need to ask whether these conditional grants
are contributing to our goals for health system development and
transformation. Are we increasing access to health care for the people of
our country? Are we increasing their chances of attaining an optimal state
of health? Are we building social justice by promoting equity in our
services? Are we exercising good stewardship, which includes preserving and
maintaining the assets that we have? Are we gearing up for the large
additional burden of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases like
HIV/Aids, tuberculosis and malaria, and other infectious diseases?

I believe that we can confidently claim we are making steady progress
towards fulfilling most of these goals. Our clearest gains have been in the
areas of expanding access to basic health services and in introducing
preventive programmes that have been tried and tested and proven effective
in other countries.

In addition, in most provinces long-standing patterns of overexpenditure on
budgets have been reversed. This is certainly evidence of improved
financial management at all levels in the provincial health services.
However, against this progressive trend there are a couple of features that
contradict our transformation agenda. The one is the familiar issue of
quality of care in our health services, a matter that I addressed at length
in the National Assembly last week.

We are striving to make the Patients' Rights Charter a living reality in
our services, but we are still far from reaching this. I believe we should
not be deterred by this factor. The problems that undermine quality of care
are complex and are not amenable to instant solutions. But we also need to
recognise that we will not succeed unless we provide powerful leadership to
quality initiatives and infuse a measure of discipline that has been sadly
lacking in recent times.

The other matter of concern is the disturbing retreat from our goal of
establishing equity across provinces. We made significant gains between
1994 and 1997 in narrowing the gap in per capita health spending between
urban and rural provinces, but this progress has not been sustained in
recent years. With the introduction of fiscal federalism, competing
provincial priorities have eroded gains in health spending, particularly in
the less developed provinces, and equity has suffered in the process. I
want to flag this trend in this Chamber and appeal to the members of this
Council to consider its implications in terms of addressing the basic needs
of our most disadvantaged people and breaking the cycle of poverty.

The proportion of the national health allocation that is retained for the
national department's own work is small, but it inevitably has a wide
impact. In essence it is spent on drafting laws and policies, setting norms
and standards and undertaking research and surveillance. New policies and
programmes depend largely on provincial resources for their implementation.
Alignment between the two spheres of government is therefore critical for
effective delivery. It is important to note that our intergovernmental
structure, the health Minmec, plays a central role in achieving this
alignment.

The Minmec carefully scrutinises national health plans and subjects them to
reality checks so that they take account of resource constraints. This
process allows various elements of the health system to move largely in
unison, thereby giving expression to our basic constitutional character as
a unitary state. At the same time the Minmec also recognises that provinces
face different conditions and the implementation strategies may vary.

The concurrent exercise of powers by different spheres of government would
be unworkable without a clear sense of priorities and shared direction
among the leadership. I used the opportunity of my budget speech in the
National Assembly last week to outline some of these priorities and would
like to continue the process this afternoon, focusing on different areas of
intervention. Unfortunately, time does not allow for a comprehensive review
and I hope members will read my remarks in the National Assembly in
conjunction with today's comments.

This afternoon I would like to focus on developing the district health
system, human resource planning, gearing the health system to cope with
emerging and re-emerging communicable diseases, namely HIV/Aids, TB and
Malaria, emergency medical services, and hospital revitalisation, including
quality of care.

Firstly, let us look at developing the district health system. There is a
firm view held across the public health system that primary health care
services should be administered and controlled at a local level. Partly
this has to do with ensuring that communities can engage the authorities
directly about their service needs, but it also relates to the fact that
health is an intersectoral endeavour and co-operation among these various
sectors works best when it is focused. The division of local health
districts provides precisely such a focus and creates the conditions for
good co-ordination among role-players.

When the restructuring of local government took place last year, health
district boundaries were redrawn to coincide with municipal boundaries.
Soon after this the Minmec took a policy decision that primary health care
services should be delivered by local government wherever this option is
viable and acceptable to both the province and the municipality in
question. I would like to emphasise that the shift of primary health care
services to local authorities will be an incremental process. In each
locality the shift will only take place if and when both the province and
the local authority agree to it, and if and when the municipality is
capable of maintaining services at the required standard.

A service agreement between the province and the municipality will spell
out the terms of transfer of primary health care services. The agreement
will specify the services to be delivered by the municipality and it will
set out the financial, human and other resources to be contributed by the
province.

We welcome and support the initiatives by the Minister for the Public
Service and Administration to incorporate local government personnel into
the Public Service. This would certainly facilitate the personnel transfers
that are critical for the building of our new health districts. It goes
without saying that labour law provisions will be observed at all times in
creating the new districts and that appropriate talks will be held with the
trade unions.

Decentralisation has many obvious benefits, but unless managed carefully,
it also has the potential to create or increase inequalities. Our strongest
defence against this danger is the very thorough work that we have done to
create a standard service package for primary health care in clinics and
community health centres. This not only specifies the range of services to
be delivered but also itemises the mixture of staff, equipment and drug
supplies needed.

The package of services represents a realistic norm for primary care
delivery. We believe that the vast majority of clinics and community health
centres will be able to achieve this norm by the year 2004. During the
course of this year we will be conducting an audit of the services and
resources in all health districts so that we actually know the size of the
gap between what exists at present and the standards we want to achieve.

I want to make a commitment to the members of this House that the transfer
of primary care services to local authorities will be an exercise in
development and not a dumping of responsibility. We are proud of the
advances that we have made in primary care - our expansion of immunisation,
improved sexually transmitted diseases management, strengthening of TB
treatment and increased access to maternity care, to name but a few
achievements. We will guard these gains jealously throughout the process of
restructuring.

Obviously, as local councils become major role-players in the public health
sector, it becomes necessary to create structures to give effect to co-
operative government between provinces and local authorities. These
provincial health authorities would play a similar role to the one
currently played by Health Minmec.

The national health Bill will be tabled later this year and will provide a
firm basis for the division of responsibility among spheres of government
and for the consultative process that will ensure that all elements combine
to form a single national health system.

Turning to our second focus area of human resources, I would like to say
that there is more than a little truth in the commonly held view that there
is a shortage of health personnel in the public sector, that the rural
areas are worse off and that the brain drain is hurting public health care.
But, of course, the picture is a lot more complex than this, and I can only
give hon members a flavour of the issues relating to the recruitment,
redistribution and retention of personnel.

Firstly, regarding recruitment and the related matter of training, at the
time of last year's Budget Vote, the department had just produced a major
strategy document entitled Human Resources for Health. This strategy spans
the private and public health sectors. It examines future demands for
various health professions and sets training targets in accordance with
this demand. The report concludes that there is no overall need to produce
a great number of doctors, dentists and pharmacists, but that there is a
need to create increased training opportunities for clinical psychologists
and mid-level workers, especially enrolled nurses who do a two-year course.
It identifies a need to redefine the scope of practice of various
professions to meet the requirements of primary health care, and sets out
in great detail the nature of changes that are required. It asserts the
need to promote representivity amongst students and teaching staff in
health disciplines and proposes changes to admission criteria at
universities and colleges.

Two further human resource audits have been undertaken during the past
year. One was an audit of primary health care personnel to determine where
we stand in terms of our ability to implement the primary care package. The
data is currently being analysed.

The other audit focused on postgraduate medical training. It uncovered the
fact that we are overproducing certain kinds of specialists and
underproducing others. Underproduction is especially critical in the
disciplines of forensic pathology and public health.

The recent cholera epidemic emphasised just how serious our shortage of
public health specialists is. In a country where cutting-edge heart surgery
is performed, we were forced to import WHO experts from abroad to advise us
on the management of the cholera outbreak.

The evidence on recruitment and training points to one simple fact -
Government and the institutions that train our health professionals are
badly out of step. Few university medical faculties can show real results
in terms of the diversity of their student bodies. A minority of clinical
departments in medical schools have embraced the goals of health sector
transformation. I believe that the situation demands urgent remedial
action.

Our medical schools represent a considerable public investment and their
potential to contribute to the development of our country is enormous. But
we will not reap this benefit if we do not engage each other fully and
honestly. I am therefore inviting the relevant university administrations
to get together with government, that is, with the Departments of Education
and Health, so that we can jointly hammer out an accord on the
transformation of training in health sciences. I believe that we should
commit ourselves to achieving this accord before the end of this year.

As the Human Resources for Health report suggests, the so-called shortage
of health professionals could often be more accurately described as an
extremely uneven distribution of health professionals.

Our provincial health departments vary in the extent to which they
experience serious shortages of health professionals. Provinces that are
mainly rural are hit by these shortages in almost all professional
categories while the more urbanised provinces only experience problems in
filling posts in a few occupations where the private sector has greater
pulling power.
A compelling need to introduce doctors and other professionals into distant
dispossessed communities has driven our community service programmes as
well as various country-to-country agreements to opt for the deployment of
foreign doctors.

In the Northern Cape, for instance, there were only 20 full-time doctors in
the province in 1994. As a result of community service and the employment
of Cuban doctors, the number of full-time doctors employed in 2000 was 111
- a fivefold increase. In the Eastern Cape, community service has put
pharmacists into hospitals that have been without a single pharmacist for
some years.

Critics of community service refer to it disparagingly as a stopgap
measure, with low retention of professionals beyond the compulsory year.
For instance, in the Northern Province last year, just 20 out of 137
community service doctors stayed on after completing community service. The
chances are that far fewer than 20 South African trained doctors would have
been recruited to the Northern Province without introducing them through
community service. And, although the yearly turnover is not ideal, I have
no doubt that any patient in pain and distress would rather have a
``stopgap'' doctor than no doctor at all.

Perhaps surprisingly, a recent feature article in the Afrikaans Sunday
paper Rapport portrayed the community service initiative in a really
positive light. The young professionals who were interviewed confirmed that
being sent from the world of plenty and privilege to serve in an
environment of need and destitution is a life-altering experience. It is an
experience that they will carry with them forever, and that will continue
to influence our professional practice.

I would like to pay tribute to the young doctors, dentists, pharmacists and
allied health professionals who have performed their community service with
commitment, often in conditions that are far from easy. For me, if we talk
of patriotism, this is the genuine article - a real contribution of service
to our country at a critical time in our history. [Applause.]

Finally, in the area of human resource planning, there is the challenge of
retaining skilled professionals in the public health sector and, indeed, in
South Africa. When it comes to the foreign brain drain, we recognise that
higher salaries in developed countries, together with exchange rates that
favour their countries, are inevitably going to attract a certain number of
our health workers.

We may regret this, but freedom of movement and freedom to sell one's
labour are basic rights on which we have built our democracy and we cannot
restrict these rights. However, any responsible government will take steps
to protect its assets, and we certainly need to devise strategies that will
conserve the public investment in human resources for health.

We need to recognise that many health workers leave this country
temporarily, for instance to gain experience abroad or to boost their
earnings to repay student loans. Such international exposure, generally,
leads to personal development and enriched knowledge. Therefore, we should
make it easy and attractive for returning professionals to reintegrate into
the public sector.

It may very well be in our interests to facilitate short-term foreign
contacts for public-sector health workers and to offer options for
continuity of pension and other service benefits. We will be exploring ways
of doing this within the context of South-South co-operation and, more
specifically, to benefit our neighbouring countries in the SADC region.

We want to state quite clearly, though, that although we recognise
migration as a normal phenomenon in any free country, we will continue to
object vigorously whenever developed countries plunder the meagre skills
resources of developing countries in organised recruitment raids. Countries
that systematically underproduce skilled workers because it is cheaper to
poach them from poorer countries are guilty of exploitation. This is simply
colonialism in a new guise. And, in the context of knowledge-based
economies, it is as destructive to our national interests as the rape of
our national resources was in the past.

As South Africans, we are proud of our decision not to meet our short-term
human resource needs by bleeding the health systems of our neighbouring
countries. The outflow of health professionals to the private sector
probably represents a greater drain on public health services than foreign
migration does. I am not arguing in any way for the demise of the private
health sector, but I do believe that it should be aligned with the overall
public health goals of the country. When the private sector operates in a
way that undermines national health objectives, for instance through
wasteful and irrational practices that create artificial markets, then
Government is compelled to intervene.

We have already done so through a number of laws that are designed to
reduce health costs in the private sector. The Medicines and Related
Substances Control Amendment Act, for instance, outlaws kickbacks which
artificially increase demand, and compels pharmacists to offer the cheapest
versions of prescribed drugs. The Pharmacy Act opens up ownership of
pharmacies and therefore increases competition. The Medical Schemes Act
strengthens the hand of members in relation to the schemes and the schemes
in relation to service providers.

We acknowledge that conditions in the public sector are also a significant
factor when it comes to the loss of professional personnel. There are many
aspects of the working environment, over and above salaries, that are
unattractive. Poor management systems, in particular, impose additional
burdens on busy professionals. We need to work constantly at improving the
working environment and injecting attractive features into public health
settings.

We also need to ensure that there is representivity in all sectors of the
health profession. To this end, a group of pharmaceutical companies and
private health care institutions have initiated a bursary in my name to
provide financial assistance to deserving students in a variety of fields.

In concluding my review of human resource planning, I would like to mention
that the department is finalising a comprehensive gender policy and that we
aim to launch this publicly before the end of this year.

Of course, the policy extends beyond issues of human resource development.
However, gender issues are of direct concern to a huge number of our health
workers and this seemed an appropriate point to share our plans. The policy
deals with issues of women's health in a comprehensive way and includes
policy perspectives on violence against women and girls, safe pregnancy and
motherhood, female cancers, women's mental health, tobacco control and
health promotion issues, as well as ways of making the health system more
responsive to women's needs.

The next area of focus is planning for the impact of HIV/Aids,
tuberculosis, malaria and other infectious diseases. The specific
allocation for HIV/Aids programmes in the budget before us is R207 million.
However, that represents only a fraction of the amount actually spent on
HIV/Aids in the health sector. The bulk of spending on treatment for Aids-
related illnesses is indistinguishable from general hospital and clinic
spending in all provinces. The challenges of meeting the demand for
HIV/Aids treatment and care were at the heart of the meeting that was held
in Pretoria last week between health Ministers of the SADC regions and
representatives of seven of the world's largest pharmaceutical companies.

All of the countries represented at that meeting reported that the sheer
size of the HIV/Aids epidemic makes it extremely difficult to deal
effectively with the adequate nutrition of people living with HIV/Aids and
the treatment of opportunistic infections, let alone expand health
infrastructure to the point where antiretroviral therapy can be done in a
safe and responsible way.
Furthermore, in the SADC region we have embraced the view, taken at the
Abuja conference last month, that there is no justification for dealing
with HIV/Aids in an isolated and elevated way when other diseases like TB
and Malaria are having a devastating impact on our countries. These
emerging and re-emerging diseases have common roots in poverty and
underdevelopment. To some extent, they have common solutions in poverty
relief, development and the general strengthening of health systems.
Therefore, they demand a response that is co-ordinated and comprehensive.

SADC health Ministers asserted the position that, given the incurable
nature of HIV/Aids, prevention programmes must remain the first line of
attack and should not be reduced in scope, no matter how urgent the need
for expanded treatment infrastructure. The drug company executives
concurred with this view.

UNAids executive director Peter Piot drew the obvious conclusion that the
HIV/Aids epidemic will not be tackled effectively on the resources of the
affected countries alone. A massive and sustained contribution of resources
is required from the countries of the northern hemisphere. This, of course,
is what the Global Fund for HIV/Aids and Health, initiated by UN secretary-
general Mr Kofi Annan, is all about. Like other developing countries, South
Africa has a vital interest in the success of this fund.

However, the possibility that demand for treating HIV/Aids-related
conditions could overwhelm our health service has been apparent for some
time. We have never believed that we can sit back and wait for an outside
benefactor to solve the problem.

Last year the Government commissioned a study on the likely impact of
HIV/Aids on health services. The study was completed late last year. It
was, essentially, a modelling exercise in which existing research was
utilised to produce various scenarios.

The value of the impact study lies not in the exact figures produced. In
fact, there are some methodological problems that have to be sorted out,
and this will alter the figures.

The true value of the study lies, firstly, in the inescapable conclusion
that the demand for Aids care will far outstrip the capacity of our health
system to deliver, unless we take decisive action to strengthen our health
system.

Secondly, and equally important, the study suggests areas where we could
intervene most fruitfully to reduce the gap between the demand and the
supply of health care.

The top treatment priority that emerges from the impact study is more
effective control of tuberculosis. Experience on the ground in provinces
confirms the finding that effective control of TB will be the key to
containing the burden of opportunistic infections. Every province has taken
steps in the past year to improve TB management and are all targeting it as
a priority for the year ahead.

TB cure rates have improved to about 65% in recent years, and that is
thanks to widespread implementation of the Dots community-based treatment
strategy. Pilot schemes for integrating TB and HIV management have yielded
promising results and will be scaled up. At the integrated sites, many HIV-
positive patients can be given medication to prevent them developing active
TB.

National and provincial departments have set in motion a forensic audit of
Santa, which is contracted to provide hospital care for a large number of
public-sector TB patients. Members of this Chamber might have seen the
tender for the audit advertised this week. This move follows a review of TB
hospitals run by Santa and Lifecare that uncovered some serious problems in
the management of the institutions.

The HIV/Aids impact study also highlighted the need to build alternatives
to hospital care. Our main alternative form of care is home-based and
community-based care, which is still at an extremely early stage. This year
we will focus on providing additional funding to existing projects so that
they can consolidate their services. Some provinces are funding NGO-run
hospice beds, and in Gauteng and the Northern Cape health departments have
created the first step-down facilities within public hospitals.

When we talk of strengthening the health system, we are referring to
improving its overall efficiency, for instance by managing length of stay,
ensuring that care is delivered at the most appropriate level of service
and pursuing the lowest possible drug prices.

The use of nevirapine to prevent mother-to-child transmission, or MTCT, of
HIV may substantially reduce pressure on paediatric HIV care. It will only
do so, however, if we can ensure that the majority of babies that are
protected by nevirapine at birth are not exposed later on to the risks of
infection. A total of 18 research sites for the prevention of MTCT have
been designated in order to enhance understanding of the demands for a
successful programme.

One of the aims of the programme is to sustain the mother in good health
through nutritional supplements, prompt treatment of opportunistic
infections and supportive counselling. Some of the sites will also research
the nature of drug resistance in mother-to-child transmission programmes.
Five research sites in three provinces are already operational and others
will follow soon.

We are also prioritising the promotion of voluntary counselling and testing
because knowledge of an individual's HIV status is the precondition for
various prophylactic and therapeutic measures. Provinces have taken up the
challenge of expanding the number of facilities where this service is on
offer. For instance in the North West, the number of sites offering
voluntary counselling and testing has been increased to 78, and 350 nurses
have been trained in the use of rapid test kits for HIV.

There has been considerable progress in certain provinces in establishing
Aids directorates where these did not exist and staffing them
appropriately.

When it comes to emergency medical services, we need to remind ourselves
that emergency medical services are the single area of health care where
the Constitution confirms an outright guarantee of service provision.
Emergency medical services are also an exclusive function of the provinces.
Although they are not specifically funded by a conditional grant, I would
like to spend some time reporting on this area, because it has been the
focus of public debate and there have been considerable changes during the
year.

Until recently most provinces depended on local authorities to deliver
noninstitutional emergency services on their behalf - in other words, to
staff and run their fleets of ambulances. The arrangement worked with
varying degrees of success, but overall it was unsatisfactory.

During the past year eight provinces have resumed direct responsibility for
the operation of ambulance services.  Emergency medical services have been
separated from other emergency services such as fire services and now have
a dedicated staff. All provinces will soon have their own training
facilities for emergency services personnel. Several provinces, including
the Free State, KwaZulu-Natal, the Western Cape and the Northern Cape are
investing substantial amounts in renewing their ambulance fleets. The Free
State is perhaps at the top of this list with the recent acquisition of 62
new ambulances, 32 commuter transport vehicles and 19 emergency response
vehicles. It is committed to eradicating backlogs by purchasing 20 new
ambulances every year. [Interjections.] National norms are being developed
for the emergency medical services.

The final significant item on the list for debating this afternoon is
hospital revitalisation. We have identified better management systems and
skilled managers as critical factors in the programme of hospital
revitalisation, impacting both on the dimension of the quality of care and
on capital works projects. All provinces confirm that they have taken this
priority on board.

Wherever provinces are reducing or eliminating overspending, better
financial management, particularly by hospital managers, has been a
critical factor. Funding is available from Treasury for the further
development of management skills in the course of this year. Amounts
totalling more than R3,5 billion have been allocated for a three-year
programme to restore and replace hospital facilities. In all, 242 hospitals
will benefit from this programme. To date 331 individual building projects
have been completed at 86 hospitals.

Provinces have also shown results in relation to improving the mobilisation
of resources. Revenue recovery is increasing with a new patient billing
system. Private-sector usage of hospitals is being actively negotiated in a
number of provinces. Donor funding has been secured, for instance to take
forward the expansion of primary care facilities. It is encouraging to see
that even where donor funding is not available, several provinces have
budgeted to expand their clinic networks in the year ahead or to upgrade
existing facilities.
I am pleased to see that provinces have defined quality of care as a
multidimensional issue that is critically influenced by the effectiveness
of management systems. The factors that provincial departments believe have
made a real difference to quality of care include the following: ensuring
that there is unbroken availability of essential drugs, acting on
information produced by maternal death monitoring to remedy deficiencies in
professional knowledge and skill, promoting a patient rights culture and
monitoring compliance with the Patient Rights Charter.
I spoke at length in the National Assembly about the quality of care. I
believe that it is the responsibility of every health worker to contribute
directly and on a daily basis to better health care. It is a responsibility
that should not have to be imposed from above, but should be enacted simply
as part of our professional commitment and our undertaking as public
servants. The Batho Pele ethos is non-negotiable.

I also indicated in the National Assembly that I believe that there should
be far more serious consequences for health workers who fail in their
responsibility to deliver quality care. I would like to see cases of gross
negligence, fraudulent behaviour and outright abuse of patients pursued
much more vigorously by the various professional councils that are charged
with defending the public interest.

It is disturbing that it has taken years for anybody to lodge a complaint
against Wouter Basson and to ask whether his behaviour renders him unfit to
remain in the ranks of the medical profession.

It seems that our moral and ethical senses have been anaesthetised, and
that we are in need of a real shaking up. I would like to repeat my
intention to appoint a task team to look into the ability of the
professional councils to deal decisively and fairly with cases of
professional misconduct and malpractice. The task team will be asked to
consider in particular whether we need to review the legislation that
governs the councils.

Before taking my seat, I would like to thank a range of individuals for the
constructive role they have played during the course of the last year.
Members of the Select Committee on Social Services and the Portfolio
Committee on Health have continued to play a significant role in guiding
our work. We thank all of them, and in particular their respective
chairpersons.

I started out this speech with a reference to co-operative government and I
want to acknowledge the contribution of all the MECs for health and their
departmental heads in making this concept a living reality. The President,
the Deputy President and colleagues in the Cabinet have taken the
challenges of health care to heart, and I thank them for their interest and
collegial support.

Finally, my thanks go to those whose daily and unremitting task is the
improvement of our health system: the thousands of health professionals,
health support staff and health service managers across the country. We are
profoundly indebted to those who do their work with compassion and
understanding, guided by their deepest personal values. I include in this
group officials and managers of the Department of Health, and especially
the Director-General of the Department of Health, whose leadership remains
constant in challenging times.

I am deeply appreciative of my personal staff and particularly the support
staff: Mr Lucky Motaung, Mr Patrick Mahlangu, Mr Jaco Theron and Chris
Kondowe, who work extremely long hours and respond to many unexpected
demands with great resilience and goodwill.

I thank hon members for this opportunity to address them and look forward
to their responses. [Applause.]

Ms L JACOBUS: Hon Chair, Minister, MECs, special delegates and members, at
the beginning of this year, the Department of Health presented to the
select committee an outline of its priorities for 2001. Amongst these
priorities were: firstly, reducing morbidity and mortality rates through a
number of health promotion campaigns; secondly, the revitalisation of
hospital services; thirdly, improving human resource development; fourthly,
improving communication and consultation; and lastly, the reorganisation of
support services.

For purposes of this debate we have narrowed it down to four themes, linked
to these priorities, namely: the transformation of the department, access
to health services, service delivery and HIV and Aids.

As I said last week during our Social Development debate, I hope that MECs
and special delegates from the provinces will use this platform not only to
highlight their successes, but also to pinpoint the challenges facing them
as they work towards the goal of providing quality health care to our
people, a constitutionally enshrined right of every citizen.

Regarding transformation, I want to begin with a quote from a book called
Transformation in Action: Budgeting for Health Service Delivery:


  Health spending is currently inefficient and ineffective. South Africa
  spends a large proportion of its GDP on health ... yet it has a poorer
  health status than countries which spend considerably less on health.

While some members of this House might jump up in support of this statement
and others in rejection of it, I think we need to reflect on it in the
broader context of the socioeconomic status of our population. We need to
ask ourselves the question: What generally determines a person's physical
and/or mental health status?

It is my view that one's health status is determined by, amongst other
factors, whether a person is employed or unemployed, whether a person has
proper housing or not, the level of education of an individual, access to a
daily balanced diet, clean drinking water and sanitation and exercise. If
we are honest with ourselves, we will all acknowledge that a large chunk of
our population is not healthy, simply because they do not have access to
the goods and services I have just outlined.

I am sure we are all aware that Cabinet cluster committees have been
established. One of these is the social cluster committee. It is on the
initiative of the hon the Minister of Health and Minister Skweyiya that
this cluster has on its agenda matters like water, sanitation, food
security, nutrition, HIV/Aids, integrated sustainable rural development and
housing.

This shows that Government has already acknowledged that we need a
comprehensive, integrated response to the socioeconomic challenges facing
us as a nation. We know that this cluster has developed action plans for
these specific areas of intervention, with clear objectives and
deliverables. We will, within the next term, call upon this cluster to
present these objectives and deliverables to our committee, so that we can
assist the Minister in monitoring and achieving our broad objective, and
that is to create a healthy nation.

At this point I want to congratulate the Minister, and Government as a
whole, on the victorious outcome of the court case against some of the
giants in the pharmaceutical industry a few months ago. This victory
symbolised the triumph of united action by progressive forces, both here
and abroad, over capital. This victory has cleared the way for us to begin
to systematically provide our people with much-needed drugs at a fraction
of their present price. I want to emphasise here that this means cheaper
drugs across the board, not just anti-Aids drugs.

I do not think it would be out of order if I also thanked those
organisations and individuals that rallied to support us, as Government, in
this crucial matter. It was morally and politically incorrect and
unacceptable for these pharmaceutical companies to challenge a country's
head of state and, by implication, its constitution, for their own profit,
at the expense of the lives of fellow human beings. This victory allows us
to finally implement our commitment to ensuring the availability of
affordable medicines, in line with our national drugs policy.

The hospital rehabilitation and reconstruction programme also needs to be
commended. Although funding has been set aside for this programme,
institutions in rural areas must be prioritised. Our visits to rural
KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape highlighted the level of dilapidation
and neglect these buildings are in. They are health hazards themselves!
This illustrates that access to health services goes beyond mere access to
drugs. Patients must also have access to safe, healthy, well-equipped,
adequately staffed health facilities.

Every time we visit health institutions throughout the country, we are
confronted with complaints of staff shortages and theft of drugs, hospital
equipment and other provisions. These thefts cost both public and private
health institutions an estimated R1 billion, according to a study done in
1995. Unfortunately this stock theft has continued, at a tremendous cost to
the state. We propose that medicines and equipment be clearly marked to
identify them as Government property, and anyone found in possession of
such stock and equipment should be held liable for prosecution. Stealing
Government property is no different from stealing Government money. This is
theft and corruption, and the perpetrators must be found and brought to
book.

While we have made considerable strides towards allocating a more equitable
share of the budget to the provinces, we also need to ensure that this
equity in terms of input translates into improved access to health care for
our people. Equity in output needs to be measured and monitored, and we
need to find a way of doing it. Only then can we say with confidence that
our budget speaks to our priority of ensuring access to health care.

Regarding service delivery we want to emphasise that spending does not
necessarily mean delivery. Again I want to quote from this book called
Transformation in Action: Budgeting for Health Service Delivery:


  Financial planning and budgeting is how the organisation, in this
  instance Government, allocates money and other resources to realise its
  aims and objectives. An effective system for financial planning,
  budgeting and financial management is therefore essential for an
  effective and efficient service delivery system.

One of the weaknesses identified in service delivery is the lack of
financial management and accountability of our limited resources in some
provinces. This poses a challenge to our leadership at the national level
to develop capacity at the provincial level in order to decentralise
responsibility and accountability. Let me commend the department on the
appointment of CEOs in hospitals. It certainly goes a long way in
addressing the problem of the management, particularly financial
management,  of these institutions.

Because the health portfolio, in many instances, has to budget on
projections, it becomes increasingly important that we develop the ability
to budget for new objectives and challenges and monitor delivery in
relation to expenditure and outcome, which means the improvement of health
and health care.

Mismanagement of the budget manifests itself in areas such as the school
nutrition programme. Some provinces have reported underspending and even
acts of corruption in this area.

How are we supposed to justify the fact that a child faints at school
because he or she has not eaten for the day, and yet Government has set
aside money to feed this child at least once a day at school?

A case in point is the incident reported on e-news on Saturday evening,
which took place at Silversands Primary School here in the Western Cape,
where kids went scavenging on a nearby rubbish dump in search of food
because they were hungry. A number of them ended up in hospital with food
poisoning and sores around the mouth, after eating rotten apples and
contaminated food products.

The company contracted to deliver bread to the school only delivered 60
loaves a day, which only fed half of the pupils.  The other half obviously
had to look for food elsewhere, in the nearby rubbish dump. These corrupt
practices amount to stealing food out of the mouths of our children, and
they need to stop.

The hon the Minister may need to tighten the screws on these crooks,
whoever they might be, and task school-governing bodies with playing a more
active role in awarding, monitoring and reviewing tenders to provide this
nutrition service to our children.

Service delivery is not just the administration of a Panado to a person
with a headache, or giving a slice of bread to a hungry child; it goes way
beyond that. It includes the principle of Batho Pele, people first - the
Minister has referred to that as well - according to which every human
being has the right to be treated with dignity and respect.

Batho Pele costs nothing. It merely requires a change in attitude within
our Public Service, especially among those in the front line of service
delivery, our hospital and clinic staff. As we have introduced the
Patients' Rights Charter, we might want to think about outlining the duties
and responsibilities of our public servants, based on the Batho Pele
principles. In the words of the hon the Minister, and I quote: ``The Batho
Pele principle is non-negotiable.''

The department also needs to be commended for establishing hospital boards,
which have assisted in improving the management of hospitals and clinics,
through community participation. They also serve as an effective monitoring
mechanism for service delivery. However, clinic committees seem to be
either poorly developed or nonexistent. I see it as our responsibility to
encourage the establishment of these committees in our various
constituencies, rural areas in particular.

This brings me to the last theme, which is HIV/Aids. Government deserves a
pat on the back for establishing the SA National Aids Council, which
replaced the Interministerial Committee on Aids and serves as an advisory
body to Government. The establishment of Sanac has brought together a much
broader range of role-players than just Government.

This is an acknowledgement that HIV/Aids requires a much broader response
than just that of Government. Sanac members include traditional healers,
the youth, women, the hospitality and entertainment industries, the media,
faith-based organisations, the disabled and people living with Aids.
Future projections of HIV infections are frightening, to say the least.
Focusing on vulnerable groups, I think that women, especially married ones,
are probably one of the most vulnerable groupings when it comes to HIV
infection. They find it difficult to negotiate condom use with their
partners or husbands. I therefore want to suggest that the department
embark on a much more vigorous campaign to empower women to take control of
their own health. This might mean broadening the pilots of female condom
distribution points.

People using hospital services for the treatment of opportunistic diseases
already place a tremendous strain on the health budget. Therefore, the
implementation of the home or community-based care programme, in
collaboration with the Department of Social Development, should be
welcomed.

As I said last week, I also want to encourage the Department of Health to
forge stronger links with NGOs, CBOs and FBOs in the implementation of this
programme, so as to relieve the financial and human resource burden on the
department.

In conclusion, we need to acknowledge the following, in the words of my
premier at his opening address to the legislature, and I quote:


  Our country's foundation was built on systematically enforced racial
  divisions in every sphere of our society. Towns and cities were divided
  into black townships and white suburbs, the one without basic
  infrastructure and the other very well resourced. While a lot still needs
  to be done to improve the lives of our people, tremendous progress has
  been made since 1994. While seven years is too short a time, to undo the
  ills of decades of systematic oppression, we are proud of our
  achievements to date.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank the Minister and her department
for their continuous support and assistance to the select committee when we
request information and briefings, sometimes at very short notice. We
appreciate the very good work that they are doing and hope that the
comments, suggestions and recommendations we put forward today during this
debate are taken in the spirit of co-operation, in which the various arms
of Government work together towards a common goal, that of creating a
better life for all our people. [Applause.]

Dr P J C NEL: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MEC from the Free State, all
other MECs, hon members, in an interview with the Mail & Guardian recently,
Mr Mandela called for an open debate on political differences within the
ruling party. Regarding criticism voiced by the DA and other opposition
groups voiced, Mr Mandela said, and I quote from article in the Mail &
Guardian of 2 March this year:


  I dare to say that even the opposition, the DA, is proud of South Africa.
  They are criticising because they regard this as their country. They are
  not prepared just to leave the country and go abroad. That is pride.

I challenge the hon the Minister, or any member of the ANC in this House,
for that matter, to contradict this statement made by our ex-president.
[Interjections.]

When the DA says that the underfunding of health services, the poor
management of funds and the ineffective usage of health resources have
given rise to almost total collapse in the delivery of health services in
some of our state hospitals and clinics, we criticise because we are really
concerned. The World Health Report 2000 of the WHO, which measures how
effectively countries are using their health resources, rated South Africa
only 175th out of 191 countries. Only 16 countries did worse than South
Africa.

The lack of funds also results in poor working conditions and low salaries,
forcing our doctors, like Dr Nzo, nurses and other health workers to leave
our country. According to the SA Nursing Council, approximately 300 nurses
a month are leaving South Africa without being replaced, putting greater
pressure on the remaining staff.

The ever-increasing admission of patients with HIV and Aids- related
diseases is also putting an increasing burden on the health care facilities
and funds. In many hospital 80% of beds are already filled with Aids
patients. The fact that the national department failed to spend R31,9
million, 29% of its allocation for HIV/Aids is unacceptable and shocking.

The lack of funds also results in the deterioration of our health
infrastructure. The Department of Public Works, in a submission to the
Department of Finance as far back as 1999, already stated that 30% of the
existing infrastructure would soon be beyond repair, and that R8 billion
would soon have to be spent to address the backlog.

To my amazement, I read the following in the report of the Select Committee
on Finance tabled in this House on 26 March this year, and I quote:


  The committee has observed that serious underspending is being recorded
  in respect of the Hospital Rehabilitation Grant ...

How can one justify that?

The other factor contributing to the lack of funds is that many state
hospitals are owed large amounts of money by patients who can pay, but
neglect to do so. The amount of money owed by the state itself to state
hospitals is quite substantial. The Compensation Commissioner alone owes
the state hospitals more than R9 million, let alone the RAF, which is at
the moment operating with a deficit of more than R10 billion.

I request the hon the Minister to talk to her colleagues, the Ministers of
Labour and of Transport, and urge them to pay their debts.

'n Ander belangrike aspek wat fondse in die gesondheidstelsel erodeer is
diefstal van medisyne, toerusting en ander artikels uit hospitale. Volgens
die departement is in die jaar 2000 artikels ten bedrae van R6,2 miljoen
gesteel. Ek het egter groot waardering vir die sterk standpunt wat die agb
Minister in dié verband inneem. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Another important aspect that is eroding funds in the health system is the
theft of medicines, equipment and other articles from hospitals. According
to the department, articles amounting to R6,2 million were stolen in the
year 2000. I do, however, have great appreciation for the strong standpoint
the hon the Minister is adopting in this regard.]

HIV/Aids makes all the other problems that I have mentioned seem trivial.
There has never been an epidemic like this in human history. It is even
worse than the black plague that wiped out one third of the European
society. However, that plague came and went. HIV/Aids came to us 20 years
ago. It is still with us and will be with us for many years. Many people
have become more or less accustomed to the shocking statistics published
daily in our media and press. They do not really take notice of them, nor
do they want to hear and read the statistics, which I do not want to repeat
today. However, whether people want to hear or not, this is the reality.
Aids is everybody's baby. Hon members should listen.

The fact that South Africa is struggling to get to grips with the Aids
crisis can mainly be attributed to the lack of leadership and the apathy of
people at large. [Time expired.]

Mr M D QWASE (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, hon members, MECs, distinguished
guests and the representatives of the media, firstly, I would like to
tender an apology for the MEC for health of the Eastern Cape who is tied up
in other programmes in the province.

The Eastern Cape department of health has been allocated R3,8 billion for
the financial year 2001-02 to fulfil its constitutional obligations. We are
confident that with these resources at our disposal we will be able to
deliver quality and equitable health care services to all our people in the
province.

We are proud to announce that the Eastern Cape department of health has
never been better positioned than it is today to take the decisive steps
towards contributing to a better quality of life for all the people of the
province, especially those communities that have never seen a health worker
in their lives.

There are a number of concrete achievements we have attained in the past
financial year. Amongst those achievements I can cite the completion of
projects that are related to the rehabilitation of hospitals - that is, 15
projects and nine clinics - the installation of solar energy in 46 clinics,
the connection to the Eskom grid in 61 clinics, the installation of
refrigerators and 94 two-way radios in our clinics and also other
achievements in respect of infrastructure.

The hospital transformation process is being finalised. The rationalisation
of three complexes, that is, East London, Port Elizabeth and Umtata, has
also commenced. Other achievements include the successful implementation of
Dots which has resulted in the closure of TB wards, for example in Tsolo
and Qumbu.

We have also had successes in terms of the availability of drugs, which has
increased by 90% for TB cases and 30% for cases of sexually transmitted
diseases. There are a number of other achievements. These major indicators
point to the excellent work that has been done to place our province on the
path to achieving a better quality of life for all.

Despite all these successes, we are still faced with many challenges, and
we are hopeful they will soon become history if we commit ourselves to
acting in unity and with a passion for development.
We have to deliver under circumstances not of our creation. The problems
and challenges that we feel include, firstly, the economic status of the
province, where 80% of the population depend on public health care
services. The situation becomes worse when we have to accommodate
economically inept migrant labourers from other provinces. The province is
very rural with certain areas being inaccessible by modern transport. All
the same, we have to reach to those communities.
Thirdly, the rural nature of the province has made it not attractive to
both nurses and doctors, especially in the rural areas. This hampers the
effective delivery of services in these disadvantaged areas.

Our greatest challenge is to recruit and retain professional staff in the
rural areas.

We have a duty to realign current health districts with the newly
demarcated municipal areas to ensure that the process of devolving certain
health services to local government, in line with the national district
health systems policy, is enhanced. Another challenge is around mental
health. For many years mental health has never been given priority. The
Eastern Cape has since prioritised this aspect.

On transformation strategies to improve service delivery, the department of
health has undertaken a series of strategic work sessions to restructure
and reorganise and provide efficient, effective, appropriate and equitable
services. Our efforts are not directed only at organisational structure,
but also at producing a health cadre that is technically skilled and fully
committed and that has the values to ensure a caring ethos when delivering
our services.

The following are the critical areas of intervention that we have
identified. The first is the reorganisation of the department of health. An
amount of R7 million has been set aside to build management capacity in the
provincial office, so that it is capable of strategically steering the
organisation to achieve its vision and objectives. In line with the
resolution of the executive council, the department has replaced regional
offices with revamped health districts to deliver cost-effective health
services.

The second is the targeting of 10 institutions as pilot interventions in
the year 2001-02. The department has targeted three complexes; Umtata, Port
Elizabeth and East London, for the rationalisation of services. The
department has commenced the process of recruiting the CEOs to manage these
complexes. They are also in the process of recruiting senior executive
officers and executive officers to manage other smaller institutions. This
process will be finalised by August 2001.

Issues that impeded appropriate spending on conditional grants have also
been resolved. The new financial year should realise the correct planning
and implementation of these programmes. The business plans to access the
conditional grants for the ensuing years would, in line with the provisions
of the Division of Revenue Act, be finalised before the end of June 2001.

On district development, the ushering in of the last phase of local
government transformation on 5 December 2000 will enhance our relationship
with local government and ensure that the delivery of services is
strengthened.

The department is restructuring its delivery units to be in line with the
newly demarcated district municipalities to ensure meaningful co-ordination
and political accountability. The department will take responsibility for
co-ordinating services in those areas where devolution to local government
has not taken place.

We are working within the integrated provincial support programme of
district development. The department will contribute its part in the
delivery of the above and other programmes within the social services
cluster. Each district will develop service plans which will cover at least
all the essential services that the department is required to provide.

The Government structures, like boards and community health committees, are
being established to meaningfully provide participatory democracy at
community level.

The Integrated Sustainable Rural Developments strategy implores us to plan
and deliver as departments in unison. It is our unwavering commitment to
work as a department within this strategic framework of the province.

The quality of care, as indicated above, will be one of our priority areas.
The Patients Rights Charter, which has been officially launched in the
Eastern Cape with the support of the hon the national Minister of Health,
will be rolled out. Each and every institutional or district manager will
be required to sign a pledge to ensure that the charter is communicated,
internalised by the staff, and fully implemented in all our facilities.
Representative boards will be established for all hospitals and the
department will ensure that the regulatory framework is provided.

Regarding HIV/Aids, as indicated, the province committed R50 million to
develop programmes for implementation in different departments. The
Department of Health is responsible for R38 million of that whole amount.
We promise to undertake the task of co-ordinating this responsibility
without failing.

On drugs supply and management, the department has recognised drugs and
pharmaceutical products as one of our cost drivers and priority areas. We
are currently finalising the process of outsourcing the distribution of
drugs and the bar-coding of bulk supplies. An amount of R5 million has been
set aside to improve management in our depots, to prevent pilferage and
also to develop drug management systems. Clinic drugs budgets will be de-
linked from the hospital supply.

The establishment of pharmaceutical and therapy committees in all
institutions and districts is also our priority. We will also develop
computerised stock and formulatory management systems.

On primary health care programmes, in addition to HIV/Aids strategy, the
department will focus on TB programmes by purchasing transport to improve
sputum results and the Dots system. The focus will also be on the
developing of an alternative delivery strategy in the school feeding
nutritional programme.

On management issues, the department of health will focus on training and
development consultation management systems. It will also continue and
finalise the process of rationalising nursing colleges. This does not only
ensure the cost-effective delivery of training services, but is also in
line with the broad transformation agenda.

We are gravely concerned about debt control regarding the department's
assets, and we are committed to developing asset and fleet management
systems. [Time expired.]

Mr H T SOGONI: Chairperson, hon Minister and members, providing health care
services to the nation is the department's greatest challenge. The vision
of the department to afford all South Africans good quality health care
requires the extension of its delivery system to reach the remotest and
poorest of our communities.

The Minister in her presentation to the committee on social services on 27
February 2001, correctly referred to the report in the SA Demographic and
Health Survey, indicating vast inequities in the health status of South
Africans based on race and geography.

Therefore, the Budget Vote before us represents one of the central pillars
of service delivery, the provision of the Constitutionally guaranteed right
to health for all. It stands central among the needs to those who were
previously disadvantaged. The budget is therefore appropriated to translate
the policies and programmes of the department into the outcomes desired to
reverse the imbalances.

The department has identified its priorities for 2001-02 within the health
sector strategic framework, which constitutes the main objectives of the
department for the remaining term of the Government. We also note the
argument of the department that the negative real growth in the national
budget over the next three years must be seen in the context of the
completion of a few large infrastructure projects and the location of the
bulk of resources by the department.

In spite of huge amounts allocated to the construction and maintenance of
clinics and hospitals, the need remains severe, especially in rural areas.
Constituency visits to the rural areas provide a stark reminder of the dire
need for proper and accessible health care. Many thousands of people have
yet to experience the fruits of the new Constitution when it comes to
health care.

This, linked with high levels of poverty and the disintegration of the
social fabric in rural areas, leads to immense suffering and unnecessary
but avoidable low standards of living and loss of life. The intervention
strategies of the department, therefore, to decrease the morbidity and
mortality rates are most welcome.
  Perhaps the observation by Solani Khosa of the Health Systems Trust, in
  an article published in Idasa's Budget Watch, is relevant to this debate.
  He indicates, among other things, that, poor provinces still receive
  relatively small or no increments for health care.


  Historically disadvantaged provinces should be favoured even more.

Such provinces could then secure a fair share of the allocated funds in
order to provide additional resources for health care. To me, this makes
good sense. I consider it to be a statement that proposes a genuine
approach to be followed in order to fulfil the objectives of the
department.

Finally, no discussion on health in South Africa today would be complete if
it did not recognise the pandemic of HIV/Aids that we are faced with. It
has also unfortunately become one of the most politicised and controversial
subjects in South Africa. We remain concerned about this and believe that
the department should approach the matter from the correct policy
perspective.

As long as HIV/Aids remains a controversial issue, millions of rands
budgeted towards this vital cause will make little or no impact, especially
in the light of Government winning the court case against pharmaceutical
companies. It is time to act decisively. Having said this, the UDM supports
the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Ms M A TSOPO (Free State): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister of Health, hon
members, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, there is no question about the
fact that the historical challenges before us are major.

As I stand before this House today, I am well aware of the historical
backlogs we are still faced with, particularly with regard to health
service delivery. Our goal is not just health service delivery to the
masses of our people, but quality service delivery. This process must take
into account a number of factors as contained within Batho Pele and the
Patients Rights Charter.

These historical challenges can be placed in broad categories such as
service delivery HIV/Aids and, access and transformation. Although these
categories are closely intertwined, I would like to address the challenges
in the context of these categories, with special attention to the Free
State's department of health.

We have developed a human resources plan whose objective is to ensure that
we have the optimum staffing levels in our institutions, and that our
personnel is well trained. Most of our critical posts have been and are
continuously being filled. A proportion of 1,1% of our personnel
expenditure has been budgeted for training. An amount of R9,8 million has
been earmarked for bursaries and for the training of under-graduate and
post-graduates health professionals, including students from disadvantaged
backgrounds, who are always targeted through this particular bursary
scheme. For example, this year, 18 students were targeted for the MBChB
degree out of the six fields we are currently supporting.

Abet and the interactive distant education and learning programmes are
utilised as tools for the attainment of quality personnel. Through Abet, we
have already covered 825 personnel.

The department of health has very successfully integrated all primary
health care services into district health services. The latter have been
organised to coincide with the five districts in the Free State. Outlined
below are the challenges faced by the primary health care services. The
first is the establishment of district health authorities and the transfer
of the provincial primary health services to the district health
authorities over the next two years. The second is the improvement in the
quality of care rendered.

Here, several projects are being implemented to help improve the quality of
care. Last year equipment worth R9 million was purchased for primary health
care facilities, including district hospitals.

The accreditation programme of the Council for Health Accreditation
Southern Africa, will be implemented in several districts in the Free State
this year, and it will be rolled out to include all district hospitals over
the next four years. An interactive distant learning system is being
implemented in the Free State at a cost of R11 million. The system is based
upon television broadcasting and electronic feedback and uses the networks
of the Department of Health and Telkom networks. The department is in the
process of hiring a 24-hour satellite channel. This system will enable the
department to train people online and 600 staff members at a time.

The conditional grants of R16 million for hospital reconstruction and
rehabilitation and the R6 million for the maintenance of infrastructure
should go a long way in ensuring that our facilities are of world class. We
have indeed moved with speed in the direction of restructuring emergency
medical services in the province. The service has been provincialised in
accordance with the Health Act, Act 63 of 1977, and Schedule 5 to our
Constitution. We have now taken the service from local authorities who
previously ran it on an agency basis.

Following this provincialisation, we have put strategies in place according
to which we plan to purchase 20 ambulances per annum so as to address the
backlog around ambulance vehicles. Sixty-two ambulances, 35 commuter
transport vehicles and 19 emergency response vehicles were purchased at the
end of the 2000-01 financial year. There is a possibility of going beyond
the annual purchasing target of ambulances.

Ambulance emergency and commuter services will now be provided on a
regional basis, with the central co-ordinating control rooms situated in
Bethlehem and Bloemfontein. This will enable the department to provide more
effective and efficient medical services.

Regarding quality care, factors that contribute to this goal include
personnel, pharmaceutical services and equipment. In terms of personnel, we
have managed to fill most of the posts which are essential in the delivery
of health services. We have developed a human resource plan, the objective
of which is to ensure that we have the optimum staffing level in our
institution.

The state of equipment is something that will require urgent attention.
Most of our equipment is not in good shape, and requires repair, if not
total replacement. However, we believe that we are not at a crisis point as
we have effectively developed a three-year strategic plan.

The situation as regards pharmaceutical and medical consumables has
improved a great deal. To address the availability of essential drugs, the
department has put in place a three-month stock level strategy. Strategies
and programmes have also been put in place to alleviate the problem of
theft of pharmaceutical and medical consumables.

There are major challenges that we have to address in our country as
regards HIV/Aids. We are, nonetheless, moving with dramatic speed in terms
of our interventions and strategies against HIV/Aids. Comprehensive home-
based care is being rendered in the province and a strategy was approved
during the workshop held on 21 March 2000 to extend the service throughout
the province. Ireland Aid is considering a proposal that we have made to
fund the Department of Health with an amount of R2,5 million over the next
three years with the aim of developing NGOs working with the Department of
Health's financial and personnel management capabilities.

We are also refining strategies in order to implement research and training
sites for nevirapine in Virginia and Frankfort by the end of July 2001. The
department is also dispensing fluconazole in three of our hospitals, which
are Universitas, Pelonomi and Goldfields, and this process will be extended
to Bethlehem, Manapo and Boitumelo in due course.

We have also upgraded the HIV/Aids sub-directorate into a directorate as
from 1 April 2001. The Free State established a provincial Aids council in
February 2000 and will be establishing district Aids councils in each of
the five districts by the end of June 2001.

To make services accessible for people with disabilities, the department
has ring-fenced money in the department for assistive devices as well as
prosthetic and orthotic services from the last financial year. We have
established structures where NGOs are fully represented, namely assistive
devices and rehabilitation committees. We have opened a third orthotic and
prosthetic workshop in Bloemfontein.

In relation to TB, since the change-over to the new drug, no shortage has
been experienced as regards TB drugs in the province. Currently, we are
managing our MDR patients through the Santa Sandtoord Hospital in Thaba-
Nchu, but we will be taking over the MDR unit at Moroka state hospital,
which will be functional by the end of March 2002.

On 19 March 2001, a new joint agreement between the Department of Health
and the University of the Free State was signed after 31 years. This
agreement gives effect to the principles in the co-operative framework;
promotes the provision of high quality education, training, research and
health services by the school of medicine; and establishes a commitment to
a long-term, sustainable and quality faculty of health sciences leading to
excellent management, adequate funding and high standards.

We have recently been blessed with the arrival of two Tunisian doctors at
the Goldfields regional hospital in Welkom to assist with cataract surgery
from 4 to 15 June 2001. To date, 514 cases of cataracts have been operated
in the province. In terms of oral health, we have procured three mobile
dental clinics and 13 set of equipment for new dental clinics in the
province to make the dental services accessible to rural areas.

Regarding public-private partnership, further impetus to quality service
delivery will be provided by the public-private partnership that we will be
entering into at the Pelonomi and Universitas hospitals around
underutilised beds at these institutions. This partnership will be
operational before the end of this financial year. It will bring along an
injection of additional funds. The process will establish a very necessary
working relationship between the public and private sectors and will ensure
that the Free State gets maximal benefits from the available resources.

I want to thank the Development Bank of South Africa for financing the
appointment of transaction advisers to manage the project as well as the
unit for public-private partnership of the National Treasury for its
valuable assistance in this regard.

The actions that we have taken as a province, as I have just outlined to
the hon members, are the end of the beginning and not the beginning of the
end. As we travel on this path of quality health service delivery, we are
conquering milestones in terms of access, transformation and service
delivery. All the milestones that we have conquered as the Free State give
us hope that we have finally reached the end of this tunnel.

In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude for the leadership of
our hon Minister, Dr Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, because hon members must
also understand that as various members who are leading various portfolios
in provinces, we are not health activists, but through the leadership of
the Minister we are really tackling challenges head-on in our particular
provinces. [Applause.]

Mr B WILLEM: Chairperson, hon Minister, esteemed MECs, special delegates
and hon members of the House, first and foremost I would like to deal with
something that has been pronounced upon many a time, namely the question of
service delivery. A famous British politician once said, ``A week is a long
time in politics.''

In the face of the challenges which confronted us when we swept away the
old order in 1994 and ventured into the cobwebbed corridors of power
bequeathed to us by the apartheid order, the past seven years have been
short indeed. They have been short if we examine this period against the
herculean efforts that we had to make to dismantle a system nurtured for
over three decades.

I suppose that from this point of view, our understanding of power, its
possibilities and limits imposes a greater sense of reality. The ANC-led
Government is always concerned about access to health care facilities for
all of our people. We know that in our areas there were insufficient and
ineffective health services to deal with the inequities of the past.
However, with our focal point being access to facilities to meet the
demands of the people, we overlooked quality.

When the people in our constituencies started complaining about attitudes
of staff, the long queue and the lack of medicine, we knew that we should
shift our focus to improving the quality of care in all our health care
facilities. With this in mind, the Minister and her department put their
minds together and came up with the 1999-2004 strategic framework. This
focus concentrates on accelerating the quality of service delivery in 10
key areas.

They describe this attention as a way of strengthening the implementation
of efficient, effective and high-quality health services. The plan has very
high goals and is very ambitious. With the co-operation of all the role-
players, it is possible for us to fulfil the guidelines provided by the
plan.

Over and above ensuring that certain crucial aspects like the cost of
medicine - the second highest expenditure in the Department of Health - is
kept at a cost-effective level, both the Ministry and the ANC members of
Parliament are tasked with the responsibility of monitoring health
facilities in their provinces.

We know that our Minister and her department are also dedicated to
experiencing first-hand the challenges facing all nine provinces and to
giving them the necessary support for the work they are doing to provide
quality health care services, often under challenging circumstances. An
example of this pledge to improve the service delivery of health care is
the visit the Minister made to my province, the famous Eastern Cape, in
October 2000. It was about time, as my province was threatened by the
crisis of a depleting budget and increasing demand.

My Minister met with the premier and senior management in both the
departments. As a result of this visit, the Eastern Cape drafted a short-
term action plan, which they forwarded to the Minister. The director-
general and a team of managers followed up the Minister's visit to
concretise the action plan and to offer support from the national
department.

My colleague referred to our achievements as a province, which I will not
touch on. The problems in health are highlighted, and the impression is
left that health care has gone to the dogs. What we find in reality is that
we do not have sufficient resources in the provinces to deal with the large
needs, a large legacy of the past. At the same time, now that we have
identified that there is a problem, I think the public representatives will
have to work on a programme to ensure that our provinces are on track.

It is this kind of vigilance that allows us to rise to the challenges of
rectifying and strengthening those areas in need. If we were an uncaring
Government, we would have left the Eastern Cape in the mess we inherited
from the Bantustan apartheid era, in which corruption was rife and little
attention was given to the majority of our people.

Our policies allow for checks and balances, so that a problem can be nipped
in the bud. Even this annual budget debate allows us to refocus on our
spending patterns in terms of where we are going off track.

I know from experience the enormous task that the department has before it.
As the ANC, which masterminded the services of delivery policies, we want
to thank the Minister for her advances in a very difficult and often
underresourced portfolio. We value the cheaper medicines, the foreign
doctors, improved health facilities and all other help that the new
Government has brought to our province. [Applause.]

Mrs B S MOHLAKA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, transformation is a buzz word
and it is necessary. I feel privileged to participate in today's debate. I
will therefore talk about medicolegal mortuaries. Perhaps to define
medicolegal mortuaries, these are mortuaries which handle mainly police
cases. Let me go further by saying that deaths resulting from accidents of
any nature - patients dying before arrival at hospital - are regarded as
police cases and are therefore transferred to the medicolegal mortuaries
which fall under SAPS management.

One often wonders whether present staff, excluding district surgeons,
receive any form of training on the last offices, inter alia, setting the
features of the corpses. It is gratifying that at last these types of
mortuaries are going to fall under the Department of Health.

In KwaZulu-Natal the transfer of medicolegal mortuaries from the SAPS to
the Department of Health is going to take place soon. Phase 1 will commence
in August 2001. However, KwaZulu-Natal still needs a lot of funding as
building costs have escalated over the past few years.

Recruitment and training of personnel, who will be responsible and who will
be employed to work in these medicolegal mortuaries, should commence soon.
In preparation for this big task, we hope that personnel involved in the
handling of the dead will do their work in a more professional way, which
must also include counselling the relatives.

We are all aware that the conditions of service of health workers,
particularly doctors, nurses and other paramedics, must be revisited. HIV
is sweeping the country. One gets very concerned at how infection control
in these medicolegal mortuaries is going to be handled by untrained
mortuary attendants. I have become very concerned that these handlers
should not become infected with HIV/Aids. Therefore, a policy on mortuary
attendants will have to be developed.

Mortuaries are not places to conduct mischievous practices such as hiding
liquor, the illegal dissection of tissues from bodies for selling for
financial gain, and even the mixing up of corpses. In most cases, suturing
corpses remains and becomes the duty of police who assist during the
postmortem. In fact, in that case, such fine procedures should form part of
the training of medicolegal mortuary attendants.

In conclusion, let me sound a word of warning: The nursing fraternity must
not be utilised at all in procedures carried out in medicolegal mortuaries.

I also request that regular inspections of these medicolegal mortuaries be
carried out regularly, since they will be falling under the Department of
Health.

I want to thank the hon the Minister for a very informative speech in this
debate on Vote 15. [Applause.]

Dr R A M SALOOJEE (Gauteng): Chairperson, in the absence of our MEC for
health, I would like to focus on some aspects of our successes, the
challenges we face and the risks we are exposed to.
The strategic priorities of the Gauteng department of health and, of
course, the government, are to improve the health of the people of Gauteng,
provide better health care services, and secure better value for money and
effective organisation. There is a move away from incremental budgeting
through a phase of budgeting for output towards the phase of output
budgeting as required and defined in the Public Finance Management Act for
better accountability.
The Gauteng department of health's expenditure framework for 2001-02 is
consistent with these defined objectives of achieving equity through better
utilisation of the resources and efficient delivery of services made
available to the most vulnerable and needy groups in the Gauteng province.
We know that there are constraints of budgetary allocations, but we must
also be aware of the inefficiencies in structural and organisational
sectors which do not need more money, but are willing to improve care,
motivate, be compassionate and refocus on discipline and commit to
delivering excellence.

The complex nature of the inherited problems of our health system and the
chronic nature of all expenditure in the past appear to have stabilised.
The department has to be complimented for moving into a phase of budgeting
for output and continuous movement away from public administration to
public management.

The sum of R32 million for financial management capacitation in central
hospitals, the establishment of cost structures and the appointment of
financial managers, internal audits and a shared service centre will
enhance development towards output budgeting, as envisaged in the Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework process, so as to achieve the defined goals of
the Public Finance Management Act, thus favourably filling the gaps caused
by the  middle management shortage and lack of financial skills and thereby
improving management systems at all levels of the provincial health
structures.

One of our foremost priorities, of course, for the ensuing MTEF period
should be the control and reduction of the virulent spreading of HIV/Aids.
It is time to put to rest the confusing debates that have coloured the
issues surrounding the epidemic. Whilst the fundamentals of our strategy to
curb the epidemic are sound, we cannot remain complacent. Recent statistics
show that in Gauteng there is an increase of 4% in the number of new
infections.

We note that in the 2001-02 budget, additional funds have been made
available, but the financial resources needed to counteract the spread will
need more, much more, than the allocated funds and a greater willingness to
review our present pace of action if we are to make meaningful inroads.

In Gauteng we support the establishment of home-based care, step-down and
hospice beds, but our progress doing so is too minimal to be effective in
the short term. As the availability of a vaccine is still years in the
future - it may be three years or six years; we do not know how long it
takes to develop a vaccine and what kind of duplication and replication of
the virus may occur - certain aspects such as mother-to-child transmission
and antisocial factors such as the alleviation of poverty, the abuse of
alcohol, drugs and sexual violence, must receive aggressive attention.

When affordable drugs become available, the need for active antiretroviral
treatment in certain appropriate circumstances must be seriously considered
and, if necessary, implemented.

From statistics it is clear that there are significant shifts of patient
attendance to primary health care clinics from hospital OPDs, from 41% to
67%, in the last three years. Furthermore, the rate of accessibility to
health services has significantly increased in the last three years from
8,4 million to 12,8 million, an increase of 51%.

Never in the history of humankind has any nation or continent faced such a
pestilent future. Those of us free from the contagion of HIV/Aids can never
feel the pain and torment of those afflicted. We must place life above
costs and profit. This is the least we can do to bring comfort and offer
hope to the hundreds of thousands who will no doubt die, and the others who
will be orphaned.

If we do not act appropriately and with a moral conscience, the
consequences will be ghoulish and incomprehensible. This is merely a
warning that all of us should take very seriously. We cannot, and must not,
be duped by the change that has come as a result of the question of
affordable drugs that is now in front of us, because that is merely a small
issue in the greater context of the epidemic that we face.

The question we need to ask, especially when we look at the shift towards
PHC as opposed to the central hospital, is: If we have a constrained number
of personnel, which we currently have, over this period of increased
accessibility, are we going to be able to provide equitable and
comprehensive care and attention? Will the targets set by the health
departments be realisable? Will the quality of care be sustained,
especially in the light of the accelerated rate of the brain drain which is
reaching serious proportions? This will have future critical consequences
for continued adequate care for all in all the provinces that we are
running, without doubt.

The answer is given by our own department. There are shortages in the
following categories of nurses: operating theatre nurses, intensive care
unit nurses, primary health care nurses, trauma nurses, and personnel
providing palliative, neonatal and paediatric care. Thus the lack of nurses
from level 6 to level  8, with post-basic clinical skills, poses a serious
threat to patient care at all levels, leading to poor staff morale, and
encourages moonlighting, which is a very prominent feature of health
services in Gauteng, especially with the private sector being so well
endowed.

We have a shortage of medical specialists in public health and family
medicine, radiology, radiation therapy skills, neurosurgery, nephrology,
oncology, cardiothoracic surgery, etc. There is a vast array of shortages
that we need to fill. There is also a lack of allied health professionals
in speech and audiology therapy, physiotherapy, occupational therapy and
pharmacy.

We are aware that a number of steps are being taken in training nurses,
with contractual measures being introduced. A skills audit is being
instituted. Differentiated remunerative packages are being planned and
incentives explored, but the rate of loss demands speed of action and
forward planning.

For Gauteng, with the largest number of central hospitals and academic
training facilities, the above deficiencies have serious implications. We
believe this matter is very urgent. Academic institutions and health
departments, both national and provincial, need to develop a sustainable
strategy. Closer partnerships must be forged. There is such a big divide.

We held a workshop in the standing committee to bring together the three or
four stakeholders to see where the differences lie. I can assure hon
members that the chasm is so great that I think our Minister will have to
pay greater attention to trying to create that partnership and to develop
that infrastructure so that our health systems will not collapse in future
as a result of the deficiencies that I have noted above.

Following on the above, our country should revisit the whole issue of
allowing freer access to professional health skills from other countries,
of course not from the deprived and the lower socioeconomic countries, be
they nursing, medical or allied health professionals. I think I saw in the
press today that there are more than 100 or 200 doctors waiting to be
registered in this country. We cannot afford this kind of procrastination,
which undermines our health system.

Last year we terminated limited private practice, because of its negative
connotations, and introduced remuneration outside provincial services. This
change seems not to have been applied or followed uniformly. As a matter of
fact, it seems that many of those doctors are still functioning under the
same limited private practice system as in the past. Assessment of the
situation and the present level of implementation at various facilities is
desirable.

We should all be glad to see the deployment of community service doctors.
It has helped to alleviate the dearth of medical personnel at many of our
institutions, but there appears to be serious dissatisfaction with interns
who are being deployed under similar criteria. Many interns have to labour
without outreach support and supervisory monitoring. They have to take
decisions which they are not yet competent to exercise, and nonteaching
clinical supervisory support does not exist, or is lacking, whilst others
are better off ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms L JOHNSON (KwaZulu-Natal): Mr Chairman, firstly I would like to thank
the Minister for the comprehensive and well-thought-out speech she
delivered this afternoon. I wish to express our profound appreciation for
the support received from the Department of Health and the hon the
Minister, Dr Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, when our province, KwaZulu-Natal,
was struck by malaria and cholera.

I also want to address a special word of gratitude to provinces that sent
retired staff to give us a helping hand. Their contribution helped us to
contain the spread of cholera. Their support reminded us that South Africa
is one country, and we are one people and one nation. During our struggle
the labour slogan went: ``An injury to one is an injury to all.''
KwaZulu-Natal is known as a province of outbreaks. First it was malaria,
then foot-and-mouth disease and lastly cholera. The good news is that these
outbreaks were well managed. The success story is attributed to the
intersectorial collaboration, teamwork and community participation. The
World Health Organisation team commended the KwaZulu-Natal department of
health for the management and control of the spread of cholera, and keeping
the mortality rate low.

Allow me to take a few steps backwards. Apartheid was indeed an expensive
and wasteful system. Services were fragmented and duplicated. The present
Government is grappling with the legacy of apartheid. It is unfair to
expect the Government to undo the apartheid mess in seven years. Apartheid
was nurtured over more than 40 years, and a lot of resources were used to
maintain it. The present Government will equally need more resources to
transform and restructure the apartheid structures. Despite all these
constraints, the Government has achieved a lot in a short space of time.

Coming back to my province, KwaZulu-Natal, it is known as having a large
rural population, and it is also one of the poorest provinces in the
country. The vision and mission of the department of health is as follows:
The vision is to achieve the optimal health status for all persons in the
province of KwaZulu-Natal. The mission is to develop a sustainable, co-
ordinated, integrated and comprehensive health system at all levels, based
on a primary health care approach through the district health system. I
must say the department is faring fairly well on this issue. We have
already aligned the health regions with the new local government
boundaries.

The topical area of concern is the shortage of professional staff due to
emigration. Even this afternoon it is an issue that has been raised. It is
also dominating our agenda as we keep on discussing the issues around
service delivery. If this issue is not adequately addressed, it will
paralyse the health services. I am glad to have heard this afternoon that
the Minister has actually covered this area on human resource development
very comprehensively. It indicates a commitment to addressing the issue of
staff shortages. It is indeed encouraging.

In KwaZulu-Natal, the department of health is currently working on
recruiting retired nurses back to the service, and the response is quite
encouraging. We are also looking at increasing the intake of nurses,
opening some of the colleges to train more nurses, and also improving the
working conditions in some of our institutions.

With the opening of Inkosi Albert Luthuli Hospital very soon, there is also
a concern that some of the staff will be moved from other institutions to
that hospital, and that also will worsen the situation.

I will also briefly also touch on the issue of HIV/Aids. Again it remains a
serious concern. The recent national study revealed that the infection is
on the increase in KwaZulu-Natal. We support the integrated approach in the
fight against the infection. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairman, my congratulations to Dr Saloojee for a really
honest, patriotic and excellent speech. [Interjections.] For a time, we in
South Africa felt that we were going to kick disease and prolong healthy
life. People were living longer and longer. Heart transplants and organ
transplants gave hope of things to come. We were in the forefront against
disease. Malaria had been banished from our country. It was something
rarely found. I can recall debates, in which I was involved myself, about
closing down certain TB hospitals, because of diminishing cases.

Great cathedrals to modern medicine like Groote Schuur and Tygerberg were
built. Here great medical men did great things. My father was a doctor. He
worked amongst the poor communities all his life. I know that the best
medical attention was found in public hospitals for nothing, not in the fee-
paying private hospitals. People from all over the world came to us to
learn.

The hope was that when we had the great transformation and reform in our
society in 1994, of which we are all proud, it would allow us to improve
things further for everyone, and to take our society to new heights. But
what has happened? The test is: Are people living longer, or are they
living for a shorter time? That is the test of this department. The fact is
that life expectancy is dropping in South Africa for the first time in 100
years.

It seems that our country is in the grip of one scourge after the other.
HIV/Aids is a pandemic, TB is rampant, malaria and tropical diseases are
now being reported in our major cities. Diseases like cholera, which were
exceptional, have become commonplace. Medical aids, hospitals and health
budgets are under stress. I visit the clinics in my constituency every time
we have a constituency week. Everywhere I go the ambulances are not
working, there are staff shortages, or there are shortages of medication of
one kind or another. [Interjections.]

We are losing some of our best doctors to emigration, people like Dr Ike
Nzo, and replacing them with third world Cubans. [Interjections.] That is a
reality. In the bad old days we used to say that one cannot practice normal
sport in an abnormal environment. I agreed with that. But in the same way
one cannot practice health in an unhealthy moral environment, devoid of a
value system. Respect for the sanctity of life should be paramount.

The scourge of Aids and related diseases is as much a problem of values as
it is a medical challenge, and there are too many mixed signals coming from
the Government. It is no good taking a tough line on smoking - saying that
people cannot smoke in certain places and children cannot smoke, but at the
same time condoning sexual deviation, pornography, promiscuity and
prostitution as being acceptable practices, and then being surprised at the
escalating level of sexually transmitted disease which comes as a
consequence.

In our society, abortion has become less hazardous than going to have a
tooth extracted.

Unless the Minister and the Government begin to roll back this humanist
legislative assault upon South Africa's value systems, family values and
basic morality, the health of this country will go nowhere.

Just as the abolition of slavery and apartheid, representative government
and labour reform were the products of the value system of the society that
gave birth to these great notions, so it is with public health. A healthy
society will underpin good public health services, and we do not have that
in our country. Therefore my party opposes this budget. [Applause.]

Mr C R REDCLIFFE (Western Cape): Chairperson, I am honoured to be back here
in this House, where I spent some time as a senator, and look forward to
taking part part in this very important budget debate.
We count ourselves fortunate in this province to have a well-developed
health care infrastructure, from primary health care to a full range of
available services and a strong academic and a research base. It has taken
hard work over the past seven years to deal with transformation, downsizing
and consolidation, and still to remain a respected international player
which can attract top candidates to fill vacancies.

Thanks to some astute long-range planning, consolidation can now be rounded
off within budgetary parameters in this budget year, and in the following
one, too. In short, the Western Cape health department can be commended on
the job that it is doing, not least for its willingness to help health care
staff and patients from other provinces.

I foresee the interdependence of provinces growing in importance, and not
least in two of the three major fields of health care in Africa,
considering the following from the last week's edition of the respected
journal The Economist. Referring to the UN's mooted worldwide fund to
contain TB, malaria and HIV/Aids, The Economist noted that $7 billion to
$10 billion a year will be required, yet a rather modest United States
offer of $200 million dollars has been the only one forthcoming.

Sadly but clearly, we could still be waiting for doomsday if we depend only
or mainly on outside help. Our voice must go out from this Council of
Provinces for stronger interprovincial and international co-operative
ventures, particularly in the face of malaria, HIV/Aids and tuberculosis.

Our programme against Aids takes cognisance of the strong synergy between
HIV/Aids and TB, which is still rife in our province. The big difference
between TB and HIV/Aids, apart from the mechanism by which they are
contracted, is that the one can be cured and the other cannot.

TB is the single most prevalent communicable disease, and it was declared
an emergency in the province in December 1996. There are many factors that
drive these two diseases together. When there is a confluence, they
conspire to bring about rapid death.

Prof Gary Maartens of the University of Cape Town has pointed to the
dramatic increase in TB once the HIV/Aids prevalence is high. He has
stressed that preventative therapy works best where a control programme is
firmly established.

The reality of this decade is that the incidence of HIV/Aids is increasing.
Despite the enormously negative impact of HIV, a well-run TB treatment
programme based on the directly observed therapy strategy, Dots, remains an
important response to the TB epidemic. A partnership involving the patient,
health authority and community can help limit the effects of TB.

In March last year, we adopted the World Health Organisation's Dots
strategy in its entirety. Since then it has been supported, refined and
successfully implemented. We have seen a sharp increase in the number of
Dots workers in the past year. Without this, the situation would have been
far worse. We owe them a deep debt of gratitude.

As the confluence of HIV and TB increases, we are going to need more people
trained in Dots. Too many people are still leaving their jobs or getting
fired if they contract tuberculosis. Researchers have stressed the need to
go to the workplace if we are to improve our success rate.
The employers must be encouraged to allow their employees who have
contracted TB to keep working. Supportive employers could assist by
becoming part of the Dots programme, and perhaps by working with the
patient's family. Fellow employees must be counselled, and asked to support
their colleagues until they can be fully reintegrated, which often takes a
few weeks.

In South Africa there are two further imperatives that drive this scenario.
Labour legislation is being tightened on every front in order to address
historically skewed patterns of employment. Labour unions are acutely aware
of the move to replace personnel in jobs with contracts. Employers must be
alerted to possible long-term advantages, and where they find that it is
cheaper to treat a worker with TB than to train a new one, the experience
must be shared with the business community. Health education plays a very
important part in strengthening these ties.

In the end, life comes down to family. It is up to the patient who has
contracted TB and his or her family to go to the clinic immediately, and,
in addition to be aware of the issues around acquiring the HIV. The stigma
still attached to TB must be addressed in every community and throughout
every province. The true nature of the link between HIV/Aids and TB must be
explained repeatedly. It is imperative to destigmatise both these
conditions, if we are to make inroads into either HIV/Aids or tuberculosis.


Our distinguished visitors may have noticed that we have been bold and
alone in introducing two of our interventions. I would like to explain our
rationale for our campaign to prevent mother-to-child transmission of
HIV/Aids, and our announcement this week on extending antiretroviral
treatment for rape victims.

Each of the five points in the programme that the Western Cape has adopted
against HIV/Aids has, in specific ways, been taken further than usual, for
example by means of voluntary counselling and testing for HIV.

What will persuade people to act in a way that will protect their status?
Facing the reality of the status will influence the action. If one is HIV-
positive, one focuses on preparing for the future and not infecting others.
If one is not, while having undergone the trauma of testing, then one can
often be persuaded to behave in a different way. In voluntary testing and
counselling the results are kept private, to minimise the threat that
testing poses for some.

What is it that will persuade people to come forward and know their status?
There must be something for the individual, and the answer is treatment.
That is the basis of the programme to prevent mother-to-child transmission
of HIV/Aids - that is, treatment, so that the unborn baby can have a
chance.

Our core health programmes are, firstly, the treatment of sexually
transmitted infections; secondly, the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission; thirdly, voluntary counselling and testing services;
fourthly, treatment of opportunistic infections; and, lastly, home-based
care.

As far as STDs are concerned, we have a prevalence of 5% to 8%. Effective
treatment of STDs leads to a reduction in HIV transmission of up to 40%. A
new syndromic management approach is required. The public sector treats 125
000 STDs every year in provincial and local authority facilities in the
Western Cape. The private sector treats about 60% of STDs. In the Western
Cape 170 GPs have received further training, and we will provide free
syndromic drugs to them to treat STDs.

Our programme to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV/Aids is
recognised internationally. Of the 70 000 deliveries per year, 8,7% are HIV-
positive. In Khayelitsha we have had the AZT programme in place since
January 1999.

Between that date and December 2000, there have been 14 000 antenatal
attenders and 71% accepted voluntary counselling and testing; 18% are HIV
positive, and 1 700 HIV positive women were treated. Of the 538 babies
tested at birth, 90% are HIV negative and the programme is continuing in a
very successful way.

The national Minister announced in August last year that there would be two
test sites using nevirapine in each of the nine provinces. We were eager to
change to nevirapine as the legimen preferred by the World Health
Organisation. We started with nevirapine in Guguletu on 4 January 2001. In
Vanguard, Paarl and George we started in May, and we will be commencing
soon in Worcester as well.

Altogether, mother-to-child treatment will be offered to 23 000 women at
these sites at more than 50 antenatal and child health clinics already
covering approximately 50% of HIV pregnancies. [Time expired.]

Mr S MOLOTO (Northern Province): Chairperson, Minister, and hon members, we
wish to seize this opportunity afforded to us by this House to highlight
our views on the policy debate in respect of the Health budget. We would
also like to add our voice of appreciation to the good leadership that the
Minister continues to provide to the health sector.

Perhaps it would be proper to sketch out the Northern Province scenario to
the House. The province remains one of the poorest, with a total population
of about 5 million, the majority of whom are the youth and the elderly. The
province is 90% rural, with an unemployment rate of more than 46% and about
40% of the adults being functionally illiterate.

The province is also characterised by problems of infrastructural backlogs,
such as a lack of clean water and sanitation facilities, and poor road
networks. All these factors continue to have a bearing on our capacity to
discharge our constitutional mandate of delivering quality health services
to our people.

During the past seven years, our department has succeeded in fast-tracking
the delivery of health care services to the communities through the
implementation of primary health care policy. Our roll-out programme for
hospital rehabilitation and clinic building has made a positive impact in
the lives of our people. We have succeeded in increasing the number of
clinics built in from 312 in 1994 to 474 in 2001. At least 164 of these
clinics are now rendering 24 hour services. Mobile outreach programmes are
in place for villages that are not within walking distance from the nearest
health facility.

Due to the improved access to the health services, we are able to reduce
the morbidity and the mortality rates for priority diseases such as polio,
measles and TB. The infant mortality rate in the province has dropped from
57 in 1 000 live births in 1994 to 37,2 per 1 000 in 2000. Immunisation
coverage currently stands at 90% for polio and 100% for measles. The TB
cure rate has been improved to about 75%.

The Northern Province, like KwaZulu-Natal, has been severely affected by
the sudden outbreak of the cholera pandemic. Our swift and hands-on actions
in terms of the multidisciplinary approach and intensive health awareness
campaign have succeeded in curbing the spread and fatal effects of this
pandemic. It is expected that if further measures are not taken for the
provision of potable water and adequate sanitation facilities, this
pandemic will still pose a serious threat during the coming summer seasons.

In the last malaria season, we saw a drop in the malaria fatality rate from
0,76% to 0,68%. We are grateful for the support of the national grant of
R16 million, through which we have employed sufficient seasonal sprayers
and sprayed more than 700 000 houses for this season.

Our administrative records on the pharmaceutical distributions suggest a
marked improvement in the supply of medicines to our health institutions.
Whilst this is the case, we are continuously receiving complaints from
communities about the shortage of medicines in our hospitals and clinics.

Our primary school nutrition programme is going relatively well, with a
total number of 1,3 million learners being fed for 196 school days a year.
We are still exploring better ways of improving primary school nutrition
programmes through a broader community involvement. Our view is that this
programme should be linked with other Government poverty alleviation
interventions.

The department is making significant progress in realigning health
districts with the new municipal boundaries. We do, however, remain
conscious that it is going to take some time before most municipalities are
able to carry out their health delivery responsibilities.

In our last interaction with the municipalities, it was mutually agreed
that the process of devolving such responsibilities should be finalised by
31 December 2002. Furthermore, we have put in place three distinct levels
of care with a clear chain of referrals from primary health care centres
through to district hospitals and to secondary and tertiary services.

We have also witnessed an improvement in the patient-doctor ratio since the
introduction of the community services. The department is faced with the
challenge of recruiting and retaining enough doctors in the province, with
the retention rate consistently remaining at about 14% despite all the
incentives that we have put in place to encourage them to remain in the
Public Service. In fact, our doctor population is dominated by foreign
doctors who continue to experience problems of cultural and language
barriers. Over and above these social obstacles, they also experience
problems regarding issues of work permits and approval for permanent
residence which often turn out to be demoralising factors.

The health sector has been experiencing incidents of dropping service
delivery standards. This has been characterised by acts of misconduct and
negligence among our personnel. The department is doing everything possible
to deal with the problems. Over and above the stern measures that we are
instituting against the perpetrators of these acts, we are also embarking
on service delivery improvement workshops in order to sensitise our
personnel about the need to adhere to the Batho Pele principles.

Our department is continuing to experience problems with the shortage of
personnel, which leads to general demoralisation and burn-out. Of the total
staff complement of 37 909 that the department requires to render health
services fully, only 23 415 posts are filled, thus leaving a shortfall of
14 494 vacancies. Worse still, our budget can only accommodate 1000
vacancies in this current financial year.

As has been stated in the previous policy debates of this House, the
Northern Province health sector continues to be underfunded. Funding for
health in the Northern Province stands at about 17%, whilst the national
average is about 24,8% per capita expenditure. This explains why we are
still unable to fill these vacant posts, and equally unable to fund other
cost pressures like rank-and-leg promotions as well as second and third
notches.

Arrears in respect of rank promotions require additional funding of R32
million. We have since negotiated with the unions for this payment to be
spread over a period of three years. Equally, there is a shortfall of about
R21 million on payments of second and third notch promotions.

We are equally faced with the challenge of improving our emergency
services. We have always argued about whether it is appropriate to fight
for allocation to purchase a new fleet of ambulances, which will be
awaiting attention in the Government Garage within a short period of time
due to poor road infrastructure, or put the money aside in order to improve
infrastructure. Besides these arguments, there are still no adequate
allocations for the replacement of our ambulance fleet.

The HIV/Aids epidemic remains a serious challenge to the Northern Province
as much as it is to the rest of the country. The rate of prevalence in the
province stands at about 13,2%, being the third lowest in the country. We
have vigorously stepped up awareness campaigns which culminated in the
launch of a provincial Aids council representative of all the sectors in
the province. As part of the national programme, the province has also
identified two research sites for mother-to-child transmission at Mankweng
and Silom Hospitals.

Preparations are at an advanced stage for the actual implementation of the
programme. The department has also embarked on a programme of voluntary
counselling and testing in most of the health institutions in the province.
More than 400 people throughout the province have already been trained for
this purpose. An integrated home-based care programme is being planned,
with four sites already identified. We are hoping to expand this programme
with an additional six new sites before the end of this financial year.

Through the provincial Aids council and other forums, we continue to
intensify our awareness campaigns and social mobilisation. We have already
established contacts and conducted health education in places like taverns,
shebeens and truck stops throughout the province.

All these challenges and highlights should serve to draw the attention of
the House to the fact that provision of health services in the Northern
Province has not been without impediments. However, it should be noted that
we will continue to be equal to the task and match the challenges.
[Applause.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, hon MECs present here, hon Minister and
members of the National Council of Provinces, I arise to tender an apology
for our hon MEC, who could not make it to this sitting due to some
emergencies in the province.
Our vision in the province remains that of achieving the optimal wellbeing
of all inhabitants of the province. We want to achieve this by ensuring the
provision and promotion of transparent health services that address the
basic needs of the inhabitants through a decentralised, holistic primary
care approach in a caring and a gender-sensitive manner in order to develop
self-reliance in a safe environment.

In an attempt to achieve these broad goals and objectives, the following
are prioritised: tackling HIV/Aids, improving child and adolescent health,
improving women's health, managing chronic conditions and improving mental
health. Of course, the other priorities are as follows: reducing infectious
and parasitic diseases, improving primary care services, endorsing and
promoting the Patients' Rights Charter, improving medical emergency
services, developing the workforce, improving hospital services and also
improving pharmaceutical services. All these priorities form the backbone
of service delivery.

The biggest threat to Africa's economic development and growth is HIV/Aids.
The Mpumalanga province is largely rural and rates the highest in terms of
the prevalence of HIV/Aids in our population. Of course, we are not proud
of this situation. The prevalence of HIV has slightly increased from 27,3%
in 1999 to 29,5% in 2000. However, it has been observed that the prevalence
is decreasing. The highest HIV prevalence continues to be in the 25 to 29 -
year age group, rated at 38,77%. The prevalence rate among the 20 to 24-
year-olds has risen to 36%. Of the three districts in our province,
Enkangala continues to have the lowest prevalence of HIV at 20%, while the
Ehlanzeni and East Vaal districts stand at 34% and 35% respectively.

Given the above-mentioned scenario we cannot just fold our hands. The
department will continue to enhance the development of social awareness and
mobilisation initiatives. To date approximately 40 master trainers on
voluntary counselling and testing have been trained. Training on rapid
testing has also been conducted. It is encouraging to note that awareness
levels and the demand for condoms have increased. Condom distribution sites
have increased by almost 40% in the province, with government departments
now having their own condom sites for distribution.

The impact of condom distribution and appropriate management has already
reduced sexually transmitted diseases such as syphilis and gonorrhoea. We
believe this strategy will have a positive impact on reducing the spread of
HIV. The plan for the project to prevent mother-to-child transmission of
HIV is at an advanced stage. This is being implemented at two research
sites, one urban and one rural. The urban one is in Evander and the rural
one is Eshongwe Hospital. The site committees and pharmacists are
finalising logistical issues relating to training and pharmaceutical
supplies. Interviews for the post of chief community liaison officer have
been held.

The launch of the Mpumalanga Aids Council, which was held in March 2001,
will strengthen the partnership between government and civil society in our
fight against the spread of HIV/Aids. Plans are also in place to launch the
district and local Aids councils with the Enkangala District Aids Council
due to be launched on 15 June 2001.

The Demarcation Board has come up with far-reaching recommendations which
our province needs to adjust to. Our department has already made a policy
decision to have three health districts in line with newly demarcated
districts. The new health districts are already integrating the old
districts in line with the new developments.

Our emphasis is on continuing to sustain a primary health care approach,
which is the effective means of providing an essential primary health care
package, by ensuring access to water, sanitation, nutrition and basic
health services based on prevention, health promotion and education. Our
aim is to ensure that we bring health services closer to the people,
especially the rural poor. We can only achieve this by building clinics and
availing the necessary resources for the functioning of these clinics.

There has been a reasonable increase in the people who have visited our
clinics between 1999 and 2000. In 1999, 4 930 million people visited our
clinics while in 2000, 4 949 have visited our clinics. This indicates an
increase of patients of about 19 000. This clearly indicates an increase in
the number of people who receive primary health care services.

It is also encouraging to note that there has been a decrease in cases of
severe malnutrition, with an indication of about 15 926 in 1999 which
decreased to about 15 305 in 2000.

Intervention measures have been also put in place to improve the state of
our emergency medical services. One hundred and fifty posts were advertised
and filled in that section. Thirty ambulances were purchased and the first
consignment was delivered in April 2001.

The majority of these ambulances were allocated to the rural areas. This
contributes positively to service delivery.

The introduction of 35 community pharmacists has also had a positive
impact. We also believe that the introduction of the basic accounting
system, the BAS, and the decentralisation of bank accounts will improve the
pharmaceutical services. Our main goal remains that of transforming service
delivery. We will attain this by providing impartial, fair and equitable
public services.

Implementing the Batho Pele principle should be a dynamic process which
aims at reforming public services based on the needs of the customers,
either internal or external, and developing a relationship between public
servants and their individual clients. The launch of the service standards
has not yet yielded the desired results, and we have taken a calculated
decision to relaunch them. A process has already been started in this
regard.

In conclusion, I would like to request the House to acknowledge and be part
of Youth Month. As we do this, we will be honouring the martyrs of our
struggle: the Solomon Mahlangus, the Tsietsi Mashininis and others.
[Applause.]

Mrs M KHUNWANA (North West): Chairperson, allow me to greet the hon the
Minister, MECs present here, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. Allow me to
apologise for my MEC, who was unable to come because he had to launch SMMEs
in Taung.

With regard to emergency medical services, I wish to confirm that the
transformation process is firmly on track. In terms of the South African
Constitution, ambulance services are the competency of the provincial
government. We have no doubt that the result of our transformation process
will be a uniform, quality and equitable provision of services across the
province. When our work is done, every village or health centre should have
an ambulance.
Our fundamental objective is to establish a fully fledged emergency service
with a capacity to deliver an adequate and effective service. We will also
ensure that we have an adequate number of well-equipped emergency vehicles.
We are in the process of appointing 324 people, half of whom will be women.
All administrative posts will be reserved for people with disabilities.

Towards the end of last year, a total of 25 ambulances was purchased and
distributed equitably across the province. We expect to procure 32 more
ambulances in the next few weeks. We are satisfied that these measures will
contribute towards creating an emergency service that will respond
adequately to the needs of all our people in the province.

Regarding the historically disadvantaged students, our largest contribution
in the admission of students is nurse training. We do this through the
provision of funded posts for the Universities of Potchefstroom and North
West, and the Excelsius and Mmabatho colleges of nursing. Eighty per cent
of these students are from rural backgrounds.

Our greatest challenge in terms of empowering students from historically
disadvantaged backgrounds is in respect of the largely skewed profile of
students at the University of Potchefstroom. However, we are in
negotiations with the university with a view to reversing this trend. We
need to enforce, without fear, the requirement that institutions of
learning such as this university become more representative and overcome
the historical racial imbalances.

The equity criteria which characterise selection for Cuban medical training
cannot be overemphasised. In particular, a large intake of this programme
has been young women from rural backgrounds.

District surgeons in the North West have been given letters informing them
that their contracts will be terminated. This decision is consistent with
the statement made by the MEC of health, Dr Molefi Sefularo, in his
previous budget speech in April 2000.

Dr Sefularo has in the past made the following observations about district
surgeons, and I quote:


  ... many district surgeons have not returned our gesture of
  reconciliation and co-operation. We continue to see separate consulting
  rooms for blacks and whites. Many district surgeons still reject the
  values of our new society. They are using every ounce of their energy to
  undermine all efforts aimed at reconciliation and transformation of
  services. Our patience has been stretched to the limit.

Those who wished to remain were given the option of doing so on different
terms, terms that define them as a secondary level of care for indigent
people and part of the Public Service. Among other things, they will be
expected to work fixed hours and provide services at public facilities like
clinics, community health centres and hospitals. Their contracts will be
renewable upon satisfactory performance.

A separate group of doctors, led by regional specialists, has been
appointed to look after our medicolegal and forensic services. This, we
believe, will improve our health service, our human rights record and our
services to the courts in cases of criminal offences like rape, drunken
driving and violent crimes.

The department wishes to stress that full-time medical officers have been
trained to perform forensic medical services as part of their normal
duties. Currently, there are 32 full-time officials trained to perform
these services in the North West.

As is the case with other rural provinces, the North West continues to find
it hard to attract and retain medical professionals, especially
specialists. The community health service programme for doctors, dentists
and pharmacists remains one of the central pillars of our strategy to
alleviate the critical shortage of doctors. The other strategies are the
Cuban programme and the telemedicine project.

Areas where a serious shortage of doctors is being experienced include
Brits, Ganyesa, Kuruman and rural Moretele. Potchefstroom and Klerksdorp
are urban areas with the worst indicators for primary health care services.
We will therefore be shifting resources to these areas of great need.

Regarding the speeding up of integrated primary health care services
through district health services, we have 18 well-functioning health
districts with fully fledged district management teams. The districts
provide comprehensive primary health services: that is, clinical primary
health care programmes through provincial clinics, community health centres
and district hospitals and nonclinical services through district offices
and their primary health care programmes, for example environmental health
care.

The primary health care services are delivered in an integrated function.
This is further enhanced by the advanced development of the biggest
allocation through the creation of functioning cost centres and units. Each
individual district is allocated a budget which is subdivided to all
programmes according to cost units and monitored by programme managers.

The department intends to improve the working and living conditions of our
dedicated personnel.

Concerning youth and school health, through partnership with the Department
of Education, 15 health-promoting school projects have been conducted in
the year 2000.

Twelve schools have participated in the Breast Cancer SA competition. This
project was aimed at educating young women on how to prevent and how to
detect early breast cancer. The province has launched five new adolescent
and youth centres. Including the old one in the Winterveldt, six centres
are currently fully operational. This has been done with the aim of
encouraging youth to have free access to health facilities without being
labelled or ill-treated by health personnel.

Regarding hospital services, the visible chant in our hospitals is for an
improved quality of service. The focus in all our hospitals is on quality
patient care and sound hospital management. The appointment of hospital
general managers is having a positive effect on the performance of
hospitals based on the key hospital performance indicators. This has
resulted in a decline in hospital stays and a decrease in outpatients. This
is mainly due to the Cuban programme and community service doctors and
dentists.

From 1 April 2000 we decentralised the primary school nutrition programme.
The initiative was first implemented in the Bopherema region, followed by
the Klerksdorp region or the southern district, Mafikeng, the central
district and, finally, Bojanala.

At all times, we prefer some form of co-operative instead of individual
operators. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs A M VERSFELD: Chairperson, I am delivering this speech on behalf of Mrs
Embré Gouws, who is currently in Korea. We believe that health services
must be accessible, equitable and efficient. Currently, state hospitals are
overcrowded, undermaintained and underresourced. In a submission to the
Department of Finance contained in the 1999 budget of this report, the
Department of Public Works said that unless
R8 billion was spent on rehabilitating existing health facilities, 30% of
existing infrastructure would soon be beyond repair.

Despite this, there has been a per capita decline in public-sector health
care spending since 1996. The virtual collapse of public health care means
that effective treatment for life-threatening diseases like cancer, Aids
and tuberculosis is surely undermined.

Poor working conditions and pay have forced a steady stream of doctors and
nurses out of the public sector. These posts are generally frozen, putting
greater pressure on remaining staff and risking patients' lives. According
to the SA Nursing Council, 300 nurses a month are leaving South Africa
without being replaced. What is the Minister going to do about the brain
drain of doctors, nurses and other health care professionals?

Provinces do not have affordable retrenchment or redeployment tools, so
they cannot remove nonperforming staff. The extent of the collapse is so
bad that patients must sometimes supply their own food and bedding.
Hospitals and clinics do not have all the necessary drugs and are forced to
treat seriously ill patients with inferior medicine.

The World Health Report 2000, a World Health Organisation report which
measures how effectively countries use their health resources, rated South
Africa 175th out of 192 countries in the year 2000.

The Government's priority has been to change the focus from secondary to
primary health care. This change has been implemented too fast. In 1997, at
an international health conference in Durban, a petition was drawn up and
handed to the then Minister, which dealt with the issue of recruiting and
training health care workers, doctors and nurses in rural areas. This was
done so that the problems in clinics, especially in the rural areas, could
be addressed and overcome. The then ANC Minister never responded.

There are so many unresolved health issues in this country. Rural health is
one of the important areas in which the Government has claimed success, but
that is not true. We have the Aids issue, the TB issue, which is also one
of the highest in the world, and then the bad management, on the Minister's
part, of merger ... Six minutes? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Will you
please take your seat, hon member? What is your point of order, Mr Lucas?

Mr G A LUCAS: Chairperson, I just want to find out if the hon member is
prepared to take a question. [Interjections.]

Mrs A M VERSFELD: Chairperson, Yes, I am prepared to take a question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): She is prepared to
take a question, hon member.
Mr G A LUCAS: I just want to find out where she gets her statistics about
the issues related to rural health and so forth. Who gave her those
statistics?

Mrs A M VERSFELD: Chairperson, I said right at the beginning I was
delivering the speech on behalf of Mrs Embré Gouws and not on behalf of
myself. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Continue, hon
member.

Mrs A M VERSFELD: Chairperson, we have the HIV/Aids issue and the TB issue,
which is also one of the highest in the world, and then the bad management,
on the part of the Minister, of the merger of Fedsure Health and Northern
Medical Aids. It now appears, according to auditing firm KPMG, that the
merger should never have taken place. There are thousands of people at
risk, yet nothing is done by the Ministry of Health.

The DA policy focuses on decentralising services by creating independent
management units and reviewing the tangle of bureaucracy governing public
health. This will allow for closer control and more direct accountability.
The people are suffering, the people are dying. The Minister must please
take action.

Samuel Johnson, a writer and a philosopher, said:


  Health is, indeed, so necessary to all the duties, as well as the
  pleasures of life, that the crime of squandering it is equal to the
  folly.

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I say to Mrs Versfeld: ``Walala wasala.''
[You snooze, you lose.] [Interjections.] [Laughter.] Hon Chairperson, hon
Minister, hon members, firstly, I want to render an apology on behalf of
MEC Peters to the House for her absence from these proceedings. I am
informed that owing to other urgent commitments, which were unforeseen, Mrs
Peters could not be present though she would have wanted to. It is
therefore indeed an honour and privilege for me to represent the Ministry
and the department on the sterling work and performance of the Northern
Cape health department.

We are satisfied that our people have witnessed our practical commitment to
quality health care. However, we still believe that a lot needs to be done
to improve and better the daring efforts of our health professionals,
managers and personnel in general.

The local government elections in December 2000 represented a critical
moment with far-reaching implications for health service delivery. The new
dispensation ushered in a new window of opportunity for our department to
accelerate the decentralisation and devolution of health services to the
local authorities. The department's districts have been aligned to the new
district municipality boundaries.

Pursuant to our decision to devolve district health services to local
authorities, a task team was constituted by the MECs of health and local
government and housing to give effect to this decision.

The task team is representative of all role-players, including
representatives from labour, local authorities and the two departments. The
team works in close collaboration with the national district health
committee. The task team will report on its work by September 2001, which
report will then be submitted to the MECs for their consideration and
finalisation.

It is anticipated that the devolution of services will take effect in July
2002. The department is gradually moving towards its target of achieving
employment equity and representivity in terms of demographics, skills and
gender.

Currently the department reflects a female gender dominance because the
core of our workers is female nursing professionals. It is anticipated that
in this financial year, we will increase the component of male nurses by
10%. While there is female dominancy at the level of professional
caregivers, at management level there is an overdominance by males. This
situation will be corrected.

Some 60% of our staff are health professionals. We strive for
representivity of the disabled. The health faculties from which we draw our
labour force are not producing graduates from this sector of our society.
Thus we could not meet our target of 2% of our workforce being from the
disabled community. However, we are engaged in talks with the office for
the status of people with disabilities and the office of the premier to
find a common strategy on how best to address this shortcoming.

We continue to adhere to the prescripts of the Skills Development Act.
Currently 18 porters are being trained as nursing assistants. The staff
nurse post is being done away with and all staff nurses are being retrained
to qualify as full professional nurses. Others are being trained in the
discipline of midwifery and related fields. This training runs over a two-
year period. With a cadre of 140 staff nurses already trained, we can see
the difference.

Services are being improved through the introduction of a core package of
primary care services. A major constraint is the extensive distances and
the low population density in the province. These limit our ability to
ensure optimal access to certain services, irrespective of the major
strides that are being made in improving access to services. Community
service doctors are being deployed in remote areas with supervision being
provided by large hospitals and private, sessional doctors.

Community service doctors also rotate through hospitals such as the
Kimberley and Gordonia Hospitals. Cuban specialists at Gordonia Hospital in
Upington have significantly increased access to these services for the
western half of the province.
Cuban family physicians are also deployed in remote areas. Five community
pharmacists have been deployed since January, and this has improved our
medicine management, giving better access to medicines. In July 2000, eight
community dentists were deployed. This number was increased to 11 in
January and by July 2001 we will have a total of 13 community dentists.

Access to oral health services has significantly increased. We foresee
greater improvement in all oral health services through the integration of
oral health promotion in primary health care programmes. R2 million was
spent on dental equipment to ensure the maximum utilisation of these
dentists.

The 24-hour services which were available at hospitals are being extended
to other nurse-driven primary care centres. The implementation of this
process will be achieved over the next two-year period. The challenge for
the coming years is to ensure the availability of at least two professional
nurses at 50% of these facilities. As with the decision for a 24-hour
service, the implementation of this policy position is anticipated over a
two-year period. In 2003 this will greatly enhance the capacity of these
health care centres to, on the one hand, handle more patients, whilst, on
the other, improving the levels of care and service at these centres.

Also in line with our decision to create a user-friendly environment for
our clientele, access for physically disabled people is being attended to.
This involves improvement to the physical structures such as erecting ramps
at entrances and ablution facilities that are comparable to the required
standards for disabled persons.
A new clinic for the Green Point community has been completed and is fully
operational. New clinics will also be built at Sanddrift, Strydenburg and
Kujasa in Colesberg. Providing primary care facilities at Schmidtsdrift and
Platfontein for the Batlaping and the KhoiSan communities will receive our
primary attention.

The department has committed itself to improving the standards of care by
upholding the Patients' Rights Charter, which was launched in March 2000.
In addition, we continue to emphasise the effective implementation and
observance of the Batho Pele principles.

Since the launch of the Patients' Rights Charter, reports of rude and
unprofessional behaviour by our staff members have dramatically declined.
As a department we are of the view that such behaviour constitutes a gross
violation of our people's rights to dignity and health.

The department has constantly stated its position that action will be taken
without any hesitation against any employee whose action or behaviour has
the effect of undermining our public commitment to the principles of Batho
Pele and the provision of the Patients' Rights Charter. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I must commend the hon Mrs Lubidla on her very
valiant attempt.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Minister of Health, Dr M Tshabalala-
Msimang, hon members, on behalf of the IFP I congratulate the hon the
Minister and her department on the great task she and her department have
performed up to now.

I would also be failing in my duty if I did not also congratulate the
chairperson of the portfolio committee, the hon Ms L Jacobus, and the
committee members for all their contributions towards the proper
functioning of this committee.

The Department of Health is very complex in nature, heavily laden with work
and heavily challenged by various health and social problems. One of the
challenges facing the Government and the department in particular is rural
health. Health conditions are still very bad in rural areas where people
have lived for many years without health facilities.

This situation makes it difficult for the Government's labours to bear any
visible fruits at this point in time. After all, this is the legacy of the
previous apartheid system.

The HIV/Aids pandemic is the worst health hazard confronting this
department in my province, KwaZulu-Natal. The sting of this health hazard
is experienced by a broad spectrum of society.

Besides the killer disease HIV/Aids, tuberculosis is still claiming more
lives, and so is malaria and the cholera epidemic, although it is now
declining. I can name quite a lot of diseases. KwaZulu-Natal is still hard
hit by life-threatening conditions.

Besides the contemporary health hazards I have just mentioned, the health
sector is highly affected by the heavy workload experienced by health care
givers. The heavy workload is worsened by shortages as a result of
absenteeism, because the care givers are also not immune to the hazards I
have just mentioned. Then there is the brain drain of highly skilled
personnel who leave the country for greener pastures abroad.

Staff members are overworked as they stay long hours on duty in overcrowded
wards. The situation is really unbearable in clinical areas. Overcrowding,
besides draining care givers' strength and energy, also drains medicine
supplies and other essential resources. The budget is placed under stress
and this leads to a failure to accomplish certain goals. In other words,
quality care to patients becomes lip service.

Thina be-IFP sisibona singengcono neze isimo kwezempilo. Angisho ukuthi
ngisola uNgqonqqoshe noMnyango wakhe - uthwele kanzima. UNgqongqoshe
wezeMpilo uphathe esimeni esibukhuni sokuhlaselwa yizifo ezinhlobonhlobo.
Mina nje, isifundazwe sami saKwazulu-Natali sesiphelile ubhubhane
lweNgculazi. Singcwaba masonto onke izinqwaba zabantu. Nansi i-TB nayo
ayizibekile phansi. Nayo iyaqotha futhi ithi uma isihlangene neNgulazi
sibondwe sibe sinye. Kuyosala bani? Nangu nomalaleveva naye akazibekile
phansi. Kukhona nesifo sohudo naso esihlasele sacoboshisa KwaZulu-Natali.
Yingakho ngithi uNgqongqoshe walo Mnyango uthwele kanzima.

Sinethemba lokuthi uMnyango wezeMpilo uzobhincela nxanye uzame amakhambi
okuthiba lezi zifo. Sizwile ukuthi ukuze igciwane lingaweleli emntwaneni,
sekuyaqalwa ukuthi kusetshenziswe ikhambi lokuvimbela lokho ko-King Edward
VIII Hospital, Prince Mshiyeni Hospital nakwezinye izindawo. Kodwa thina be-
IFP siyakubona lokho futhi sihambisana naye uNgqongqoshe. Sengathi
angalwandisa uhlelo lwezempilo lwe-primary health care engizwe ethi
uzolubuyisela ezandleni zomasipala. Sengathi kungaba njalo nabo baphathe
kahle futhi baqhubekele phambili nomsebenzi. Indima yinde kakhulu.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[We in the IFP feel that the health situation is not improving. I am not
blaming the hon the Minister of Health, I know she has a lot of things
going on in her department. She took this position at a difficult time,
when people are suffering from different diseases. Now, my province,
KwaZulu-Natal, is greatly suffering from Aids. Every weekend we bury many
people. TB is also spreading. It is killing people and it becomes worse
when it affects an HIV positive person. Who will survive? Malaria is also
spreading. Cholera has also killed many people in KwaZulu-Natal. That is
why I am saying that the Minister and her department are heavily burdened.

We hope that the Ministry of Health will work hard in trying to find
medications to fight these diseases. We have heard that in the King Edward,
Prince Mshiyeni and other hospitals, they have started the process of
preventing the transferring of HIV from a mother to a baby. The IFP
acknowledges this and also supports the Minister. We wish her to extend the
primary health care, which I heard her say she would entrust to
municipalities. We wish this to be so and also wish them to manage it well
and improve the work. There is still a long way to go. [Applause.]]

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs present and colleagues, the
usual prophecy of doom and gloom is what we heard from the hon, but poorly
disposed, Dr Nel, who together with Mrs Gouws, in absentia ... [Laughter.]
... and Mrs Versfeld, together with their group of lost sheep, whose name I
will not mention, because I do not want to enhance its credibility, suffer
from a very debilitating syndrome, injected into their minds long ago. This
syndrome will plague them for the rest of their lives, and get worse with
every sunrise. [Laughter.]

Some of them, like Dr Nel, are fond of quoting the hon Dr Mandela when it
suits them. As for Mr Durr, he and his ilk, during their time, when they
talked of South Africa, and he fails to mention it, excluded almost two
thirds of the country, and called it ``homelands'', with the poor and
marginalised majority of the people excluded. Maybe he is not in touch with
the geographically changed South Africa, because he spent most of his time
in foreign countries selling apartheid policies. [Interjections.]
[Laughter.]

The state of the wellness of our nation is always uppermost in the minds of
the ANC. When we first came to power in 1994, it was one of the key areas
earmarked for transformation. We needed to ensure that the fragmented,
inequitable, racially and ethnically divided system which was in existence
then was replaced with a democratic, transparent, equitable and integrated
system, using, as its basis, primary health care.

This policy direction was clearly stipulated in our Reconstruction and
Development Programme. One of the first transformative documents to come
out of the meeting of minds on health matters was the White Paper on the
Transformation of the Health System in South Africa.

In our country the costs of drugs used in the public hospitals and clinics,
etc, are second only to personnel costs. We, as the ANC, know very well how
contentious the issue of the cost of drugs is, but we did not shy away from
the struggle for cheaper drugs. We refused to be bullied by those forces
that insisted that our course of action was illegitimate and that we would
have to face the consequences of legal action. We were prepared to take on
the biggest and best of the pharmaceutical giants so that our people would
be able to access affordable drugs.

As an example of how outrageous the cost of drugs in the global free trade
arena was becoming, I would like to cite the Hospital Association of South
Africa, and the comparative study that they did on drug pricing. They found
that a basket of 1 000 drugs increased substantially in price between
January 1997 and May 2000. In fact, all products in the basket reached the
145,9% mark. Part of the reason for these outrageous figures is the fact
that one company may dominate the sales in, for instance, cardiovascular
drugs, or in HIV/Aids drugs, and would therefore be able to manipulate the
prices at whim, leaving those in need of drugs at their mercy. In South
Africa four companies account for 92% of local company sales in the private
pharmacy market.

Another problem contributing to high drug prices was the high profits made
by pharmaceutical companies. In the last 10 years the pharmaceutical
companies have been the most profitable companies in, for instance,
America, with their chief executive officers in top firms averaging about
$10 million each in salaries in 1999.

Clearly, with this kind of blatant manipulation of prices, which had little
to do with the needs of patients or with manufacturing and development
costs, and more to do with profit margins, South Africa, through our
Minister, had no other option but to stop the abuse, court case or no court
case.

The battle for transformation in medicines has been won here, and we would
like to tell the Minister that we are extremely proud of the victory.
However, we achieved even more. Our efforts have had positive implications
around the globe. Other developing countries faced with similar challenges
have now begun to use South Africa's precedent as a springboard to make the
necessary changes to their legislation.

The concept of district health care presupposes that there is a good
district health system in place that will co-ordinate and facilitate
primary health care, ensuring quality health care in the areas where people
live. That would include incorporating local government in the delivery of
health care. The fact that there is this discussion in health is already
commendable, especially in this period of transition following the recent
restructuring of local government.

The challenge is to integrate the services into a comprehensive service in
each district or metropolitan council, so that under the co-ordination of
the provincial department of health, various health authorities within the
district or metropolitan council areas will provide the full complement of
district health services. This provision, already outlined by the Minister,
provides that the municipal health services will include personnel and
nonpersonnel services performed, such as environmental and health services,
the provision of clean water and sanitation, the provision of essential
medication for primary health care, the treatment of minor injuries and
diseases and the prevention of infectious or communicable diseases.

It is clear to us, in the ANC, that the Minister and her department are
still clearly focused on transforming the health system to make it more
accessible to all. We therefore would like to convey our congratulations to
her and her team on bringing affordable health care to all. We will always
endeavour to support her efforts in every way that we can. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, thank you very much for the
opportunity just to make brief remarks at the end of this debate. First of
all, I would like to thank everybody who participated in this debate. I
found it very enriching, educational and informative. Obviously, we have
taken note of all the comments and recommendations, and certainly, the
useful ones will continue to guide us in our work.

It is a pity Mr Durr is not here, so I will direct just one point to him. I
do not think we actually, and in all honesty, require his solitary vote to
support this Budget Vote. [Laughter.] It is quite negligible, so I am sure
that is the reason he left, because even if he were to cast his vote or
abstain, it would not affect the result.

Let me also just talk to Dr Nel, who has quoted figures here, some of them
to the tune of R10 million. I tried to find out, but we all do not seem to
know about this figure. It is really not proper to bring the claim up here
when he himself has not investigated this matter thoroughly. Even the
Compensation Commissioner has not completed or finalised his work, and it
is not easy to actually count when they have not completed their work. Let
me say therefore, that I have nothing to advise my colleagues concerning
what and how much they should pay.

He also referred to an underspending of R29 million on HIV/Aids. I thought
we had been explaining this over and over again. Honestly, I cannot help it
if the hon member does not want to listen, because we have reported that
this money had already been committed for the purchase of condoms. It is
not as if it was not spent. The only issue that we were grappling with was
to ensure that, indeed, we had quality condoms and that did take us some
time. But the money was already committed, so I do not think it is correct
for Dr Nel to say things that could mislead this House.

If I had been Mrs Versfeld of the DP, even though she was speaking on
behalf of Ms Gouws, I think that after listening to several speeches, I
would have withdrawn my name from the list because I do not think she added
any value in terms of assisting us, in particular on what we should be
doing this year. She talked about the rural areas, but she does not have a
constituency there. I do not know where she got the mandate and information
to come and talk about rural health. She probably has been speaking with Mr
Mike Ellis and together they have decided that this is a new angle from
which they can approach this matter. It is not going to help.

She talked about hospital buildings that are deteriorating.
[Interjections.] The hon member was not here, I suppose. Since 1997 moneys
have been allocated for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of hospitals,
and that money has been increasing. My colleagues and I spoke at length
about the hospital revitalisation programme. But the hon member still
rattled on and on, saying that nothing was is being done, whereas she was
here, right through from the beginning, listening to what all of us were
contributing on this item during the debate.

I would like to talk to Mr Redcliffe right now, just to say to him that I
was very pleased to listen to him talk about tuberculosis. As members know,
the situation in the Western Cape has really been worrying us. At last, he
has now understood. We shall, indeed, be supporting them to ensure that we
improve on the cure rates of TB in this province, because it is of great
concern to us.

When it came to mother-to-child transmission, he spoke about AZT and
Khayelitsha. Honestly, I am still waiting to hear from him what the results
of that programme are. Where are the mothers and babies? I hope that we
will get a full report in this regard.

With regard to nevirapine, I visited the Paarl hospital this morning, where
they have started the programme of nevirapine. Let me hasten to say that it
is not correct to say that mother-to-child transmission or prevention
thereof, using nevirapine, came from the WHO. This decision was taken by
the health Minmec long before the WHO made the announcement. So it is not
correct to say that it came from WHO. I think he needs to get his facts a
little bit right.

But, as I was saying, I was at the Paarl hospital this morning.  I express
my thanks to Dr Cupido, who assisted me to move around, and, obviously, to
some of the officials there, too, who welcomed me even though I had just
dropped in to see what they were doing.

It also became very clear to me that the Western Cape did not want to move
at a national pace, precisely because we have agreed that what we needed to
do was to develop a national protocol. Considering what I saw today, I hope
that they will also come back to us so that we can improve the deficient
provincial protocol that they are using, and address some of the issues
that we all agreed that we were going to address at these sites, and not do
things differently, because I do not think that helps. I think we really
must make sure that when we agree on certain things, we do them in the
manner in which we had agreed.

He also spoke at length about the manner in which they are comprehensively
responding to HIV/Aids. I need to congratulate them on that as well, simply
because they are doing exactly what all of us have been saying we should
do. It is not that anything new is being done by the Western Cape. All the
components that he identified are contained in the strategic plan that all
of us developed collectively. But I would like to congratulate them on the
fact that they are now doing things in that particular way.

Bengicabanga ukuthi uNkk Vilakazi uzogcina ngokuthi athi uzongithandazela.
[Uhleko.] Bengilindele ukuthi angagcini nje ngokuthi uyangesekela kodwa
athi uzongithandazela. Kodwa-ke ngicabanga ukuthi, uma sekukhulunywa
iqiniso, naye angavuma ukuthi izinto azisafani nakuqala KwaZulu-Natali.
Azisafani ngempela, ikakhulukazi emakhaya. Cha, akusafani. Uma ekhuluma
kanjalo, ukhuluma inkulumo efanayo nekaNk Gouws kepha ngiqinisekile ukuthi
akavumelani naye mayelana nalolu daba.

Siyavuma ukuthi ziseziningi izinto okusafanele zenziwe. Bengithi mhlawumbe
uzokhuluma nangabezempilo abasebenzela emiphakathini ababizwa ngama-
community health workers futhi abaningi kangaka KwaZulu-Natali. Bayazama
ukufinyelela le emakhaya ukuze benyuse izinga mayelana nezindlela
esinakekela ngazo abantu ekhaya. Mhlawumbe kufanele sizixoxe kabanzi lezo
zinto ukuze sibonisane mayelana nokuthi ngempela ngempela kuhanjwa ngayiphi
indlela.

Ngicabanga ukuthi uma ngabe bebekhona lapha noDokt Mkhize bekungazwela
kabuhlungu impela nakubona ngendlela elibeke ngayo leliya lungu.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[I thought Mrs Vilakazi would conclude by saying she will pray for me.
[Laughter.] I was expecting her not only to say she supports me but also to
pray for me. I think if we are to tell the truth, even Mrs Vilakazi can
attest to this that things are not the same as they were before in KwaZulu-
Natal. They are different now, especially in the rural areas. They have
changed. If she speaks like that, she speaks like Mrs Gouws, but I am sure
she does not agree with Mrs Gouws on this issue.

We agree that there is still a lot to be done. I thought she would talk
about community health workers as they are in the majority in KwaZulu-
Natal. They are trying to reach everybody in the rural areas so that they
can uplift the level at which we care for the rural people. Maybe we should
talk lengthily about these issues so that we can decide which route to
take.

I think that if Dr Mkhize was here, he would have felt very badly about the
way that hon member has spoken.]

We have had, as I said, a very robust debate this afternoon. We touched on
quite a number of issues - on the quality of care, on HIV, TB, malaria, the
hospital revitalisation programme, the human resources development
programme, issues of telemedicine, developing district health systems, and,
 in part, on the medicolegal mortuaries. We identified successes,
constraints and challenges.
Once again, I would like to thank members for the debate. I thought that,
maybe, before I sit down I should just use the time allocated to me now to
say that with regard to the primary school nutrition programme, a lot of
work has been done. Under the social sector cluster, we have reviewed the
primary school nutrition programme because, indeed, we were very much
concerned about its implementation.

As MEC Moloto indicated, we are focusing on strengthening community
involvement and participation, and we would like to see this programme also
being aligned to the other poverty alleviation programmes. Certainly, we
are also going to rely on the members in this House to assist us in this
regard, because it is one thing to say the Ministry is not doing this. But
I think because all of us are elected representatives of our communities,
we therefore must not just complain, but do something ourselves in order to
ensure that the programmes that are meant to benefit our people are,
actually, properly implemented.

With regard to nongovernmental organisations and community -based
organisations, I can, with all confidence, say that we are involving NGOs
and CBOs in all the programmes that we implement. I think, for example,
around the issue of HIV/Aids, we have more than 80 NGOs, and I will tell
the hon members what the problem that we are facing is. We give the NGOs
resources, and when the time to account comes, they do not account.

It becomes very difficult, and I hope that we can interact with the NGOs in
this regard. Obviously, we have not thrown them out through the window,
because we must work with them. Civil society must be part of the
implementation of all the programmes.

So we have had to incur additional costs to hire financial officers to go
right around the country to audit their books, and that becomes very
difficult. I just hope that we can also be assisted in this regard.

I would like to tell the hon Dr Nel that I am not even going to talk again
about the WHO report. I think the patriotism in hon Dr Nel should have told
him to look at all other countries, the least developed countries,
countries in Southern Africa, countries in Africa. Can he honestly sit
there and say we were correctly graded by the WHO report? I do not think
so. We have repeatedly reported this and talked about methodological
problems with this report.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I am afraid, Minister, that your time
has expired.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, I have a piece of good news, and I thought it
would be improper for me not to make this announcement. The Northern Cape
has won the cataract surgery trophy for the year 2000. This is in
recognition of their having achieved the highest cataract surgery rate in
this country. [Applause.]

The second piece of good news is that more than 300 opthalmologists in this
country have agreed to donate their services and perform 60 000 cataract
operations. I think we need to applaud them too. [Applause.]

The last one is that we have Tunisian doctors who have just arrived. They
will be in the Free State and Northern Province, and will be also doing
cataract operations. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Minister, Mr Van Niekerk has asked me
to inform you that they can now see very clearly, and they are grateful for
that. [Laughter.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 17:42.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            MONDAY, 11 JUNE 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Trade and
         Industry in the National Assembly on 11 June 2001 and referred to
         the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
         Joint Rule 160:
         (i)     Industrial Development Amendment Bill [B 32 - 2001]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 22249 of 24 April 2001.]


         The Bill has also been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry of the National Assembly.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.349 published in the Government Gazette
         No 22219 dated 9 April 2001, Public Finance Management Act, 1999:
         Treasury Regulations, made in terms of section 76 of the Public
         Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).
     (2)    Government Notice No R.357 published in the Government Gazette
         No 22248 dated 20 April 2001, Designation of an institution of
         which the activities do not fall within the meaning of "the
         business of a bank" ("Ithala Development Finance Corporation
         Limited" formerly known as "KwaZulu Finance and Investment
         Corporation Limited").


     (3)    Government Notice No R.303 published in the Government Gazette
         No 22234 dated 26 April 2001, Appointment of an authorised dealer
         in foreign exchange, made in terms of Paragraph 3(a) of the
         Government Notice No R.1112 of 1 December 1961.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Subcommittee on Powers and Privileges of
     Parliament, dated 7 June 2001, in terms of the resolutions adopted by
     the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces on 5 April
     2001:


         The Joint Subcommittee on Powers and Privileges of Parliament
         reports as its recommendations to transform the existing law and
         practice on parliamentary powers and privileges, as follows:


              (1) Second Draft dated 4 April 2001 of the Powers and
                  Immunities of Parliament Bill; and


              (2) Minutes of the meeting of the Joint Subcommittee on Powers
                  and Privileges held on 4 April 2001.


                            TUESDAY, 12 JUNE 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 12 June 2001 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:
         (i)     Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 31 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Council for Mineral Technology for
     1999-2000 [RP 65-2001].

2.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Specific Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of Sweden on Children and Justice
         Support 1 September 2000 - 30 September 2003, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Specific Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of Sweden on the establishment of
         a Technical Co-operation Facility, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    Specific Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of Sweden on Revised Budget
         Reporting Formats, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (4)    Financing Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the European Union concerning the Support
         Programme to the Chief Directorate International Development Co-
         operation IDC (IDC - NAO Office), tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (5)    Financing Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the European Union concerning Conference,
         Workshop and Cultural Initiative Fund II, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (6)    Financing Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the European Union concerning the Technical and
         Administrative Assistance Programme to the European Programme for
         Reconstruction and Development in South Africa (EPRD), tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (7)    Rider No 1 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning Support
         for the SADC Finance and Investment Protocol (FISCU), tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (8)    Amendment Number Two to the Development Co-operation Agreement
         between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
         Government of Sweden, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (9)    Financing Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the European Union concerning Regional Support
         for an Expanded Multisectoral Response to HIV/AIDS in the SADC
         Region, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


     (10)   Rider No 3 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning the
         Public Health Sectoral Support Programme, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (11)   Rider No 4 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning the
         Public Health Sectoral Support Programme, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (12)   Rider No 2 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning the
         Assistance to Policing in the Eastern Cape, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (13)   Rider No 3 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning the
         Assistance to Policing in the Eastern Cape, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (14)   Financing Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the European Union concerning Support to the
         Transformation of the Justice System: The e-Justice Programme,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (15)   Rider No 3 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Commission concerning
         Public Service Management Development Programme, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (16)   Financing Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the European Union concerning Water Services
         Sector Support Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (17)   Rider No 4 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning the
         Water Development Programme in the Eastern Cape, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (18)   Rider No 3 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Commission concerning
         the Education Sectoral Support Programme, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (19)   Rider No 1 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning the
         South African Qualifications Authority, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (20)   Rider No 2 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Commission concerning
         the Education Sectoral Support Programme, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (21)   Financing Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the European Union concerning the Second EU Human
         Rights Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (22)   Rider No 3 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning the EU
         Human Rights Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (23)   Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the European Commission concerning Privileges and
         Immunities of Technical Assistants, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (24)   Financing Agreement between the Commission of the European
         Communities and the SADC Member States concerning the EU-SADC
         Investment Promotion (ESIP) Programme, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (25)   Rider No 1 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning
         Technology Support for SMMEs Pilot Programme, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (26)   Rider No 1 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning Labour
         Market Skills Development Programme, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (27)   Rider No 2 to Financing Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the European Union concerning Labour
         Market Skills Development Programme, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Report of Mintek for 1999-2000.


