---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 October 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-10-17
---

WEDNESDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

 AGREEMENT BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND LABOUR ON PUBLIC SERVICE WAGE NEGOTIATIONS

                                 (Statement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration has requested an opportunity to make a statement on the
final agreement reached between Government and the labour movement on
Public Service wage negotiations. I will now give the Minister that
opportunity. I should advise you that I have been informed that there is an
agreement that there will be no party responses that will follow the
statement.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Speaker and
hon members of this august House, I addressed the National Assembly on 10
October 2001 and stated the intention of Government to implement its
original wage offer of 5%. Today, I would like to reflect on the
developments that have been made by both Government and labour which, I
believe, are fundamental in portraying our partnership and commitment to
build an efficient and effective Public Service.

I also believe that that is in the spirit of accountability to both this
Parliament and the country. I would like to state upfront that, as
Government, we are convinced that central to the fundamentals of
transformation is the need both to advance our partnerships with labour,
and also to ensure the full involvement of labour, in a constructive
manner, with Government in this process.

In negotiations - and this is in relation to the agreement that we reached
on Sunday afternoon - our objectives were based on ensuring that we reach
an agreement on all matters, including a multiterm agreement, restructuring
and payment for performance in line with our wage policy. It should be
stated here today that the convening of the PSCBC on a Sunday was
extraordinary. It showed the commitment of labour and Government under the
chairpersonship of Edwin Molatlhegi, the chairperson of the chamber: a
commitment to reach an agreement that was in the interests of the country.

It was important for Government to inject a sense of urgency in the
negotiations in order to ensure that the process was not endless and that
it was result-orientated. In doing so, Government imposed deadlines that
were presented before this Parliament. This was based on the fundamental
processes that we needed to go through in order to effect the final
agreement.

Insisting on implementation of our original wage offer, when we did not
reach an agreement within the original timeframe required, was not based on
Thatcherite tendencies, as many suggested, or a mechanism to undermine
unions. It was based on concrete processes and experiences required as well
as outlined in our Constitution. That is, the need to go through a
parliamentary process in order to obtain additional funding.

We also did not want to unnecessarily focus our resources without clear
timeframes and achievable goals. We were, therefore, serious about
implementing the original wage offer, and such implementation, as stated at
the time, must be seen in this context. However, we need to stress today
that our main priority was to reach a negotiated settlement and, as a
result, when the opportunity arose within the required timeframes, we then
reviewed the deadlines.
I therefore wish to confirm to the House that the wage negotiations in the
Public Service have been concluded in terms of wage increases for this
year, 2001-2002, and 2003 and 2004. The settlement actually covers a three-
year period, including this financial year.

This agreement goes beyond the narrow focus on wages, and is consistent
with the spirit of the Reconstruction and Development Programme. I want to
remind everyone in this House that Chapter 5 of the RDP stated, and I
quote:


  ... to rebuild a Public Service that will provide an excellent quality of
  service. The Public Service is the servant of the people and must be
  accessible, transparent, accountable, efficient and free of corruption.

All departments will undertake reviews in order to discontinue policies,
programmes or projects that act against the spirit of the RDP and the
Constitution.

This challenge of rebuilding the Public Service is not a simple one. It
requires the joint efforts of all in the public sector. The remarkable
aspect of this agreement is the constructive manner in which Government and
labour agreed to resolve their differences when a dispute arises. For
Government, the unity of the progressive labour movement and the labour
movement as a whole, and this constructive arrangement between Government
and labour, are critical in achieving our mutual objectives of rebuilding
the Public Service.

It is against this background that the lengthy negotiation process
concluded with a key agreement that resolved on a dispute mechanism, taking
into account conciliation, arbitration or resorting to strike action or
lock-out, as well as whatever other recourse there is in the law. This is
in resolutions 9 and 10 of 2001.

The salary increase of all public servants was reflected to members, and
will be an average of 5,8% on a sliding scale. The implementation of the
salary increase is effective as from July 2001. For educators this means,
as the Minister of Education reminded me earlier today, that educators at
entry level who used to earn R2 617,25 will now earn R2 800,00 per month.
Educators at level 12, who used to earn R16 283,50, will now earn R17
342,00 per month.

We could still break down the other sectors. In general, the entry levels
in the Public Service will now be R2 003,00. In addition to this amount,
all employees for this year will receive a once-off amount of R850,00, and
the total increase for this year will amount to R5 billion.

I have no doubt that the current Public Service salary scales and the
increases given this year are also in line with general trends in the
labour market. Additionally, as stated earlier, the agreement spans three
years. For the following two years, Government has agreed to increase
salary rates above inflation as measured by the annual CPIX.

The Bargaining Council agreement also provides for a compulsory basic
health care package and approved acting allowances. The multiterm agreement
should be seen as a great achievement for employees, as it ensures
certainty in salary increases, and it is also in line and synchronised with
the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. We believe that this will lead to
stabilising labour relations in the Public Service.

The challenge of transformation is, however, vast. It requires the
commitment and will of all leaders, public servants and the entire public.
I want to reflect briefly on pay progression. Last year, rank and leg
promotions were abolished within the Public Service. This was based on the
fact that they promoted inequalities, and were unfair and unjust. Chapter 5
of the RDP recognised that, and I quote:


  The present grading structures are very complicated and there were many
  ad hoc allowances. This must be rationalised to simple broad-banded
  structures based on competencies rather than qualifications and it must
  allow for clear career paths and lifetime training.

The ending of disparities should then be carried out in the context of
regrading, establishing career paths, recognising prior competencies,
accelerating developments and redeploying new priorities that enhance
training programmes consistent with the National Training Strategy and the
National Qualifications Framework.

The pay progression system under discussion has to be based on a fair
system of performance. It is an output movement in salary from lower
notches to higher salary notches. The upward movement will be based on
performance management excellence. A system for pay progression has been
developed for discussion in the council, and through negotiations that will
commence in the task teams, this will be developed into a centralised
framework to be adapted by sectors in order to fit their unique needs and
service delivery requirements.

On the restructuring of the Public Service, I think it is necessary to say
that restructuring is not about loss of jobs, as many people would like us
to believe. In line with the Jobs Summit agreement, Government has
committed to creating 20 000 jobs. The restructuring process is also not
arbitrary. It is based on a fairly detailed strategic plan in terms of
which departments are required to match service delivery targets to their
human resource needs.

Excess personnel will be determined through the strategic planning process.
When excess personnel are identified, a rigorous process to investigate
alternatives will be undertaken. This includes, primarily, redeployment and
also, of course, other means. When all alternatives have been explored,
only then will the issue of retrenchments arise. In this context Government
will put in place a social plan including training and the absorption of
people into other areas of the economy. Unions will be involved in this
process, including its monitoring.

The current negotiations in the PSCBC are about procedures to regulate the
restructuring process in the Public Service. We know that the Jobs Summit
agreement of January this year was a historic agreement between Government
and labour on a framework that guides the process of restructuring and
transforming the Public Service. As a result the resolution captured in
this year's agreement encapsulates the issues that have been discussed in
the Jobs Summit agreement.

As part of this process, a special PSCBC was convened yesterday, 16
October, as decided on in the resolution of this year's agreement. There it
was agreed that negotiations will start on 24 October to 12 December 2001,
when conclusion will be reached on the restructuring agreement. Some unions
have signed, some have not. We can confidently say from the side of
Government that everything was done and flexibility was shown in order to
ensure that the concerns of labour were considered in this agreement.

I want to conclude by saying that this agreement was fostered in the
context of building and strengthening the relationship between Government
and labour, whilst at the same time ensuring that we are able to address
the challenges facing the transformation of the Public Service, as we
believe that it is in the interests of all parties to make this happen. I
am confident that the commitments from both Government and labour to
conclude the restructuring process will promote and ensure better service
delivery as well as a better life for all South Africans. I am proud to say
that this agreement is a manifestation of the theme of Government: ``Unity
in action for change or ubambano kwimizamo yeenguqu''. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Thank you, Minister, for keeping Parliament informed. I
would commend this practice to other Ministers because it is important that
you keep Parliament informed of developments within your departments.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S L DITHEBE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the visiting President of Algeria, the honourable
       Abdelaziz Bouteflika, praised hon President Thabo Mbeki's role in the
       development of the continent;


  (2) further notes that he also acknowledged the constructive and leading
       role that hon President Mbeki is playing in the conceptualisation of
       and the mobilisation for international support for the New Africa
       Initiative;


  (3) believes that the statement made by the President of Algeria reflects
       the commitment of the President and the ANC-led Government to work
       for a better Africa and a better world;


  (4) welcomes the comments made by President Abdelaziz Bouteflika of
       Algeria and commends President Mbeki for his constructive
       participation in the processes to entrench democracy in Africa, and
       also looks forward to the launch of the African Union (AU) on South
       African soil in July 2002; and


  (5) applauds President Bouteflika's contributions towards the
       democratisation of Algeria.

[Applause.]

Mev P W CUPIDO: Mev die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van die toename in kinderprostitusie regoor ons land;


  (2) 'n beroep doen dat die Regering indringend kyk na die herinstel van
       'n toelaag vir skoolgaande kinders van werklose ouers; en


  (3) derhalwe 'n ernstige beroep doen op die Minister van Maatskaplike
       Ontwikkeling om daadwerklike stappe te neem om te sorg dat jong
       dogters in ons land beskerm word teen gewetenlose seksuele
       uitbuiting, misbruik en mishandeling.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mrs P W CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the increase in child prostitution across our country;


  (2) appeals to the Government to take an incisive look at the
       reintroduction of a grant for school-going children of unemployed
       parents; and


  (3) consequently makes an urgent appeal to the Minister of Social
       Development to take decisive steps to ensure that young girls in our
       country are protected against unscrupulous sexual exploitation, abuse
       and ill-treatment.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with regret that the number of rape cases is on the increase
       while the rapists are going free because some cases are being
       withdrawn;


  (2) warns those who have been raped not to withdraw cases on the request
       of the rapists, because the culprits will rape again and again; and


  (3) urges the police to find out the reasons for the withdrawing of rape
       cases, so as to prevent this from happening again.

[Applause.]

Ms L MABE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Department of Trade and Industry will invest R360
       million in a tourism pilot project as part of the Lubombo Spatial
       Development Initiative in KwaZulu-Natal;


  (2) believes that the injection of these funds into this tourism pilot
       project will result in job creation and attract private investment
       into the tourism initiatives and other economic sectors of this
       Spatial Development Initiative; and


  (3) welcomes the investment made by the Department of Trade and Industry.

[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its grave concern that -


       (a)  during the past two and a half years some 12 940 police officers
           were charged with criminal offences - many of them violent
           crimes;


       (b)  this shocking fact was revealed this week by the Minister of
           Safety and Security in a reply to a question put to him by the
           DA;


       (c)  it was also revealed that many of these officers were suspended
           on full pay which cost the South African taxpayer some R800 000
           per month during that period for no police work done; and


       (d)  while some charges were withdrawn and some officers were found
           not guilty this is nevertheless a serious indictment of the
           probity, moral and ethical standards in the SAPS; and


  (2) therefore demands immediate and drastic steps by the Minister to
       inculcate higher standards and to root out criminal elements from the
       SAPS in order to ensure that South Africa has a respected and
       reliable law-enforcement agency, and to stop this waste of taxpayers'
       money.

[Applause.]
Mr J T MASEKA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) calls on Government to acknowledge its incapacity in dealing with
       HIV/Aids, and thus abandon its stubborn resistance and rather allow
       and assist committed persons and organisations to unite in their
       daily fight against HIV/Aids;


  (2) notes that this call comes in the light of the release of the Medical
       Research Council's report on HIV/Aids;


  (3) further notes that the report indicates that currently Aids kills
       more people than any other cause in South Africa, and that between
       five and seven million people will have died from this pandemic by
       2010;


  (4) rallies its support and expresses its concern at the MRC president's
       comments that there was no greater threat to the African Renaissance
       than the spectre of HIV/Aids in South Africa; and


  (5) additionally, in the light of the fact that the death amongst young
       adults could only be attributed ...

[Time expired.]

Mr B W KANNEMEYER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the DP describes the international performances of South
       African sportspersons as pathetic;


  (2) further notes that this scathing attack is directed at all sporting
       codes other than rugby and cricket;


  (3) believes that this attack undermines the splendid performance of
       sportspersons such as Hestrie Cloete, Bronwyn Bock, Shaun Bartlett,
       Andrew Kelehe, Mark Fish and Desiree Ellis;


  (4) demands that the DA explains these utterances to all our sports
       heroes and our people; and


  (5) reaffirms its support for all sportspersons who represent our country
       internationally.

[Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mev die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die VF sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem daarvan dat -
       (a)  die VF in die lig daarvan dat sensusvorms slegs in Engels
           beskikbaar was 'n regsproses in werking gestel het om 'n
           hofinterdik teen die betrokke departement te kry;


       (b)  die VF op hierdie werkswyse besluit het omdat dit oor belangrike
           grondwetlike beginsels van taalverskeidenheid handel;


       (c)  na samesprekings tussen die VF en die verantwoordelike Minister,
           Minister Manuel, die Minister ingestem het om 'n spesiale
           telefoon-hulplyn in te stel vir mense wat hulle sensusvorms in
           'n ander taal as Engels wil ontvang; en


       (d)  daar besluit is om in die lig van die Minister se aankondiging,
           en die feit dat 817 000 Afrikaanse vorms nou versprei sal word,
           nie voort te gaan met die hofinterdik nie; en


  (2) dus 'n beroep doen op die publiek om gebruik te maak van die telefoon-
       hulplyn om sodoende te verseker dat die sensus vlot verloop en ook
       die Minister bedank vir die wyse waarop hy die probleem hanteer het.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  in the light of the fact that census forms were available in
           English only, the FF has proceeded with a legal action in order
           to obtain a court interdict against the department concerned;


       (b)  the FF has decided on this course of action because important
           constitutional principles regarding language diversity are at
           stake;


       (c)  after discussions between the FF and the Minister responsible,
           Minister Manuel, the Minister agreed to the establishment of a
           special helpline offering telephonic assistance to people who
           prefer to receive their census forms in a language other than
           English; and


       (d)  in the light of the Minister's announcement and the fact that
           817 000 Afrikaans forms will now be distributed, it has been
           decided not to proceed with the court interdict; and


  (2) therefore calls upon the public to use the telephonic helpline in
       order to ensure that the census proceeds smoothly, and also thanks
       the Minister for the manner in which he has dealt with the problem.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with great concern the irresponsible action by the ANC
       Government to withdraw from the ``Sex Tourism: Myth or Reality?''
       conference that is currently under way in Cape Town, where they are
       discussing how Government can address and redress legislation in
       relation to the protection of our children facing this industry;


  (2) further notes that the ACDP notes with alarm that children and women
       in South Africa have become part of the traffickers' human
       contraband, and that -


       (a)  children as young as 13 years old are kidnapped by gangsters,
           held captive and used for sex trade; and


       (b)  women and children are trafficked from overseas in South East
           Asia, Eastern Europe and other countries in Africa to work as
           sex slaves in South Africa;


  (3) calls on Government to -


       (a)  apologise to the organisers and organisations present at this
           conference;


       (b)  set a date when a conference of this nature can be held;


       (c)  not only pay lip service on certain occasions during the year;
           and


       (d)  be seen to be the protectors, and listen to the plight of our
           children, when in fact their present actions disqualify that ...

[Time expired.]

Ms M C LOBE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Prime Minister of Britain, Mr Tony Blair, expressed support
           for the creation of a Palestinian state following a meeting with
           President Yasser Arafat of the Palestinian Liberation
           Organisation; and


       (b)  reports that the Israeli government has indicated that it has
           qualified support for the creation of the Palestinian state;


  (2) believes that the emerging consensus on the creation of the
       Palestinian state contributes towards the creation of necessary
       conditions for the peaceful resolution of the Middle East crisis; and


  (3) calls on all role-players to the conflict to resume negotiations for
       a peaceful resolution of the Middle East question.

[Applause.]

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that investigations are under way to determine whether certain
       individuals received benefits in an unlawful and corrupt manner in
       connection with the arms deal;


  (2) congratulates the law enforcement agencies for their decisive action
       and encourages them to deal with these matters without fear or
       favour; and
  (3) calls on political parties represented in this House to declare to
       the South African public and law enforcement agencies if any party or
       any of their members has received any donations or benefits directly
       or indirectly from any one of the people or companies linked to the
       arms deal.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr E T FERREIRA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with regret that the number of cases involving serious assault,
       common assault and housebreaking are very high in South Africa;


  (2) urges the police to investigate these cases, and the criminal justice
       system to penalise the offenders so as to prevent the recurrence of
       these cases; and
  (3) thanks those police officials who work hard to prevent crime and to
       apprehend the criminals.

Ms N M TSHEOLE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the Macufe and the cultural festivals held by the Free State and
           the Northern Cape provinces in Bloemfontein and Upington
           respectively, during the week ending 12 October 2001; and


       (b)  that these were successful and fully integrated cultural
           festivals;


  (2) believes that -


       (a)  our respective cultures are a heritage we need to jealously
           guard and promote; and


       (b)  respect for and promotion of our diverse cultures is a
           cornerstone on which nation-building is premised;


  (3) acknowledges the efforts made by the different provinces in
       celebrating our rich cultural diversity; and


  (4) expresses the hope that these efforts will lead to a new patriotism
       which our country needs to succeed.

[Applause.]

Mr J DURAND: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a review conducted by the national Treasury, shows -


       (a)  hundreds of millions of rands allocated for housing being rolled
           over from one year to the next;


       (b)  that the provision of low-cost housing continues to be slowed
           down by poor capacity, lack of finance and inadequate planning;


  (2) believes that this is the result of the ANC Government's ``jobs for
       pals'' policy;


  (3) congratulates the Western Cape on spending all their funds allocated
       for housing, proving our commitment to service delivery and putting
       all the people first; and


  (4) calls on the Minister of Housing to root out mismanagement in her
       department, because failing to do so will be at the cost of the 7
       million homeless people in South Africa.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Prof L M MBADI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the tourism and development incentive package of R360
       million for the Lubombo Spatial Development Initiative in KwaZulu-
       Natal;


  (2) proposes that a fine balance be struck between development and job
       creation on the one hand, and ecological sensitivity on the other;
       and


  (3) urges the Government to continue with strategies which are in tune
       with the realities and needs of South African economic growth and
       development, thereby empowering citizens to improve their standard of
       living, by equipping them with basic services such as housing, water,
       electricity and health services, as well as the provision of
       recreational outlets for both the population and tourists.

[Applause.]

              INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR THE ERADICATION OF POVERTY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today, 17 October 2001, is the International Day for the
       Eradication of Poverty;


  (2) recognises that poverty affects millions of people throughout the
       world, and particularly women and children in the developing world;


  (3) believes that there is a critical need for the eradication of poverty
       to dominate the world political agenda in order to achieve lasting
       peace, democracy and development throughout the world; and


  (4) calls on all public representatives, leaders of government, the
       private sector and nongovernmental organisations, to use this day to
       pledge their commitment once again to the eradication of poverty.

Agreed to.

                 CHILD KILLED IN CROSSFIRE ON THE CAPE FLATS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its shock and distress at the death of yet another child,
       killed in the crossfire between warring gangs on the Cape Flats;


  (2) sends its condolences to the family of 11-year-old Anthonia Petersen
       who died when a stray bullet struck her while she was outside her
       home;


  (3) recognises the heroism of Anthonia who covered her younger sister's
       body with her own to protect her sister from the bullets; and


  (4) calls on all peace-loving people to work together to end such
       senseless violence and make our neighbourhoods safe for our children.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:41.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The following paper tabled on 12 October 2001 is referred to the
     Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Third Interim Report of the South African Law Commission on
     Simplification of Criminal Procedure (The right of the Director of
     Public Prosecutions to appeal on question of fact), Project 73 [RP 58-
     2001].

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
         Unit for 2000-2001.


     (2)    Supplement to the Report and Financial Statements of the Special
         Investigating Unit for 2000-2001, including the Reports of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2000-2001 and on
         the achievements by the Special Investigating Units for 2000-2001.

2.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
         Foundation for 2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2000-2001.


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
         Council for 2000-2001, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2000-2001 [RP 102-2001].

