---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 31 May 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2001-05-31
---

THURSDAY, 31 MAY 2001
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 15:28.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I have been informed by the Whips that
by agreement there will no motions at today's plenary. I am sure that is a
relief to those who have not prepared any. [Laughter.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 16 - Housing:
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I welcome my colleague the Minister of
Housing. Welcome, Minister.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Chair, hon members, ladies and gentlemen,
the past seven years have taught us that there are no fixed solutions to
our divergent housing needs. Our objective is not only to find innovative
ways to enhance housing delivery, but also to produce a housing policy that
best suits the conditions in each of our provinces. It is public knowledge
that, in the first seven years of office, the ANC-led Government housed
nearly five million people, with 1,129 million houses built or under
construction. A better life for women has been achieved in the housing
sector through the subsidy housing programme and the transformation of
hostels into family dwellings which will continue to foster safer
environments in which to bring up families.

The Gear strategy acknowledged that the infrastructure backlog in 1994 was
at R170 billion. Since 1994 my department has spent no less than R14,6
billion, which addressed the building of roads and the installation of grid
electricity and pipelines.  Our contribution to the reduction of this
backlog has been nothing less than a resounding success.

This success has been a result of a profound synergy between the policies
and actions of Government on the one hand, and the aspirations and active
participation of our people in housing on the other. Housing has proved to
be one of the most prominent instruments of social transformation. We have
transformed the construction industry through our procedures to ensure
maximum participation of emerging contractors and women in construction. We
have transformed the quality of life of our people who have benefited from
our programme, including improvements in their health, safety and security,
and the education of their children.

For the current financial year, 2001-02, my department has received a total
of R3 225 billion to finance national and provincial housing programmes.
Using our housing budget allocation formula, we have divided the total
amount received between the nine provincial governments, as contained in
Annexure A.

Because we are constantly monitoring our housing delivery environment, the
mammoth challenges in the housing arena almost always find us prepared
accordingly. That is why I mentioned, in my introduction earlier, that no
issue in housing is insurmountable, subject to the availability of
resources needed to address each issue at hand. It is this premise that has
guided our budget allocations to the different provinces. We believe that
each and every province has its unique needs that should be identified to
make housing funds more relevant to the conditions of that particular
province.

The release of land for housing has constantly been highlighted as the
major contribution to integrated and well-located housing development. The
housing sector, in providing guidelines for the reduction of the selling
prices of certain state-financed serviced sites, intended to release
speedily all land in the ownership of housing departments to facilitate
development. This, however, is far from adequate to meet all housing
requirements.

A strategy for the speedy release of well-located state land for housing
could not be more urgent in order to facilitate a greater proportion than
has already been achieved of integrated and well-located low-cost housing
development.

In further promoting integrated development, the Government seeks an honest
agreement with the private sector and trade unions to channel investment
into housing. Through the Presidential Jobs Summit Housing Pilot Programme
we will focus on developing housing on well-located land with access to
amenities and overcoming the apartheid human settlement patterns that were
based on group areas and the isolation of the majority from centres of
economic activity. We will also broaden tenure choice through building 50
000 rental housing units over three years.

The integrated land development approach will shift housing delivery from
being principally developer-driven to being government-led through the
introduction of procurement procedures in line with the preferential
procurement principles. This will be guided, mainly, by multiyear plans
formulated by Government in consultation with various stakeholders and
communities.

The plans will outline priorities and development principles and thereby
provide the briefs to which developers will respond in their proposals.
This process will facilitate discussions between Government, and
particularly local government and communities in general in order to
determine types and location of projects and, therefore, housing
development.

Provision has been made for the variation of subsidy amounts to cater for
the special needs of differently abled persons. The Department of Housing,
in conjunction with the South African disability fraternity, developed
guidelines in November 1998 to cater for the special needs of differently
abled persons eligible for housing subsidies, which entailed an increase in
the subsidy amount depending on the severity of the beneficiary's
disability.

Although rural people comprise the largest section of the population in
most developing countries like ours, less attention is generally paid to
rural housing in comparison to urban housing. It is often assumed that
rural housing conditions are satisfactory. But the findings of a United
Nations report indicated that most poor rural communities live under leaky,
unstable and dangerous structures which are vulnerable to storms and
floods, as recently witnessed in the provinces of KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga
and the Northern Province.

We are already working with the private sector, nongovernmental
organisations, provincial and local government structures and communities
to come up with ways to limit the effects of such occurrences. We have
commissioned a study through the CSIR, aimed at determining the best
methods to improve and introduce sustainable and quality housing through
traditional building methods. We have recommended various techniques to
strengthen foundations, walls and roofs, and the use of reinforcing
building material and good practices in the design and construction of
housing units using traditional methods.

We will further extend, this year, the protection of the National Home
Builders Registration Council and the five-year warranty to cover RDP
houses across the country. In cases of poor workmanship, communities will
be able to lodge complaints with the registration council, which will, in
turn, force builders to deal with defects on houses in their first five
years of occupation or otherwise face deregistration.

Rural poverty is one of the main causes of urban growth and results in the
lack of access to land, increased population growth, poverty and lack of
access to resources. The establishment of the Rural Housing Loan Fund is an
unparalleled achievement that has radically changed the lives of rural
dwellers. The Rural Housing Loan Fund has started a rural movement to
empower rural dwellers by affording many of them the opportunity to build
assets and providing the much-needed resources.

The RHLF has established a rural housing market and is the only
organisation that has partners who do cash collections, whilst others
prefer payroll deductions. The RHLF has made significant strides in its bid
to try and understand its market by embarking upon focused and targeted
consumer education.

The savings level in our country is very low. The ratio of gross saving to
GDP remained at a comparatively low level of 15,5% in the second quarter of
last year. Private sector saving deteriorated in the second quarter of last
year, but there has been a positive contribution to the GDP by general
government in relation to the national savings effort for the first time
since 1991. Further progress in this area will boost gross savings even
more, and add to a high investment ratio which could lead to higher rates
of economic growth and development.

I want to announce that we will soon be launching our savings campaign in
conjunction with our partners, community organisations and the private
sector. Our national savings initiative has the following main objectives:
to engender a culture of savings which is an essential condition for growth
in the South African economy; to facilitate access to banking and other
financial services for low-income households with specific focus on
purposely structured savings and credit products; to facilitate housing
development of a higher standard and quality than is currently delivered in
circumstances where the subsidy is the only source of funding; and to
establish institutional mechanisms and support for people to save to meet
their housing needs.

According to the findings of the research recently commissioned by the
National Housing Finance Corporation, it was found that there is a
considerable ability to save towards housing, with as much as two thirds of
prospective housing buyers saving 10% of their monthly income aimed towards
their future homes. On average, the saving period is in excess of two years
with an average amount of R8 700 saved.

I would like to commend the National Urban Reconstruction and Housing
Agency for their contribution to this programme in mobilising the financial
institutions. Although support from major banks has not been forthcoming,
the programme has received much support from the alternative financial
institutions.

Through this savings initiative, we have seen the development of over 800
houses built in Oukasie in the North West. Savings of as little as R50 per
month saw the lives of the people of the North West change. Through this
national savings programme we have seen 1 600 families and women taking
ownership of much bigger, good-quality houses that they built themselves.
This project has seen more women join the building industry as a result of
the skills they access through it. This year we want to see more savings
schemes develop throughout the country, which could add to our efforts to
create job opportunities for poor women and the youth.

Like other developing regions, the African continent suffers the phenomenon
of informal settlements, which arises out of a number of factors, including
rapid urbanisation, population growth, unemployment, skewed distribution of
wealth, natural resources and low income growth.

In South Africa, informal settlements were further exacerbated by the
scarcity of affordable land for the development of low-cost housing and the
setting up of informal settlements on undevelopable land, namely flood
plains, riversides such as the Jukskei River in Alexandra, dumping grounds
and dolomitic land. The result is that upgrading of some informal
settlements is not always possible in situ, and necessitates the
acquisition of new land and the relocation of communities.

South Africa is following global trends by relocating people from disaster-
prone areas. I want to emphasise that this can never be compared to
apartheid forced removals. Contrary to popular but ignorant belief,
relocating is intended to remove people from dangerous areas and to provide
them with better housing in safe and secure areas.

I am happy to report to this House that in a total of more than 1 million
houses, close to 232 000 in 293 projects were shacks in informal
settlements converted to proper homes countrywide. In response to the
President's prioritisation of the urban renewal programme, the department
has led the way with the implementation of the Alexandra Urban Renewal
Programme, with R3,5 million used for feasibility study and planning work.
In KwaMashu in excess of R20 million has been allocated for redeployment
over two years, through its human settlements redevelopment programme.

Our approach in dealing with this is an inclusive one and is highly
dependent on strengthened consultation ties between the three spheres of
Government, the non-governmental organisations and, most importantly, the
communities affected. The main challenge is to clearly define the role of
each sphere of Government in the eradication of informal settlements, and
to ensure that new informal settlements are effectively prevented.

The Government cherishes a process that will assist our planning towards
the eventual eradication of informal settlements by giving clear definition
to the responsibilities of each sphere of Government.

The Government housing programme strives to meet the goals of economic
growth, job creation and poverty alleviation for the poor. It forms part of
the larger framework of the construction sector.

Government investment in housing, through the jobs created and sustained in
the construction of houses and the growth of industries involved in the
production of building material and related industries, also contributes
directly to the gross geographic product across our country, particularly
the much-needed small business development.

Housing is one of the key aspects in generating growth, employment and
wealth. The Government's low-cost housing programme supports not only the
use of labour-intensive methods, but also the employment of local labour
and emerging contractors.

In order to ensure a better life for workers, the Housing department will
continue to monitor the activities of the home building industry to ensure
the transformation of the industry through the Constitution and such laws
as the Labour Relations Act, the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, the
Employment Equity Act and the Skills Development Act.

Despite the efforts of the Government, the poorest of South African
households earn less than 10% of the total income earned by all South
Africans, and the richest 10% earns more than half of that total income.
With this, access to finance still remains the greatest challenge to low-
cost housing development. As part of the restructuring of the financial
sector, with the promulgation of The Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Act
in December 2000, we are currently drafting the Community Reinvestment Bill
which is aimed at increasing access to finance by poor communities.

We aim to promote and attract adequate investment for growth and
development for both the established and the emerging sectors, to match
ever-expanding Government expenditure on social and economic
infrastructure. We need to align the investment strategies of the private
sector with those of increasing fixed domestic investment, promoting social
equity and reinvestment in marginalised areas.
The repo rate has dropped steadily from its level of just under 13,5% since
September 1999 to its present level of 11,75%. This has had a very positive
impact on housing development, particularly within the higher-income groups
that benefit from credit. It has also created stability in the housing
market, which is to the benefit of low-income groups as confidence in
property investment has been re-established.

This means that as incomes improve, many people in the R2 500 - R3 500
income group either improve on their houses or move out to better housing,
making more stock available for the poor to purchase using the housing
subsidy. However, the lack of available housing stock in the R60 000 - R100
000 group has impacted adversely on the potential growth of the secondary
housing market for both lower-income and lower-middle-income groups.

I hereby challenge the private sector to build houses for this category of
earners, particularly in the face of the most favourable interest rate
climate ever seen. This climate of confidence is further confirmed by the
trends in total building plans passed and buildings completed. The real
value of building plans passed for dwelling houses increased by 17% from
the first quarter of 1999 to the first quarter of 2000.

Housing policy has, as one of its key cornerstones, the principle of labour-
intensive building methods and employment creation, and/or sustaining
existing employment opportunities. Fortunately, the nature of a housing
delivery project is such that it has a relatively high labour component.

Even more positive is the fact that the major part of the employment
opportunities provided through housing projects is for semiskilled or
unskilled labourers.

It is estimated that the Government spends approximately R3 billion
annually on its housing subsidy programme, which sustains 45 000 direct
employment opportunities in the building industry. Linked to this are about
43 000 indirect job opportunities in the building materials and component
markets which the Government housing programme sustains.

We are enhancing, in consultation with the Department of Public Works, the
empowerment of emerging contractors. Emerging contractors tend to make use
of more labour-intensive methods and therefore create more jobs than the
more capital-intensive larger construction companies. Their increasing
involvement will therefore not only help in their own development, but also
increase the job creation potential through the housing delivery process.

Our housing policy provides access to housing opportunities to the poor on
a nonracial basis. It is through the special planning at local level that
our own housing projects can help integrate our own communities and
effectively undo apartheid planning, to the benefit of our communities and
the nation-building process. In certain instances it is sections of our
communities who refuse to be integrated merely because of perceptions of
property devaluation. But an area such as Dainfern in northern
Johannesburg, which has one of the highest property values, remains a prime
area in the country and yet is located adjacent to an informal settlement.

Local governments must ensure that our housing projects integrate
communities and, specifically, deracialise our towns and cities. We have
made great strides towards integrating racial groups such as Briardene and
Burnwood housing projects in Durban, and the housing projects in Newtown,
Johannesburg. We do, however, recognise that whilst housing delivery is
proceeding at a significant rate ... [Time expired.]

Ms P C P MAJODINA: Madam Chair, I extend my greetings to Minister
Mahanyele, MECs and my colleagues. I fully support the topic for debate
before us today, because a house is the right of every citizen. A house
provides comfort and security.

The department's programme is very clear on how to achieve the objective of
housing every citizen. Yes, as a matter of fact, this cannot be done
overnight due to the legacy of apartheid that we inherited. I want to warn
opposition parties to stop comparing our RDP houses with the matchboxes
which were built by the apartheid government. There are no similarities
between the two.

We are grateful to the hon the Minister and her department for the fact
that they have provided more than five million people with secure tenure
and safe homes. We further call on local municipalities to extend penalties
to developers and contractors who build houses that are as small as a Uno
car, because they discredit our Government and steal from the mouths of the
hungry babies.

As a public representative from the rural area of Sterkspruit, I would be
more comfortable if the department could expedite assistance to the rural
areas. The Minister has already alluded to that. Because our people have
lots of land, they can build their own houses, but they lack finances to
put on roofing. They would not like to be moved from their areas, due to
our traditions, our rituals and our cultures.

Asifuni kushiya amangcwaba ootat' omkhulu. [We do not want to leave our
grandfathers' graves.]

An integrated development strategy is the order of the day, as clearly
stated by the President in his state-of-the-nation address. We must support
the people's housing projects by setting up centres to help poor people
build their own homes.

The Department of Housing must ensure that every South African has access
to a form of sustainable settlement that ensures privacy. It is high time
now that we monitored all the Acts that were passed by this House.
Regarding its capacity-building, the department should also assist emerging
contractors through a developmental programme that is visible.

Sihlalo, isidima sakhe wonke umntu luphahla phezu kwentloko yakhe. Nditsho,
nkqu netshipa lithi xa libethwe lilizwe lithi,``Ndiyagoduka nokuba ikhaya
liyanetha, yaye ekhaya akungenwa ngamali.'' Umntu onomzi uba nesidima,
ahlonipheke azingce.

Manditsho ukuba umzamo omhle, Mam' uMahanyele, uwuzamile, Mphathiswa.
Indlela iyenyuka, akulula. Ungafumana abanye besithi kubhetele emva,
baxelise amaSirayeli xa ekhutshwa eJiphuta.

Mhlalingaphambili, kufuneka sikhuthaze umanyano kunye ne ... (Translation
of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the dignity of everyone is a roof over one's head. Even a
person who abandoned his home when things are no longer good, says, ``I am
going back to my home even if its roofs are leaking, for there I will not
have to pay anything to be allowed in''. A person who owns a house gains
dignity and respect and becomes proud.

I must say that the hon Minister Mahanyele has accomplished her mission. It
has never been an easy task. One may hear some people say that it was
better before than now just as the Israelites used to say when they were
led out of Egypt.

Chairperson, we should encourage unity and partnership between ...]

... private sector and community-based organisations which will provide
more effective forms of housing delivery. Housing development should
include training in a culture of customer care and approaches to service
delivery that are sensitive to issues of race, gender and disability.

The land issue becomes the critical matter here, and in most cases hinders
and becomes a stumbling block in the way of housing development. Therefore,
co-operation between the Department of Agriculture and the Department of
Land Affairs becomes imperative.

We appreciate the Minister's approach to implementing the Batho Pele
principles and to budgeting for the contingency fund that has been
allocated to provinces, to enable them to respond timeously to crises.

Mphathiswa, mawubekho umthetho onyanzela amafama ukuba abakhele izindlu
ezisexabisweni abasebenzi bawo, hayi, izindlu ezingathi ziihoko zeehagu.

Ndiyaluxhasa olu hlahlo lwabiwo-mali lwanamhlanje. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Minister, a law that would force farmers to build houses that are up
to standard for their labourers, and not just cheap ones, should be passed.

I fully support today's Vote.]

Ho bua ka Mme Mahanyele ke ho tshwara thipa ka bohaleng. [According to Mrs
Mahanyele it is the seizing of a bull by its horns.]

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, hon Minister of Housing, Ms Mthembi-Mahanyele,
hon special delegates and hon permanent delegates of the NCOP, my party has
no problem with Budget Vote 16 - Housing. In fact, the department must be
congratulated on delivering one million housing units to South Africans who
had previously been either homeless or tenants paying exorbitant rentals to
greedy landlords.

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, on a point of order: We would prefer this hon
member to speak in French. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I believe that the hon member has
already demonstrated his abilities in that regard. [Laughter.] Therefore we
will allow him to continue.

Mr N M RAJU: My party acknowledges that the delivery of low-cost housing in
South Africa faces two major challenges: firstly, the Government's
financial constraints, and, secondly, the fact that an alarming number of
disadvantaged people are in desperate need for roofs over their heads.

We do have some suggestions to offer the department on the provision of
houses. While there is still a dire need for the provision of housing, with
a considerable backlog to overcome, we believe that the time has come for
greater attention to be paid to the quality of the houses being built. Let
us stop playing the numbers game. Quantity has its attendant flaws. Cheap
and shoddy workmanship becomes the norm and the beneficiaries end up as
victims.

Greater attention paid to the quality of housing units being built, the
quality of materials being used, the quality of the workmanship performed
and the contracting of responsible and reputable builders will result in
greater pride and joy for the new house owner rather than the joy being
short-lived when problems arise immediately.

Our housing landscape has been littered with too many housing units
collapsing and falling apart. Fly-by-night building contractors have taken
housing boards and municipal authorities for a ride. These disreputable and
unscrupulous building operators often collude with equally unscrupulous
officials and councillors in getting underhand contracts, thereby
contributing to the climate of corruption in the tendering processes and
awarding of contracts.

Surely there is an urgent need for stricter monitoring of the process of
awarding contracts and conducting performance audits. I want to assure the
House that I did not see Ms Majodina's speech beforehand, nor did she see
mine, but it would appear that we agree on this aspect of getting better
monitoring of the process of awarding contracts. [Interjections.]

No contractor guilty of shoddy workmanship should ever be awarded another
contract. I say this because there have been cases of people who - I do not
want to use the word ``blacklisted'' because it is not in my vocabulary -
have been guilty of disreputable acts reapplying under other names and
getting contracts. Of course they end up giving the same shoddy kind of
workmanship.

Only reputable contractors, perhaps those belonging to a registered
building construction institute or some such body, should be awarded
contracts. Of course, it is taken for granted that the aspect of black
empowerment and the employment of local workers, bricklayers, plasterers,
painters and plumbers would be favourable factors when the awarding of
contracts is considered.

There is another suggestion my party wishes to place before the hon the
Minister. We wish to register a call for closer consultation and
communication between the community and the Department of Housing,
especially with regard to the quality of services. In other words, those on
the waiting list, before being allocated homes, must have prior knowledge
of the level and quality of what they are going to receive, rather than
being presented with the fait accompli when the houses are awarded.

The attitude of ``beggars cannot be choosers'' is totally immoral and
untenable. In all dealings with the citizens for whom housing is planned,
the bottom line must be courtesy and civility. A bureaucratic and officious
demeanour must be frowned upon.

My party further believes that only those most deserving amongst the poor
need state subsidisation from the state housing subsidy scheme. The DP
accepts that the Government has an obligation and responsibility to
subsidise housing for the poorer groups of disadvantaged South Africans.
Rural communities, especially, must be uplifted and the provision of low-
cost housing to these communities must be considered a priority. The DP
recognises that housing is one of many of the social claims against the
national fiscus. But housing must be considered one of the most important
delivery responsibilities of good government.

We wish the Department of Housing every success in building the next 1
million homes - hopefully, not in the too distant future, but very soon.
[Applause.]

Ms B THOMSON: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, South Africa is at
present consolidating the transition of our country to the democracy of all
its spheres. One of the most significant developments is the establishment
of democratic local government and the adoption of the Constitution, which
places the responsibility for service provision on local government.

This is the constitutional responsibility of national and provincial
governments to, firstly, help local government to recognise and define the
needs of local people, to encourage local government to involve local
people in planning and in the actions necessary to satisfy their needs, and
also to enable local people, suitably organised, to access national
programmes on known terms and conditions so as to assume increasing
responsibility for these actions.

In other parts of the world, these precepts have been the basis of
successful rural development. The rural development framework proposes how
skills resources of councils should be strengthened through capacity-
building and funding.

The major obstacles which the department has to overcome in rural areas are
the landlessness and overcrowding in former homelands, and inappropriate
farming methods on commercial farms, which have given rise to severe land
degradation and soil erosion. The current landownership and land
development patterns strongly reflect the political and economic conditions
of the apartheid era. Racially based land policies were a cause of
insecurity, landlessness, poverty among black people and inefficient land
administration and land use.

The national housing policy aims to provide access for all South Africans
to a permanent residential structure with secure tenure, potable water, and
thus provide adequate protection against ailments. These include sanitary
facilities, waste disposal and domestic electricity supply.

However, Government's support to housing development tends to receive lower
priority in rural areas. Rural households are often poorly organised to
obtain their place in the queues for subsidies. Legally acceptable evidence
of land tenure has also been a problem for applicants on communal land.
This problem is in the process of being resolved.

The settlement land acquisition grant, an alternative subsidy to that of
the housing subsidy of the Department of Housing, accommodates rural people
wishing to acquire land for agriculture, as well as for residential
purposes. The department strives to ensure that every South African, rural
or urban, has access to a permanent residential structure within a
sustainable human settlement that ensures privacy and that will provide
adequate protection against the elements.

In the case of farmworkers living on land belonging to an employer,
difficulties arise when the right to occupy is tied to employment. In these
cases the granting of a subsidy for housing improvements is to be linked to
guarantees by the landowner that the tenure of the applicant is secure.

The most recent survey undertaken in rural South Africa reveals a depth of
poverty as severe as that in the poorer African countries to the north. It
shows that women-headed households are particularly disadvantaged. As a
result, three quarters of rural children are growing up in households below
the poverty line.

Due to the apartheid system, South Africa's urban areas are extremely
dysfunctional and do not serve the needs of the majority of the population.
In order to place urban development strategies in context, the framework
examines some of the current constraints and opportunities for development.
These are large and growing urban populations, the persistence of
inequality and poverty, financial pressures on municipalities, a vibrant
and dynamic civil society, and economic and financial potential for urban
revitalisation.

South Africa, like other countries, will witness many changes during the
next 20 years. A clear positive and common vision of a desired future for
South Africa's cities and towns is essential to ensure that they sustain
and improve their roles as centres of economic and social development and
opportunities.

Government, therefore, is committed to ensuring that its policies and
programmes support the development of urban settlement that will be
spatially and socioeconomically integrated and free of racial
discrimination and segregation, enable people to make their employment
choices to pursue their ideals, and support centres of economic and social
opportunity where people will work in safety and in peace.

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chairperson, Minister of Housing Comrade Sankie Mahanyele,
special delegates present, permanent members of the House, colleagues,
distinguished guests, comrades and friends, once more I stand to share my
views and that of my province on the Housing Budget Vote, Vote 16.

At the outset, I would like to apologise on behalf of my MEC, who was
supposed to be part of this debate, but could not because of circumstances
outside his control. I have limited time at my disposal. Let me quickly
focus on our seven housing programmes in my province as guided, of course,
by the national housing policy. The programmes I will focus on are project-
linked housing, rural housing, individual subsidies, people's housing,
developer-driven individual subsidies, the hostel redevelopment programme
and the human settlement development programme.

Project-linked housing is the largest programme in my province. It entails
the establishment of townships and the transfer of full title to
individuals. This programme comprises 94 urban and periurban projects.
Already a total of 41 357 dwellings have been constructed and more than 100
000 subsidies were approved under these programmes.

I think that members will agree with me when I say that, indeed, this is a
great achievement.

Secondly, the human settlement redevelopment programme has already kicked
off. Two projects to the value of R13 million have been approved in the
areas of Mafikeng and Winterveldt. The MEC agreed with me when I had a
discussion with him that he will make sure that he pulls up his socks and
runs as fast as he can.

On the people's housing programme, five housing support centres have been
established. These centres enable local communities to create savings
schemes from which dwellings are financed. They are being supported by the
department to the tune of R50 million. To date, the people's housing
process has completed 768 units, which are, on average, 50m2 in size, as
compared to the average project-linked size of 35m2. Seven new housing
support centres, especially in rural areas, will be established in this
coming financial year.

For many years our people called on us to convert hostels into family
units. We are now meeting that demand. The programme on hostel
redevelopment entails the conversion of seven hostels into 2 172 family
units. If things go according to plan, this programme will be completed by
the end of the year.

The developer-driven individual subsidies programme is primarily targeted
to assist SMMEs and small developers or contractors, especially in so far
as bridging finance is concerned, who are in a position to build houses of
not more than 100 units at a time. In this project we have 804 units
completed to date.

The target for housing delivery was, and is, the production of 1 500 units
per month starting from 1 April 2000. A total of 14 274 houses were built
during the past financial year, which represents a monthly average of 1 190
units. The number of units, we believe, will increase significantly during
this financial year to meet the target of 1 500 units per month, as I said
earlier on.

We have spent an amount of R426 000 on capacity-building. Training was
conducted for both provincial and municipal officials in respect of special
certificate courses development, and this was done in conjunction with the
University of Potchefstroom and the national Housing department.

There are obviously many challenges that are still confronting us. Key
among these, as was said earlier on by the Minister and the chairperson of
the committee, is the lack of an integrated housing development plan. That
is, the provision of the basic infrastructure and top structures without
the concomitant social and other public facilities such as schools,
clinics, business facilities and police stations is one of the problems
currently experienced in housing delivery in our province.
The requisite public facilities as provided for in our general plans and
township establishment requirements, are not built or provided for
timeously. The fact is that there is no alignment between the capital and
infrastructure budgets received by the provincial infrastructure delivery
departments, such as housing, education, health and public works, and the
Department of Provincial and Local Government. This results in the fact
that there is insufficient capital infrastructure funding available to meet
the facility requirement to supplement housing delivery.

We are, of course, as a province in the process of a provincial housing
strategy which will be completed by the end of October this year, whilst
other departments either have developed or are developing their own
sectoral strategies and plans without the guidance of an overall
implementable spatial infrastructural investment strategy.

It is essential that these sectoral strategies be guided by a single
provincial or national investment strategy. Obviously we will need to
overlap with the local government. It is therefore necessary that the
various IDPs should be brought in line with such an infrastructural
investment strategy and should, at the same time, inform the strategy
itself.

The fact that housing delivery, as well as other infrastructure programmes,
have been implemented without a guiding provincial or national strategy,
especially in so far as the spatial element of such a strategy is
concerned, has contributed to the fact that housing delivery, as well as
other infrastructure delivery, has not always occurred in an integrated
manner.

The Minister will agree with me that we are from the same province, and I
would want her to listen and possibly agree with me that, firstly, we have
a backlog of about 300 000 houses in the province, and the amount of
R256 735 000 received by our province for this financial year is too little
to address the backlog. I would advise the Minister to consider increasing
our allocation. I suspect that for us to address this problem we might need
not less than R4 billion.

The whole question surrounding the release of land for housing development
purposes and long delays experienced in acquiring the requisite section 28
certificates from the Department of Land Affairs, especially in respect of
tribal land, and concomitant uncertainty with regard to the medium-term to
long-term tenure arrangement to be adopted has, as the chairperson said
earlier on, delayed the implementation of certain housing projects.

In conclusion I would want to highlight the following. Comrade Majodina,
who is the chairperson, will be very happy to hear some of these things.
The North West Housing Development Act of 1998 will be amended very soon to
ensure compliance with the national decision to abolish the provincial
housing development boards. I would like to say to Ms Majodina that in this
financial year we will be establishing a rental tribunal as well as
information offices at various municipalities to give effect to the Rental
Housing Act of 1999.

Finally, the province, in conjunction with the national Department of
Housing, will prioritise and select the successful tender during the course
of this financial year for the erection of 5 000 rental housing units to
the value of approximately R250 million. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I would like to remind hon members that
in the House we always address one another as ``hon member''. [Applause.]

Mr M DANGOR (Gauteng): Madam Chairperson, hon Minister, hon colleagues,
friends and comrades, the apartheid past shaped the events and policies of
our development landscape. These historical events subjected the majority
of our people to squalor, poverty and other appalling living conditions.

The former regime subjected black people, and African people in particular,
to the most horrendous conditions. Can we forget the denial of land
emanating from the Land Act of 1913? Can we forget the dispossession of the
Group Areas Act? These were the major influences and factors that
determined the landscape inherited by the present Government.

Our mandate is clearly articulated in the manifesto of the governing party.
It is guided by the RDP document and inspired by the declaration of the
congress of the people. Our duty is to translate these aspirations into
reality.

We have, despite major constraints, delivered phenomenal results. More than
154 000 houses have been built. Through the Mayibuye programme, more than
70 000 informal settlements have been upgraded. A total of 155 000 people
have received title deeds and are now proud owners of their homes.
Accommodation has improved in the present Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
for 80 000 people living in hostels. Five per cent of subsidy allocations
for every new project are now reserved for people who are physically
challenged and the aged.

We are strengthening our ties with women in the construction industry. We
are moving towards enabling NGOs to facilitate community-based
organisations' undertaking the development of their own shelter, and
shifting 37,5% of our budget into this people-centred development process
of enabling civil society to participate in the planning and implementation
of projects.

Gramsci made a very useful analytical distinction between civil and
political society in which the former is made up of voluntary or, at least,
reasonable and noncoercive affiliations, like schools, communities,
families, trade unions and faith communities. But we need to inculcate into
these partners in development a shift away from the giveaway shelter
paradigm for people who are unfortunate and who have no disposable income
or are underemployed, but who are willing and can contribute to sweat
equity and provide an enhanced shelter product in sustainable communities.

We are moving towards harmonising the budgets between the departments to
ensure that we deliver medical, educational, sports and other facilities
when we provide shelter products. Recently we engaged the newly and
democratically elected local governments to create synergy between the
budgets and timeframes of us in the province and local government delivery
programmes.

As a prime example, we need to thank the Minister and the President for the
Alexandra redevelopment programme. This presidential project is similar to
the one that was undertaken earlier in the East Rand, where integrated
development and timeous delivery has transformed the lives of our citizens.

Delivery can be anticipated this financial year. The overall development
and environmental management framework for Alexandra is to be completed.
This will form the basis for the identification of intervention precincts
and the preparation of detailed precincts. We are now moving into precinct
development. Several infrastructure studies are, likewise, to be completed
during the year in order to assess the capacity and condition of existing
engineering infrastructure in Alexandra.

These plans will establish the basis for further work in the Greater
Alexandra area during the next seven years. Planning, however, will not in
itself create a changed environment, and to this end steps will be taken to
enhance governance capacity in order to manage densities, avoid the
reoccupation of vacated land, and enforce zoning and other by-laws within
the Alexandra area.

The integration of Alexandra into the surrounding economy constitutes a
critical focus area. In order to reduce unemployment, enhance job creation
and increase income levels within the Greater Alexandra area, a subregional
economic development strategy is to be developed in consultation with
various stakeholders. This will include programmes to stabilise and upgrade
existing commercial and industrial areas such as the Malboro South
industrial area and the Wynberg retail precinct. Steps will also be taken
to introduce skills development programmes to build skills which are
relevant to the surrounding economy and which can support the redevelopment
process.

As an important housing landmark, the department will commence with the
redevelopment of what was formerly known as the Beirut area on a precinct
basis, through the construction of medium-density housing, the upgrading of
the public environment, the greening of landscapes, and the provision of
lighting, etc. The commemoration of the historical significance of the area
and the history of Alexandra is also important and must be maintained.

In order to facilitate the de-densification of Alexandra, 2 200 additional
houses are to be constructed at Alexandra Far East Bank, and additional
houses will also be constructed in the River Park area. The department
will, likewise, commence with the upgrading of the women's hostel, known as
the Helen Joseph hostel, in order to improve the quality of life and the
security of the women in the hostel.

In order to enhance the learning environment at schools, all school sites
will be cleared of illegal occupants during the year and steps will be
taken to fence these sites. The construction of sporting facilities on
cleared sites will be initiated during the year in order to enhance
sporting and recreational activities for the children and youth of
Alexandra township. The quality of education will, furthermore, be enhanced
through the linking of the Alexandra schools project to the Gauteng on-line
project.

From a public safety perspective, steps will be taken to ensure the ongoing
building of partnerships as well as resource capacity and service delivery
improvements across all sectors. This will include the rehabilitation and
capacitation of police stations and the establishment of victim support
centres.

We want to say to the hon the Minister that we have cleared all the people
from the Jukskei River now. We are willing and able to govern and we will
not be stopped.

We have a strategy that informs the shelter component of integrated human
settlement. The principles we have developed and adopted in the Alexandra
area, and which inform the way we are going to do things in the future, are
as follows: giving priority to the needs of the poor; meaningful
consultation with the affected individuals and communities; ensuring as
wide a choice of housing and tenure options as is reasonably possible;
economical, fiscal, social and financial affordability and sustainability;
integrated development planning; transparent, accountable and equitable
administration; upholding the practice of good governance; and encouraging
and supporting individuals and communities in their efforts to fulfil their
own housing needs by assisting them in accessing land, services and
technical assistance in a way that leads to the transfer of skills to the
community and its empowerment.

The objectives of the strategy are as follows: education and consumer
protection; the establishment, development and maintenance of socially and
economically viable communities and of safe and healthy living conditions,
to ensure the elimination and prevention of slums and slum conditions;
racial, social, economic and physical integration in urban and rural areas;
the effective functioning of the housing market and the taking of steps to
achieve equitable access to the market; taking measures to prohibit unfair
discrimination on the grounds of race and gender, and other forms of unfair
discrimination by all actors in the housing development process; ensuring
the economic utilisation of land and services; meeting special housing
needs, including, but not limited to, the needs of the physically
challenged; the provision ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I call upon Kgoshi Mokoena to address
the House.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. We agreed, by
consensus, in the Select Committee on Agriculture, that the title ``Chief''
bestowed on the hon Mokoena is not a traditional title, and should be
replaced by ``King''. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Thank you, hon member, for that advice.
Unfortunately, hon member, you made the fundamental error of not informing
the Chairperson. [Laughter.]

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, this
Government promised to house people in decent houses, and that was done. It
promised to build a certain number of houses in a given period of time, and
that was done. [Interjections.] It promised to give these houses to the
people for free, and that was done. It promised to give people full
ownership of these houses, and that was done. This hon Minister promised to
come up with legislation that would guard against professional cheats or
people who want to exploit these housing schemes. Hon members will remember
that before we went for Easter recess, the Minister did exactly that.

Mintirho ya vulavula n'wana mhani. [Actions speak louder than words.]

As public representatives, how can we complement what the Minister and the
department are doing? Let us agree, there are challenges faced by the
department. Let us confront them head-on. For example, it is pleasing to
note that in the Northern Province no developer is allowed to build a house
that is less than 40m2 in size. No compromise. The hon MEC Maswanganyi gave
that directive after what happened in some housing  projects in the
province. Again as public representatives, after identifying such problems,
let us intervene.

Let us make it a norm that no developer will start any housing project if
he or she cannot adhere to a particular standard or requirement. I want to
believe that we can do that. Hon members know that the best way to bring
focus into one's life is never to place a question mark where God has put a
full stop. [Laughter.] That is another challenge.

Last year I wanted to know from the hon the Minister if the time had not
yet arrived for the department to build houses where people are, in their
respective villages, instead of establishing these new ``smallarnyana''
townships - another challenge. It came to our notice, or it was discovered,
that in some areas young boys and girls of about 18 years have occupied
these houses. They have moved out of their family homes to come and stay in
these houses. We cannot accept this kind of behaviour. Let us find a way of
avoiding this unbecoming behaviour. I know we will get it right. If at
first the hon the Minister does not get it right, let her read her
instructions again - another challenge. [Laughter.]

There is no doubt that the hon the Minister has done wonderfully well in
the number of houses that the department has built. I think it is time now
for the department to focus on quality instead of quantity. Let us, for a
while, shelve quantity, and concentrate on quality. How about that? That
would be nice.

An HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!

Chief M L MOKOENA: Surprisingly, in life there are people who are surprised
when things happen. Some wonder when things happened.  There are those who
want to see things happen and those who get excited when things happen.
There are also those who just watch things happen. All these people cannot
be trusted. The only people who can be taken seriously are people who make
things happen. [Interjections.] This last group has very few people. One
such person is the hon the Minister of Housing. She is one of those few
great leaders who never desire to lead, but prefer to serve. She is unlike
those leaders who want the Lord to guide them, while they have not decided
or made up their minds where they want to go.

I say well done to the hon the Minister. Modimo a retswe. [God is great.]
[Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI (Free State): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members and
comrades, this is a very important discussion for us. We have come to say
and confirm what hon Mokoena has just said. We undertook to work together
to speed up change, and it is happening.

I would like to tell the hon the Minister that we took a decision that we
were going to do away with the provincial housing board. The Free State one
has ceased operation. We undertook that we would set in place a platform
for a participatory process which involves various stakeholders.

We have held our second annual housing lekgotla - a very successful one. It
was successful not only because it happened as we had undertaken, but also
because it addressed three critical issues in the housing process. Firstly,
the issue of an integrated housing delivery strategy was one of the key
themes of our housing conference. It was very important for us because,
having learnt in the past and having observed that it would be appropriate
for us to evolve along with stakeholders an appropriate strategy that
informs our work in the province, we have now taken appropriate steps to do
so.

We also found it appropriate to deal with the question of women in
construction at that conference. That question was given focused attention
by participants there - women themselves, and others in the housing
construction. The third important one was housing and environment, because
we consider them to be two of the most critical crosscutting issues around
the housing delivery process.

Our annual conference is a very important one for us because not only is it
going to be an annual one, but we will be producing detailed reports which
we will circulate to, amongst other stakeholders, hon members of this House
so that they are kept abreast of the critical steps that we are taking in
the provinces, specifically in the Free State.

This is also critical for us in that the accountability from the mandate
that we received from the people of this country to govern, is returning to
where it belongs so that when we take the political decisions about where
we locate housing and how we distribute it, we are able to insist and
ensure that policy is implemented as closely to how we want to see it in
reality as we are able to deal with it.

What we would like to point out is that one of the challenges that we
confronted was that, at a national level, we created institutions that
support housing delivery. Some of these were intended to help people access
credit and provide finances to people who lend money to those who want to
build homes, and others were intended for lending money to the emerging
contractors to allow them also to enter into housing construction because
one of the biggest barriers to Africans, and blacks generally, is access to
finance and credit.

We are happy to say that the challenge that we posed to these institutions,
at the Gallagher conference that was convened about a year ago, was
accepted quite gladly by some of those who were present there. The National
Urban Reconstruction and Housing Agency, for example, took the challenge
quite seriously. They are now operating from our own buildings in the
province. To date they are providing guarantees to 116 projects in the Free
State. They have completed 34 of these projects. In total they have spent
R104 165 000, which is quite significant in our province in terms of the
access that it is giving to emerging contractors and enabling people who
previously were not able to enter this sector without guarantees to do so.
We found this to be very important.

The other important thing is that, as we speak now, the National Home
Builders Registration Council is not only going around raising awareness in
our province, but is also, as we challenge them to do, speaking with key
regional operators on the ground so that the criterion that is used in
project monitoring, which is necessary to prevent bad quality housing from
emerging, is actually taken on board and is practised by our own
departments in collaboration with the NHBRC. In other words, the
partnership that we spoke about is indeed taking place and taking shape.
This intimate relationship around issues of housing will speak to the issue
raised by Chief Mokoena, of ensuring quality. We undertook that we will do
something about it. We have established the institution that is now working
practically on the ground and people are having their homes, which had been
built by people who created bad quality housing, rebuilt.

It is also appropriate to give some indication of figures in the province.
To date we have built 66 847 houses as at April - these are statistics
compiled by the CSIR, which is our partner around these issues in the
province - and 2 620 houses are currently under construction. Four thousand
four hundred and sixty-six houses - under support centres - have been
completed and 306 are under construction.

Housing support centres in the province have not only been very successful,
because they produce good quality homes, and also because they include,
largely, women, but, most importantly, have now formed themselves into an
association. They are now providing support to housing support centres
where they emerge so that these new ones do not have to reinvent the wheel.
Institutional capacity is being used to replicate the successful efforts
across the board. We are very proud of this initiative.

The challenge that we face is that we have 60 000 saving schemes of the
Homeless People's Federation in the province, with 4 000 members. They tell
one that their need is not only housing. Housing is only one of the many
needs which they have and for which they use their savings. As Government,
we have a great need to reinforce people's initiatives on the ground. This
is one of the reasons why we believe that we must work with them so that we
reinforce their creativity so that they do not behave like wheelbarrows
which cannot move on their own. They have shown the spirit of people-driven
development. We need to support this.

We are also proud to say that just recently, about three or four weeks ago,
70 graduates of our national capacity-building programme were given their
certificates. They come from the local authorities and also from our
department. They have been trained on issues of project management, housing
policy, integrated development processes and various other skills that we
have found to be necessary in the housing sector.

We are also proud to say that we are collaborating quite actively with ...
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Chairperson, section 26 of the national Constitution says
that:


  Every person has a right to have access to adequate housing. The state
  must take reasonable legislative and other measures, within its available
  resources, to achieve a progressive realisation of this right.

The department is commended for observing the constitutional requirement
indicated above. The housing provision by the department has been enforced
through the RDP since the present Government came into power.

In terms of most of Maslow's hierachy of human needs, food and shelter -
housing, in other words - rate the highest among human needs.

Biblical scripture bears testimony to this argument. Hon members should
remember that Adam and Eve's first concern when they discovered that they
were naked, after having eaten the forbidden fruit, was to cover their
bodies. This emphasises the importance of shelter.

If one were to undertake an exploratory investigation in the Northern
Province for the purpose of determining the present basic human needs, one
would undoubtedly come up with the following issues: unemployment, water,
health services, etc. Perhaps housing might not be mentioned as a pressing
need. But this does not suggest that there are no housing needs in the
Northern Province. It could be a priority in urban areas such as Tzaneen,
Louis Trichardt and Pietersburg.
A total of 86% of the Northern Province's population is located in the
rural areas. One would be biased against rural people if one were to argue
that a need for housing does not exist there. It does. Housing structures
have been built in most rural areas of the Northern Province. Some have
been occupied while others have not. Reference has already been made in
this House to the fact that some of these structures have been converted
into business structures.

May I share with the hon the Minister and the House the sentiments of some
of the people I met on the ground in respect of the housing programme in
force. They say that the Government is trying its best to address its
backlog in housing, but if our cultural norms, standards and values,
practices and habits could also be taken on board the process, justice
would be seen to have been done.

Here they were referring to the size of the residential site which is not
big enough; the crowded dwellings; lack of space for putting up kraals for
cattle and goats; the fact that fowls would have to roam around their yards
there; the space for putting up additional huts for family members such as
grannies, sisters, elder brothers; and so on.

Last but not least, one was impressed by the approach to the replacement of
structures destroyed by floods during 1998. Three-roomed structures have
been built within the existing residential sites of the affected
households. The houses therefore become located within and among other
buildings the people personally constructed. The element of ownership is
therefore entrenched.

One needs to review the modus operandi of effecting improvement to the
housing provision programme because there is no alternative to experience.
Otherwise the UDM is in support of the aims and objectives of this Vote.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Because you had the
least number of minutes, I gave you an extra half a minute. [Laughter.]

Mr G E NKWINTI (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister and the hon
members of the House, let me join my colleagues in highlighting and giving
expression to some of the matters raised in the speech by the Minister.
Now, the department in the province of the Eastern Cape has identified the
following strategic priorities for housing this financial year. Firstly, we
must systematically eliminate the housing backlog - and we are busy
quantifying this - and encourage private bond holders to respond. The
Government has a programme to assist private bond defaulters. This has
become an important programme for the Government.

Secondly, we must finalise the transfer of state rented houses to
occupants. This has become a very important matter in the province,
especially in the areas formerly administered by the CPA, the Cape
Provincial Administration, particularly in coloured areas.

Thirdly, we need to ensure that people earning a regular income pay for
services rendered to them by municipalities. This is important because we,
as the department of housing, cannot just fold our arms once we have
delivered a house. We must ensure that we assist municipalities in this
regard.

Fourthly, we must improve the quality of housing product delivered and the
housing subsidy management, because these are two important things which
the Minister has mentioned already. We have also resequenced the housing
project protocol because we thought we should contribute to the alleviation
of poverty and to developing or building the economy of the country, and,
therefore, job creation and skills development, which are linked to the
quality of the house produced. Another strategy of rural social
development.

These are our key strategic areas of focus this financial year. We think
these are achievable. The department is committed to promoting housing
development in a manner that maximises job creation and, therefore, skills
development and the improved quality of the product. The department will
continue to seek creative solutions in this regard. It is not an easy task,
but we think we can do it.

The following two creative solutions have emerged during the course of the
past financial year. Firstly, there is the rapid land development
programme. In terms of this programme the housing subsidy has been split
into two phases. Phase one includes building serviced land stock through
established housing developers. As a result of this strategy we have
developed 25 000 service sites during the last financial year at a cost of
R112 million.

Phase two includes following up with top structures this financial year. We
have split it between two financial years through emerging contractors. In
this way it is envisaged that the best of both, in terms of solid
infrastructure services and the satisfactory top structure, will be
achieved.

This is a public-private partnership. It is our intention, in the medium to
long term, to start the managerial skills training - we have started with
the first quarter of a two-day training course on managerial skills - for
these people so as to ensure that they not only are able to produce a house
but also can manage their own businesses and outgrow the status of being
emerging contractors.

The second strategy is integrated housing development, which is a strategy
that addresses most of the programme payment regimes at the same time, that
is in an integrated manner instead of the rigid straight-line sequencing
which has historically been followed.

This is essentially a partnership between the municipalities and the
department, and it is therefore a public-public partnership. The province
is piloting out this strategy during the 2001-02 financial year and the
results will be realised during the next financial year. The current
project is based on a people's housing process which is more flexible than
the rest.

We think, therefore, that the 25 000 serviced sites which have been created
during the past financial year will be the basis and a challenge for us to
build top structures. We do not know if we will be able to build 25 000 top
structures, but that is what we will be aiming for, because that is what we
have as serviced stock during this financial year.

Regarding special projects, in her speech the Minister also mentioned
women, the youth and physically challenged persons in construction in rural
communities. We have set aside 35% of the budget for these categories of
persons in our province. We are going to assist here very very actively.
But this does not mean that women and the youth will not feature in the 65%
of the amount allocated to housing.
With regard to quality control, we have three civil engineers in the
department and nine technicians. I am responding to some of the correct
criticisms which have been levelled at the development of housing by some
hon members, just to say that we are doing something about this. We have
three civil engineers in the department with nine technicians, so we have
set up three teams. Each team is led by a civil engineer, with three
technicians each, for a rigorous inspection regime. We think this is what
is going to help us not to depend on the people out there in the field. The
teams in the department will actually be doing the work.

Secondly, they will also be project managers for the housing project, from
our side as the department, so that, again, we do not have to outsource the
service when we have the skills in the department.

For instance, we have 25 000 sites that we have developed. Right now we
have these three teams going through the province, checking the quality of
those serviced sites before they are handed over formally to us. That will
make sure that when we build houses a rigorous, even traditional,
inspection regime will kick in.
Finally, we think that the housing delivery process has contributed towards
economic and social progress, and that has helped in it pursuing the
challenge of establishing functional and sustainable urban and rural
settlements.

Dr P J C NEL: Voorsitter, om 'n huis te hê, is om 'n adres te hê; 'n plek
waarheen mens teruggaan. Dis 'n klein paleisie waar jy en jou gesin skuil
teen die elemente en mekaar vertroetel en koester. Daar is 'n kinderrympie
wat begin met die woorde, ``huis, paleis, pondok''. Ek glo toe wyle mnr Joe
Slovo in 1994 Minister van Behuising geword het, was dit sy strewe om die
volgorde van hierdie rympie om te ruil na ``pondok, huis, paleis'', om
sodoende miljoene mense uit hul krotbestaan tot 'n menswaardige gemeenskap
op te hef.

Die gejaag na getalle het egter grootliks daartoe bygedra dat mnr Slovo se
droom nie 'n werklikheid kon word nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Dr P J C NEL: Chairperson, to have a house is to have an address; a place
that one can return to. This is a small palace where you and your family
can take shelter against the elements and pamper and cherish one another.
There is a children's rhyme in Afrikaans that begins with the words,
``huis, paleis, pondok'' [house, palace, shack]. I believe that when the
late Mr Joe Slovo became Minister of Housing in 1994 it was his ideal to
change the order of this rhyme to ``shack, house, palace'', in order to
uplift millions of people from their slum dwellings and turn them into a
community with human dignity.

However, the pursuit of numbers largely contributed to the fact that Mr
Slovo's dream could not be realised.]

We have learned with great appreciation from the hon the Minister today
that approximately 1,129 million housing opportunities have been created
since 1994, providing 5 million poor people with homes.

Many of them, however, were disappointed at either the size, quality or
location of the houses they had received, such as, for instance, the little
matchboxes at Delft. Many either left or sold their houses and went back to
informal settlements and their Mkhukhus [shacks].

The question arises whether it would not have been better if the citizens
were told beforehand what size and quality houses they were going to
receive and what their housing rights were, so that they would have had
reasonable expectations.

A recent study on housing rights funded by the Foundation for Human Rights
and performed by the Built Environment Support Group, shows that South
Africans' rights of access to adequate housing, as entrenched in the
Constitution, is not being properly realised. In fact, it further states
that if South Africa's housing initiatives are not improved, they will
create additional health, security, educational and environmental burdens
for the state.

The report further states that, and I quote from an article in the
Government Digest of April 2000:


  Our study found that, because of the lack of integration of budgets of
  related Government departments, public funds are being spent on
  inadequate and not adequate housing.


  The South African Government's spending on housing falls far short of
  what is needed. Housing costs the state about R3,7 billion annually,
  representing 1,8% of the national expenditure. The Government's original
  intention, based on international experience, was to spend 5%.

If one looks at the amount allocated in the 2001-02 budget for housing
development funding, one will notice that there is an increase of only
7,5%, which is plus-minus the same as the current inflation rate. That
means, in reality, no increase. To that effect I would like to quote,
again, from the same article:


  The most visible problem that lack of funding produces is corner cutting
  in terms of materials, poor design of housing projects and poor
  construction resulting in the urban environment actually becoming a
  hazard.

Ek besef maar al te goed dat dit met die bietjie geld tot haar beskikking
baie moeilik is vir die agb Minister om 'n keuse te maak tussen kwaliteit
en kwantiteit, veral as mens in ag neem dat die agterstand in behuising
tans tussen 3 en 4 miljoen is. Mens kan maar net hoop dat die
inwerkingstelling van die Rental Housing Act in sy doel sal slaag om
verhuurbare eiendom daar te stel en te bevorder en ook toegang tot geskikte
behuising te bevorder.
Ek het geen twyfel in my gemoed dat die oorspronklike behuisingsubsidie van
R15 000 wat as gevolg van inflasie nou ongeveer 30% van die oorspronklike
waarde werd is, nou drasties aangepas sal moet word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I realise all too well that with the little money available to her it is
very difficult for the hon the Minister to make a choice between quality
and quantity, especially if one considers that the backlog in housing is
currently between 3 and 4 million. One can only hope that the
implementation of the Rental Housing Act will succeed in its goal to
provide and promote rental property and also to promote access to suitable
housing.

I have no doubt in my mind that the original housing subsidy of R15 000
which, due to inflation is worth approximately 30% of the original value,
will now have to be adjusted drastically.]

In spite of the progress and all the good news that we heard from our hon
MEC from the Free State, for which my party is very grateful, I must say
that I was very surprised to read in the annual report of the Free State
Department of Housing the following, regarding the status of the housing
fund, and I quote:


  Due to the large amount of expenditure and the slow trend in expenditure,
  the problem of not spending all funds still available becomes a major
  reality. The problem is that the Free State province will only be allowed
  to roll over R10,9 million of the available amount at the end of the
  financial year, while the remaining balance will be forfeited. This has
  the implication that the total amount of R150 million must still be spent
  before 31 March. Any expenditure less than the amount of R150 million for
  the period 1 February to 31 March will be forfeited.

I find this kind of erosion of money allocated ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr J MASWANGANYI (Northern Province): Chairperson, Minister Mthembi-
Mahanyele, members of executive council, members of the House, it is a
great honour for us to present this House with a consolidated housing
delivery presentation for 2001-02 that I believe has laid the basis for
deliberations.

The negative impact of apartheid legislation, the Group Areas Act and the
Land Act in particular, on housing development in our country, provinces
and rural localities is still evident. There are however, noticeable signs
to suggest that in our six years of democracy we have successfully managed
to reverse the housing backlog by speedily moving towards our
constitutional obligations of providing decent housing for the rural poor.
Our commitment remains the restoration of human dignity for the rural poor,
through the promotion and provision of rural housing to improve the quality
of their lives.

It is important to note that given the rural nature of our localities, we
have made a significant paradigm shift in the housing development process.
More emphasis, focus and energy are now devoted to the development of rural
housing, as opposed to the establishment of new townships. We believe that
this approach not only minimises migration from peripheral areas to cities
and towns, but also ensures that qualitative development takes place within
a sustainable, integrated and rural development strategy.

The approach we have adopted to housing development will ensure the
provision of other major social services, such as employment, skills
transfer and the development of small businesses within our communities.

This financial year, 2001-02, we have consciously taken decisions to
seriously promote women and young developers, as the Minister indicated
earlier, to play a central role in the development of housing in rural
areas. The historical terrorism and marginalisation of women in this
country requires us to take bold steps and initiatives in ensuring women's
qualitative upliftment in our economy. We do so because of our political
conviction and seeing development and the future of this country through
the eyes of our young people. We therefore intend to capacitate young
people and women and allocate more projects to them in this financial year,
as MEC Nkwinti has indicated, particularly black women. This, we believe,
is not only economically sensible and feasible, but a major requirement of
fulfilling our constitutional mandate.

In line with the housing development approach I have emphasised, this
year's budget will focus specifically on the flood disaster backlog in our
province, the completion of hostel upgrading, the People's Housing Process
and the rental stock in Polokwane. We are fully convinced that in this way
we will meet our constitutional responsibilities and Treasury requirements
and, most importantly, satisfy the needs and expectations of our local
communities.

I wish to make what is, perhaps, a major announcement. We intend to
complete in total 17 436 disaster housing units before the end of this
financial year. Our target date for the contracts allocated during the
financial year 2000-01 is June-July 2001. We intend to tighten up the
remaining contracts in terms of timeframes and to strengthen monitoring and
evaluation mechanisms. This will ensure the commitment of developers to
contractual obligations and effective management of such contracts by our
department. All allocations for this financial year should be completed
before the end of this financial year.

Let me use this opportunity to indicate that in addition to financial
resources that we have redirected to sort out the disaster housing backlog,
we received during the financial year 2000-01 a total of R22 million from
the national command centre that we utilised for this purpose. In addition
to this, the national command centre has again allocated a budget amounting
to R30 million to be used in addressing the remaining housing backlog for
the financial year 2001-02. I commend the national command centre for the
interest, commitment and sensitivity that they have shown in housing the
poor.

We also commend the Minister for allocating our province R333,7 million,
which will go a long way in changing the lives of our people qualitatively.
To this end, the task of housing the homeless and the rural poor and
improving their lives, as a way of fulfilling our constitutional
obligations, becomes more complicated and difficult in the context of
increasing housing demands and shrinking budgets.

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, if ever there
was one single project that required intricate correlation with all
infrastructures in a particular area, then that project would be housing
provision. The extent to which the house is connected to other services
determines the lifestyle of the inhabitant. As we have committed ourselves
to bringing about a better life for all, we should strive for the ideal
situation in which we provide not only shelter, but homes which will form
the cornerstones of progressive communities.

To achieve this, we have to commit ourselves to communicating and co-
operating with all stakeholders and formalising our working relationships
by way of the IDP and social compact. It should never come as an
afterthought to recall that we have committed ourselves to working closely
with the people in all our efforts at creating conditions for a better life
for all.

A worrisome tendency prevailed in some areas of Mpumalanga where developers
and consultants seemed to assign unto themselves the role of determining
the mode, the pace and indeed the design of housing development. This
practice is being stopped and the communities in those areas have been
urged, once again, to take charge of their own development. At the end of
the day the awesome responsibility and constitutional obligation rests with
ourselves to account, as we are doing right now, as to how we utilise the
public resources entrusted to us.

The housing landscape in our province is shaping up fairly well, with many
areas embarking on their second or third phases of housing development,
while, unfortunately, communities in the former homeland areas are still
lagging far behind. It is worth noting, however, that the people in these
areas have shown remarkable commitment to house their families by building
some stylish homes on their own initiative. I am not ashamed to state in
this House, and boldly so, that such people could do wonders if subsidies
came their way.

The perennial challenge posed by the influx of immigrants from Mozambique
and Swaziland streaming into our province is still with us, more so now
than ever before. It is not that we have asked for it or brought this
situation upon ourselves as a province, but it is due to our geographical
location. The increasing number of refugees at Amsterdam, Piet Retief and
other areas indicates that the situation might become worse. We would
therefore urge our Ministry to strongly consider a conditional grant to
enable our province to address this somewhat anomalous situation.

Challenges will always be there, otherwise we would all have to go home
since there would be no reason for us to be here. Another of these is the
conversion of company housing into individual home ownership. Some mining
companies and forestry companies in our province tend to abandon their
former employees when the company closes down, leaving these villages
unserviced, and some even evict the destitute residents.

Some of these companies avoid negotiations regarding the conversion of
these settlements, while others are readily available to transfer these
homes to the former employees. Since the agricultural and even the forestry
sector in the province are both declining, we may be called upon to come to
the rescue of these destitute residents. These challenges cost money. The
province is presently talking to Sappi and Mondi in this regard.

The picture of Mpumalanga's challenges will not be complete if we do not
bring into the picture the plight of the inland exiles. These are the
people who were evicted from farms and have now returned to their land by
way of land restitution. We have scored the first victory, but we dare not
fail the final hurdle by not housing these people properly. [Applause.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members of this House,
housing in South Africa is a complex problem and the indications are that
it will remain so for the foreseeable future. It appears that the greater
the delivery of houses, the greater the demand for houses. The problem is
compounded by the fact that some home owners leave their houses with third
parties in order to go and settle in the informal settlements with the aim
of qualifying for the allocation of a second house.

A number of people are succeeding in this unscrupulous process. Unless the
procedures are tightened, this may be regarded as a way of life.

Except in isolated cases, the RDP houses are well received by their
occupants from the informal settlements. They find them much better than
their present informal houses. However, the beneficiaries of RDP houses
need to be made aware and understand that the Government's aim is to
provide them with a basic shelter comprising a foundation and a start-up
shelter. The beneficiary himself or herself could then add on to achieve
the required house or the stylish house, as the previous hon member has
mentioned.

Very often our people, and some of us, are not very clear on this issue and
the criticisms and complaints levelled against the department could have
been obviated if the whole process had been properly clarified. I must own
up to the fact that in the debate on this Vote last year I was very
critical of these RDP houses in terms of size, quality and durability. But
after going through the Hansard last night to check on what I had said then
and what the hon the Minister's response was, it dawned in my mind what the
true state of affairs was.

In the North West, the rural areas have not progressed as much as the urban
areas in terms of the provision of housing. However, in the light of what
the hon the Minister has said, the indications are that they too are making
appreciable progress in home ownership.

In conclusion, I wish to congratulate the hon the Minister on her
informative speech and to indicate that the UCDP supports the Vote.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I call upon
the hon member Gelderblom. Am I pronouncing your surname correctly?

Mr J P GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): Mr Chairman, that is correct. Hon
Minister, it is an honour to be here this afternoon on behalf of the
Western Cape.
Housing is one of the most important responsibilities of Government. The
provision of basic shelter to our homeless has a direct impact on other
basic services such as health, safety and education. When a family is
housed, it is provided with a measure of safety from violence. It has
warmth and shelter, which promote good health and provide an environment
conducive to learning. Therefore, when we provide housing we have a direct
impact on these other basic human rights and the costs aligned to the
provision of those rights.

In addition, the provision of housing also has primary and secondary
multiple effects on the economy. With every house we build, we create
employment opportunities for many of the unemployed within our communities.
If this is so, we should be pouring more and more money into housing
delivery.

However, the awful truth of the matter is that the budget allocation for
housing has been decreasing every year. Could it be that the budget
allocation received for housing has never been spent within any given
financial year? If this is so, then I do not blame the national Minister of
Finance for continuously reducing the budget. However, we should also
seriously look at building the capacity of provinces to spent the funds
allocated. Furthermore, we should demand that funds be allocated to
provinces that have the capacity to spend them, rather than being left
unspent for yet another year.

Much has been said and written about the constitutional obligations placed
on this department as a result of the rulings emanating from the Irene
Grootboom case. The government of the Western Cape submits entirely to the
rulings of the court and the enshrined right of individuals as contained in
the Constitution. It is, however, important that resources for the
attainment of the progressive rights of individuals be readily available.

In this regard the national Department of Housing, which provides provinces
with an annual allocation, has an important role to play. The Irene
Grootboom case is not germane to the Western Cape only. I can go on record
as stating that there are many incidents of people who are desperately in
need of housing throughout the country who live in conditions similar to
those of the participants in the Grootboom case. The responsibility,
therefore, is to ensure that those in desperate need of housing in similar
circumstances reach consensus with both provincial and national government.

In this regard I only believe that the national Government has failed this
province dismally. One need only look at the increasing housing demand
within the province and the decreasing housing allocation to the Western
Cape as proof of this assertion. Unlike its counterparts, the Western Cape
has consistently spent its full budget allocation for housing. It is almost
criminal that provinces that underperformed are allowed to roll over
unspent funds each year, while provinces that perform receive less and less
in allocations with every passing year.

Critical to the success of any housing delivery plan is the knowledge of
what, depending on funds, the allocation of funds will be - not just for
that financial year, but in the medium term. We have it on good authority
that the housing budget for the umpteenth time has not remained within the
figures indicated by the national department. How can provinces effectively
manage the housing delivery process if they are uncertain as to what their
budgets for the following two years will be?

The housing policy has almost come full circle from when it was launched in
1994 up to now. There have been many changes and there are still more in
the pipeline. However, one critical change that has been long outstanding
is the household income limit of R3 500. This income limit was set in 1994
with the inception of the policy. Since then the cost of living has
increased, the subsidy amount has increased, salaries have increased, but
the limit of R3 500 remains in place.

An issue of great concern to the government of the Western Cape is the
perception held by the national Minister of Housing that the housing
provision in the Western Cape has taken place on the basis of political
association. I must treat such utterances with the contempt they deserve.
Instead, I challenge the national Minister to visit the office of the
Minister of housing in the Western Cape. Together with the Ministry of
housing in the Western Cape, we will run the rule over all the completed
and current projects to establish where these projects are and whom they
have been earmarked for.

The overwhelming majority of housing projects and associated housing
opportunities, one will find, are in the areas presumed to be ANC
strongholds. The Western Cape government prides itself on the promise that
the provision of housing will not be politicised. In this regard, we will
ensure that the provision of housing as a basic right will be progressively
realised by all the homeless people of this province.

Finally, notwithstanding these fractious relationships with the national
Government, we will always give our outmost support to the national Housing
Minister.

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for an
hon member to mislead the House when he is delivering a speech?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: It is unparliamentary. Hon member, carry on.
You have only half a second left.

Mr J P GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): I am not speaking French, Chairperson.
[Interjections.]

Finally, notwithstanding these fractious relationships with the national
Government, we in the Western Cape will give our utmost support to the
national Housing Ministry in an effort to ensure that the homeless people
of the Western Cape receive what is their due - that is, adequate shelter
and the required services. [Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, it is right that I first tell Mr Gelderblom,
my colleague from the legislature, that it is not good to mislead the
House. It is wrong. Mr Gelderblom knows very well that he and his party
have made a point of importing people from all over the world to come and
settle in the Western Cape so that they can cling to power.
[Interjections.] That is true. They know that Pam Golding and all the other
property agents are international. If we were to go to Pringle Bay now,
whom would we find living there? [Interjections.] The hon member should not
mislead the House.

Chairperson and Comrade Minister, I must say that many members have spoken
and have said the ANC Government has delivered more than a million houses
in less than 10 years. I must tell the House also that our Government says,
``Abantu kuqala''. [People first.] It is not about the pockets and power of
individuals. This is in line with the RDP's priorities and principles of
affordability and making sure that resources are redirected to where they
are needed most.

This is one department that has made sure that if one empowers women, one
empowers the nation - not by words, but by action. The Victoria Mxenge
housing development in Philippi - I think the Minister knows about this one
- is testimony to that.

I must mention that we lost the local elections. That has been significant
for us, because it has set us far back again as people living in Cape Town.
The ANC-led council had set up a housing scheme called the Special Purpose
Vehicle, in which, in addition to what Government gave to people, the
council added R5 000 as a kind of top-up. Now, however, the DA, or ``dead
alliance'', council has reversed all that. Yes, Mr Gelderblom knows that.
If we want to see what that council has done, we merely need to go to
Heideveld, Hanover Park, Mitchells Plain or Guguletu, where we will see
houses built by the Cape Town City Council, not the Unicity. One can see
that those are quality houses. They were built to help those who did not
have money.

The Minister has just said they are going to launch a scheme that
encourages people to save. I must tell the Minister now that the Western
Cape will not follow that, because they have already reversed all that the
council has done. They do not want other people to come and live here. Only
a few rich people must live in this province. [Interjections.]  [Laughter.]


Mhlalingaphambili, ndiseza kuhlala apha eKapa ukuze ndiphendule loo mbuzo
ngoba ndizalelwe apha, yaye ingcwaba lam liza kuba lapha, hayi kwenye
indawo.

Iya kubaluleka into yokuba uMphathiswa aqinisekise ukuba abangavumiyo
barhuqwa ngeempumlo, yaye basebenza njengoko kufanelekile.

Ukuba umntu ujonga uhlobo ezilulo izinto apha eKapa, ahambe ngale ndlela
ilungu elihloniphekileyo uNkosikazi Versveld agoduka ngayo, angayibona into
yokuba uza kulala asale apha eKapa, ngoba, kweli cala leMilnerton ukunyuka,
umhlaba awulungiselelwanga zindlu ziphantsi. Lonke eliya cala
lelithengiswayo. Imihlaba ithengiselwa abantu abaphucukileyo abaneemali,
yaye mandiwaxelele amalungu ahloniphekileyo ukuba bayayishiya iGauteng yabo
baze kuhlala apha eKapa.

Mhlalingaphambili, siyavuma ukuba uRhulumente akanazo iimali ezininzi
zokuba akhe izindlu ngokokuthanda nokufuna kwabantu. Siyavumelana nento
yokuba abantu mababuzwe ukuba bafuna kwenziwe njani na. Kambe ke akukho nto
ibaluleke njengento yokuba abantu ngoku, ngabemi, ngabanini-mizi,
ngaphezulu, ubani unomhlaba ongowakhe ophuculiweyo.

Apha eKapa, phantsi kolwakhiwo lwezindlu, ukuba ubani uza kuthenga
elokishini indlu engathi inkulu, ibuphucuka, bekusakusetyenziswa inkqubo
ebisenza ukuba ubani angakwazi ukuba nendlu eyeyakhe - afumane igobhogobho,
umhlaba ingenguwo owakhe. Isandula ukutshintsha apha kuthi eKapa loo nto.

Abantu mabayibulele i-ANC ngezinto ezenzileyo ebomini babo. I-ANC
ibutshintshile ubomi babantu. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, I am still going to stay in Cape Town to answer that
question, because I was born here and I will be buried here and not
anywhere else.
It is important for the hon the Minister to ensure that those that do not
agree with the process are taken by the scruff of the neck to ensure that
they do the work as they are required to do.

If one could look at how things are in Cape Town, and take the route that
the hon Mrs Versfeld takes when she goes home, one would notice that the
land from Milnerton up is not meant for low-cost houses. The prices of all
the properties in that area are market related. Properties are sold to
people that have money. I must add, hon members, that people leave
Johannesburg to come and live here in Cape Town.

Chairperson, we agree that the Government does not have unlimited funds to
build houses that meet the needs and wishes of the people. We agree with
the idea that people should be asked about how they would like things to be
done. However, the fact that people now are full-fledged citizens, that
some are home owners and that others own land that has been developed,
should be acknowledged.

Here in Cape Town, in terms of the housing regulations, when one wanted to
buy a bigger and decent house in the township, one would not be able to
assume full ownership of the property, because only the house belonged to
one and not the land on which it was built. That system has just recently
been abolished in Cape Town.

People should thank the ANC for what it has done to better their lives. The
ANC has changed people's lives.]

Kwakhona, ngokwakuthi isenokuba nguvezinyawo indlu leyo kodwa into
ebalulekileyo yeyokuba umntu umphiwe uvezinyawo. I-NNP ayizange isiphe
negobhogobho lematshisi. [Laphela ixesha.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Furthermore, the house may be a matchbox, as we call them, but what is
important is the fact that it was given to the people for free. The NNP
never provided us even with matchbox houses. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr K PANDAY (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Minister of Housing and all
hon members present, I bring greetings from the Cinderella province of
KwaZulu-Natal, undoubtedly the number one province in South Africa. The hon
the Minister of Housing, in her budget speech, speaks of the 1,129 million
houses built over the past seven years. That is commendable, and the
immediate reaction is one of praise, but an analysis of the delivery of
houses, as against the growth of population, will show that the percentage
of those who did not have houses in 1994 was virtually no different from
the present times. This does not reflect on either the hon the Minister or
her department. Historical problems, compounded by the lack of financial
resources, amongst other factors, have contributed to the poor delivery.

The present Government has to come up with unconventional methods of
addressing the housing shortage in South Africa. The hon the Minister also
referred to the eradication of informal settlements on page 6 of her
written speech.

I commend the hon the Minister for her commitment, and we in KwaZulu-Natal
are working in this direction. I have a plan which I hope will encourage
other hon members to employ their minds to fast-track housing. I am sure
that the hon the Minister is looking for innovative ideas.

My contribution is this. Let us take all available land in South Africa,
and divide it into sections of about 150m2 to 200m2. Let us give those free
to every homeless family, and supply them with free building materials up
to a cost of about R5 000 to R8 000. The land itself will cost about R10
000 fully serviced.

One has to look at this against the background of the first-time home
owners' subsidy, which is more than R15 000, which will cover the cost of
the free land and the materials. With the land and the materials, self-help
schemes could be implemented. The poor people who are living in shacks
which are about 10m2 in area will bless the legislators of the day. This
should be compared with the national norms and standards, which stipulate
that houses should not be smaller than 30m2.

Incidentally, Government has embarked on a bold step, unheard of before, to
provide free water and electricity, although in limited quantities. Therein
lies my scheme of free land and materials.

Although our democratic Government, especially the Department of Land
Affairs, has made major strides as far as land redistribution is concerned,
the fact of the matter is that the ravages of the apartheid Land Acts still
haunt us, even today. Sad, but true, the minority owns the majority of the
land. My earlier suggestion of giving every homeless family free land
cannot be done until the whole issue of land redistribution is addressed
urgently. Hence I call for a national land indaba at which all role-players
must participate in resolving the land question. We need to act now. Words
mean nothing unless translated into action. If not addressed urgently, the
problem could become a full-blown crisis. We do not want to see the
Zimbabwean approach coming to South Africa.

Recently at Mangete, on the north coast of KwaZulu-Natal, farms have been
set alight, and this act was strongly condemned by our premier, the hon Mr
L P H M Mtshali, yesterday at our sitting in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature.

Allow me, in conclusion, to congratulate the hon the Minister on her
presentation of the budget speech and also to thank her for the work that
she is doing. I am sure that people are very proud of her and the
department. [Applause.]

Ms I L GCABASHE: Chairperson, it gives me great pleasure to participate in
the debate on the activities and plans of the Department of Housing for
this financial year as presented to us by hon Minister Mthembi-Mahanyele.

Let me say up front that this department has been able to accommodate
activities of provinces such as ours by providing and allocating funds that
assist our programmes and enable us to achieve the goals we set for
ourselves, which include national housing priorities.

The achievements of the Department of Housing have received considerable
acknowledgement by our province and the end-users, who are communities that
have benefited from the state housing subsidy. Funds that are allocated to
provinces, and the R6 million allocated to our province in particular, will
contribute to the improvement of the social and economic conditions of our
people who live in slums, informal settlements, townships and rural areas.

I am confident that the allocation for our province will further enable the
provincial department of housing to fast-track housing delivery by ensuring
that affordable housing opportunities are delivered to the poorer
communities and also to focus on the reduction of poverty as well as on
improving the quality of life by empowering emerging contractors.

With the additional allocation of R1,1 million for capacity- building and
the human resettlement programme, as well as the remaining funds of R17,2
million for the KwaMashu Unit L resettlement programme, there is no doubt
that the department of housing is on the right track. Because KwaMashu is
my home township, I understand very well the conditions in which the
community of L Section have lived for 41 years. Two-bedroomed houses with
one tap, one shower and one toilet had to be shared by two families. But
this nightmare will soon be over, and some people in this House are guilty
of that. [Interjections.]

Our priorities of accelerating the removal of slums and informal
settlements, as was demonstrated by the completion of 83 projects already,
extending rural housing development, concentrating on hostel upgrading and
moving into rental housing stock are some of the priorities that we are set
to achieve in this financial year.

We believe that housing delivery is not only four walls and a roof, but
must include location choices, security of tenure and, more importantly,
building communities. This means that housing delivery must go hand in hand
with the provision of other services, such as health and education
facilities and transport services, in an integrated approach to economic
growth and development in our province.

I promise the hon the Minister that she will receive value for the money
that she has allocated to the province of KwaZulu-Natal. [Applause.]

Ms J L KGOALI: Chairperson, I just wanted to respond to my colleague from
the Western Cape. [Interjections.] If the Western Cape cannot spend its
budget, we want to invite them kindly to come to Gauteng. If the Western
Cape builds houses according to the colour of the people, they must come to
Gauteng and we will show them how to do it. This is what we can offer as
Gauteng to assist them to ensure that housing is for all, but not for other
people.

Modulasetulo, Letona le kgabane, Matona a rona a tswang diprofensing ka ho
fapana ha tsona, le barongwa ba rona ba leng teng ka hara Ntlo kajeno, ke
thabo ho nna ho nka karolo diphehisanong tsa Ditekanyetso tsa Lefapha la
Matlo.
Mme ya bohlale ke ya tsitlallelang tsa bohlokwa ba bana ba hae le setjhaba
ka kakaretso. E nngwe ya tsena, tse bontshang ka mokgwa oo ho leng bohlokwa
ka teng, ke bohato bo ileng ba nkwa ke Letona, ba ho bontsha hore bophelo
ba motho ke ntho e bohlokwa, tshireletso ke ntho e bohlokwa, mme le mofuthu
ke ntho e bohlokwa.

Tsena tsohle di entse hore Lefapha, hara mathata ao le ileng la tsamaya le
kopana le oona, le kgone, qetellong, hore ebe le behile marulelo hodima
dihlooho tsa batho, mofuthu le tshireletso. (Translation of Sotho
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, hon Minister, our MECs from different provinces and our
delegates in the House today, it is a pleasure for me to take part in the
Housing Budget Vote.

A wise mother is a mother who sticks to matters of importance for her
children and for her nation in general. One of these, which shows just how
important it is, is the step taken by the Minister to show that a person's
life is important, security is important and warmth is important.

All these made it possible for the department, despite the problems that it
came across, to eventually manage to put roofs over people's heads, to give
warmth and security.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, on a point of order: There is no
interpretation service. We cannot understand what she is saying and we
really want to. [Interjections.] That hon member can, but I cannot. It is
my constitutional right to understand. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! No dialogue, please. The point of
order is acknowledged. Could you just ... [Interjections.]

Ms J L KGOALI: Ke na le bonnete ba hore Mong Van Niekerk o tla ... [I am
sure that Mr Van Niekerk will ...]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, whilst I understand that
all 11 languages are official, can we just accommodate one another for a
minute. [Interjections.] I am making a ruling. [Interjections.]

Ms J L KGOALI: Ke ne ke rata ho bontsha hore ... [I just wanted to show
that ...]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, we have a procedure whereby
notice is given of the language that a person is going to use so that an
interpretation service can be provided. Hence, I am saying ...
[Interjections.] I am making a ruling from the Chair, so would you please
... [Interjections.]

Mof J L KGOALI: Modulasetulo, ke maswabi hobane ka mokgwa oo ke ileng ka
leka ho bokeletsa dipuo tsa ka ka teng, ke itse ke tla bua ka leleme la
Sesotho, mme ha eba ha ho na mokgwa wa ho fetolela ka hara Ntlo ka mona, ke
maswabi hore nkeke ka kgona hore ke bue ka leleme la sejatlhapi.
(Translation of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[Ms J L KGOALI: Chairperson, I am sorry because from the way I gathered my
facts, I thought I would speak Sesotho. If there is no way of getting
interpretation in this House, then I am sorry because I will not be able to
speak in the English or Afrikaans language.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! What is your point of order now, hon
member?

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, on a point of order: I respect your
ruling, but I want you not to insist on it, because my colleague here is
prepared to translate for me while we do not have the interpretation
service. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, please, hon members! We have visitors
and future parliamentarians in the House. It is unfortunate that on their
first day the young people here will associate our Parliament with the
parliament of England. Order, please, hon members!

You may carry on, hon member.

Mof J L KGOALI: Mohlomong le bana ba rona ba tlameha hore ba tsebe hore ke
mona moo re lwanang ntwa ya bophelo boo re bo batlang fatsheng la borona.
Ke ntho eo ba tlamehileng hore ba e tsebe.

Ke ne ke sa ntsane ke rata ho bontsha hape, ke tswele pele, hore tsohle
tseo Lefapha la Matlo le di entseng ke tseo mokgatlo wa rona wa ANC o ileng
wa di lora, wa di tsitlallela, ho fihlela re di fumana kajeno.

Ke rata bo bontsha hape hore ka kgwedi ya Phuptjane selemong sa 1999,
Letona ha mmoho le Lefapha la hae, ba ile ba etsa moralo oo e leng wa
Lefapha, wa dilemo tse hlano, hore ho be le moralo o tla laelang mmuso o
bohareng, mabatowa ha mmoho le mebuso ya selehae. Le ile la itlama hore le
tlameha ho ba le matlo a hiriswang, e leng ``rental stock'', le hore
setjhaba se kgothalletswe hore se boloke, e leng ``saving schemes''.

Nka ya lolololo, ha nka ka qoholla tsohle tseo Lefapha le ileng la
ikemisetsa tsona. Ke batla hore tsena tsohle e ne e le maikemisetso a
Lefapha, hore ebe kajeno ba fihleletse lenane la matlo a 1,29 million, ao
bana ba borona ba neng ba keke ba a fumana mmusong wane wa maburu. Re
qetile dilemo tse 40 tseo ka tsona batho ba bo rona ba neng ba lefa rente,
ho fihlela Mmuso o eteletsweng pele ke ANC o fihla o nka matlo ao, o a fa
setjhaba, sesolo.

Re rata ho re ho Letona la rona, comrade Mthembi-Mahanyele, mmarona, o
sebeditse, re a o thoholetsa. Mmangwana o tshwara thipa ka bohaleng.
(Translation of Sotho paragraphs follows.)

[Ms J L KGOALI: Perhaps our children should also know that this is where we
fight for the kind of lives we want to live in our country. It is something
that they have to know.

I still wanted to continue and point out that everything that the Housing
Department has done, is what our ANC party has dreamt of and stuck to, till
we got them today.

I would also like to point out that in June 1999, the Minister and her
Department started a five year plan for the Department, which would give
orders to the national Government, regions as well as local governments.
They were determined that they would have rented stock, and the community
would be encouraged to get involved in saving schemes.

I would go on endlessly if I should mention everything that the Department
was determined to do. I would like to say that all those were the
Department's intention and that is why, today, they have reached a point of
1,29 million houses, which our people would never have had in the boers'
government. We spent 40 years, during which our people were paying for
rent, until the ANC-led Government took the houses and gave them to the
people for free.

We would like to say to our Minister, comrade Mthembi-Mahanyele: our
mother, you have worked well and we applaud you. A mother holds the sharp
end of a knife.]

I just want to thank the hon the President of this country, Comrade Thabo
Mbeki, for identifying Alexandra as one of his pilot projects. I want to
invite our comrades, especially those from the Western Cape, to come to the
launch by the President on 9 June at Alexandra stadium. They must come to
see what people do for people.[Interjections.] Everybody else is invited,
but I specifically extend our invitation to the province of the Western
Cape. In addition to that ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, your time is up.
[Interjections.]

Ms J L KGOALI: It is just unfortunate, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, thank you to the members who took
part in the debate. I will not attempt to respond to everybody. We still
have another debate coming. I will try to be very brief in my responses.

I will just identify the crucial issues that have been raised, one of which
is that there has been a continual complaint around the size of houses we
build. I just like to remind members that the issue of size relates very
much to the issue of the amount of subsidy we have. It relates a lot to the
cost of land, and to services that are provided by those who help us to
deliver. I also want to make the House aware of the fact that the people
who have taken the option to build on their own have come up with bigger-
sized houses. That is the difference and that is why we have provided those
options within our housing policy.

I would also like to say that we are currently looking at the report that
emerged out of the conference that Mr Tsenoli was talking about. We did
have a big indaba a year ago to look at the gaps that have been identified
in the policy. We are currently working on making sure that we put detail
into the proposals that were made by the people who were at the conference,
because we like to start talking about an issue when we have really given
very serious thought to it.

Mr Raju raised the issue of the department considering ensuring that
beneficiaries are informed of what they should expect. Indeed, we do do
that, I would like to say to Mr Raju. There is an agreement between
Government and the developers that one of the critical issues that have to
be dealt with before construction ensues is that the communities or the
beneficiaries be given the opportunity through what is called the social
compact - an agreement package between the developer and the communities -
to agree on the kind of house that is going to be built.

Secondly, before any construction takes place, there have to be show
houses, sample houses, so that people have an idea of what the subsidy can
provide. Usually one finds two or three variations within the subsidy
bracket. Therefore, we do do that.

However, members here have related problems of developers who really come
on board but do not give us value for money. We are addressing that issue
through our Acts in housing that are going to make sure that the instrument
that monitors that kind of behaviour is given the power to enforce and
punish those who do not adhere to the law.

The registration council, therefore, receives reports from the public
around issues of houses that have defects - the structural problems. They
take up those issues and call back the developer or the contractor to
correct the defaults, and if the developer or contractor does not respond,
he or she is deregistered. This is the kind of penalty that we are meting
out to those who do not follow the rules, and also in order to make sure
that we are also aware of what is happening on the ground.

About four years ago, Minmec took the decision that each province should
put together what we call provincial housing teams. The tasks of those
teams were to make sure that as soon as a developer received the contract,
he or she was tracked and monitored to see what he or she was delivering on
the ground - this so that we do get value for money. One of the issues,
also, that has been raised is the issue of making sure that we monitor the
overall performance, and we do do that.

I did, at some stage, talk to this House about our data system called
Nomvula. We call it Nomvula. The system alerts us to blockages wherever
they are. It links up with the provinces to make sure that when we have
allocated the money, identified the project, started counting the numbers
and determined how many units the project is going to give us, we are able
to track that. This also applies to when the provinces come back with the
receipts to get their tranche payments.

So we do have a system which helps us to monitor performance on the ground,
but it does not just do that in terms of identifying the number of units
that are being built, it also assists us to look at and monitor the cash
flow between ourselves and the provinces.

This also helps us to produce a map that indicates where our policy is
going, so that we do not end up concentrating on one area and ignoring
another, to make sure that the urban-rural balance is maintained. Hon
members can rest assured that we have that kind of monitoring system, but
that does not rule out the possibility of fraudulent practices by
beneficiaries, sometimes by developers and contractors, and by the so-
called responsible officials, like conveyancers and engineers who are also
involved in housing construction.

After we identified those problems, we did make sure that our systems
helped us to close those gaps. For example, we used to provide developers
with cash, but now we provide them with paper, because there was some
problem with regard to their accessing our money, generating interest and
not handing it over to us. We also do try and look for the systems to help
us to monitor it.

But something that the department is unable to do, something that needs our
moral responsibility as politicians, is to monitor the behaviour of
beneficiaries in communities and  corruption by people within our
communities who move from their qualified bonded house and access RDP
houses. They then move out of the RDP house and move into a shack, so that
they are queuing up continuously to take away from the poor. That is the
kind of problem we can only solve when the public alerts us to that kind of
mismanagement of our resources.

Where we have been given the information, we have been able to make
arrests. An example is in KwaZulu-Natal, where lawyers would go to bus
stops, duplicate ID numbers of members of the public and go and apply for
subsidies. We caught them because we were alerted to it.

The public also came back to inform us about the problem of the sale of RDP
houses. We were able to make arrests in certain situations but we were also
able to amend our Housing Act so that we introduced the pre-emptive clause
which we discussed in this House and the National Assembly.

We do have that obligation as members of the public to make sure that we
monitor the behaviour of beneficiaries on the ground.

We also have a system according to which we just announced, together with
the CSIR, the red book that clearly stipulates the norms and standards that
are required for the construction of our units. That is a requirement on
paper. It will need physical monitoring to make sure that people do adhere,
so that we reduce and lessen the cases of houses that have defects as has
been mentioned in this debate.

We do hope that we are going to be active as parliamentarians to make sure
that wherever we identify these problems, we solve them.

Another issue that has been raised relates to a possible denial, sidelining
or marginalisation of the rural areas. I want to assure members that within
our housing policy and through Minmec, we have enhanced the White Paper by
making sure that we do not ignore our population in the rural areas. Even
before we took the decision on the rural subsidy, we did let our provinces
allow members to access the normal subsidy. As soon as our investigation
and study were completed, we announced the rural subsidy in the rural
areas. To support our rural population and to enable them to access credit
and create a new asset base we came up with the Rural Housing Loan Fund, so
that they also, like the urban population, are able to borrow and improve
upon their stock, and that is working very well.

We are also going to make sure that through the Integrated Sustainable
Rural Development Strategy, as announced by the President in February of
this year, we enhance whatever we have done in the rural areas.

I would like to assure members that if they look very closely at the
strategy that has been announced, we are going to relate to some of the
issues that have been identified by members. They said that, despite the
success that we have achieved and the milestones that have been reached, we
have not been able to integrate our efforts as Government. Yes, I agree it
is an oversight, but besides, we also had to address urgent emergency
conditions, to reduce the backlog and to make sure that we make a start and
lay the foundation.

We have laid the foundation through the delivery of 1,129 million units and
provided shelter to 5 million people. However, it is time now that
Government worked within the cluster grouping, and, at national level, we
have attempted to do that. It is going very well. We are going to be
exercising and testing our methods when we move into the areas identified
for urban renewal and rural development. Alex is one of those test cases,
where the different departments, for example housing, transport, land and
agriculture, provincial and local government, water affairs, health, and
education, are, as a collective, going to move into Alex and see how we can
make an impact and utilise the resources that we have. Added to that, we
are going to try and make sure that the distribution of the R6 billion for
infrastructure, as announced by the Minister of Finance, is utilised to the
maximum.

In whatever we do the Government is attempting by all means to make sure
that whatever investment is put into the communities will also impact on
job creation, and that is our objective as Government.

We are also looking at the possibility of making sure that, especially for
the rural areas, we do begin to create economic focal points, growth points
where the rural communities can begin to talk about future development and
the creation of markets in the neighbouring countries and also exchanging
goods between the provinces.

I would also like to say that the issue of the Housing budget is an issue
that is currently being tabled with the Department of Finance through state
expenditure. We are going to have a review and look at what is happening in
the environment, the cost of building material, and all other issues that
impact on our subsidy, including inflation, and then discuss possibilities
of how we can support Government in making sure that we do provide good
standard housing, but also get an opportunity to improve upon our quality.

I am also happy to say to Mr Raju that in May 1999, I did make a statement
to the effect that in this term of office our focus and concentration was
going to be on improving the quality of our stock. We have made our
political statement. We have delivered beyond the 1 million units.

But it is now time to look at the broader issues of housing and integrated
development, issues of planning, issues as inspired by the Eastern Cape,
and issues of how our subsidies are being utilised on the ground.

After we have produced the goods for our consumer on the ground in the form
of housing, what amount of profit gets to be distributed? But we also have
to look at the possibilities and the realities from province to province.

I would also like to address the issue of the budget in general, and, once
more, through this House, request the Western Cape to move away from the
secluded kind of marginalised mind which wants to think all the time that
money must go to the Western Cape and that there are provinces that are not
performing well.  I think it is high time that we depoliticised our
political ambitions. As for those provinces that might be seen not to be
exhausting their budgets, I am convinced, standing here, that that is not
being done intentionally.

One of the key problems that we have in the provinces is the lack of
capacity. Why do we have such a lack in some provinces? It is a historical
factor and we cannot deny the fact that there are provinces which were
better developed, such as Gauteng, which has attracted most of the brains,
and most of the skills, whereas some of the so-called rurally dominated
provinces have been left without skills.

I think we are concerned and responsible citizens in this country and we
have to begin to deal with our problems in a different manner, so that we
have an environment and atmosphere that will help us as we go on
deracialising society and developing our people.

At the same time, we should make sure that, in whatever we do, we also do
transfer skills, instead of patting ourselves on the back. This should be
even more so, especially if whatever good we have has come through the
wrongs of institutionalised apartheid. Let us move out of that laager.

Secondly, I would like to say to the Western Cape: When I raise issues that
are wrong about the approach of the Western Cape in this House, I raise
them in a positive spirit, hoping that the Western Cape will reconsider its
positions. It is a fact that the ANC-dominated municipalities are being
marginalised. There are municipalities that were actually given subsidies
and, after some time, those subsidies were withdrawn. Interestingly, that
happened after the local government elections. How am I not to believe it
when I am told that those municipalities are being marginalised because
they are ANC-dominated? Make me not believe that by acting correctly. It is
a plea from the Minister of Housing. [Interjections.]

Finally, I would like to say that we do accept the issues that were raised
by colleagues in the House. My duty is not to respond to all of them. We
need to give a lot of thought to them, but also to say that we need to make
our communities aware of the fact that the houses that are being built are
intended to address the plight of the poor.
If we are to cover the backlog of 2 million to 3 million  units,  there is
no way in which we can afford a subsidy of about R30 000 per household. If
we did that it would take us more than 30 or 40 years to deal just with the
backlog, even before we dealt with the annual accumulation of new
households that are being created. My plea is that we should look at other
instruments, methods and approaches that are going to assist us to add
value to our subsidy.

One of those is that we encourage our communities to save. Those
communities that have responded to the call have saved, and have accessed
their subsidies. Their houses are big and they are going to continue to
expand those houses, as soon as their economic and financial situations
change.

Bietjies-bietjies maak meer. [Many a pickle makes a mickle.]

We have inherited a backlog and we have inherited a situation that will
need many, many years to solve. I am not making an excuse for that size of
house. I am saying that I am dealing with reality. Let us all deal with
reality.

I think it is time now for us to give the opportunity to the next debate.
My colleague next to me should be given the floor. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                        INTERNATIONAL CHILDREN'S DAY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, I see Thoko from the Office of
the Rights of the Child hiding there to try and look like a child. Welcome
to all of the children who are here. Hopefully, some of them will find a
way to this House when they are older. When they reach the age of 18 they
will be able to stand for election.

It is a great pleasure for me to be with the House on the eve of
International Children's Day. It is a day of celebration and dedication. It
is the appropriate time to discuss with the House the achievements we have
made and the challenges we face in creating a happy and healthy environment
for all our children.

A mere decade ago members of the ANC in exile, child rights workers in the
country and the international community, in particular Unicef, gathered in
Harare to try to formulate a meaningful response to the worsening
conditions faced by our children and women in South Africa, who had
suffered the brutalities of apartheid. In the late seventies and eighties,
in particular, our children were targets of that wretched regime.

From the 1990 gathering which resulted in an organised response to
alleviate the plight of children to today in 2001 much has happened in the
lives of our children. Tomorrow we will be launching the report on the
state of the nation's children. I hope that all members will attend. It is
a milestone that shows us concretely where we are in eradicating poverty
and improving the lives of children. I encourage all members to read that
report closely. It examines all areas that impact on children: education,
health, HIV/Aids, etc. Although we often think of national departments and
national policies, when we think of those issues, this report shows us how
our transformation is playing out throughout the different regions and
provinces of the nation.

It may sound a bit like a report card with the bad provinces duly punished,
but, believe me, it is not meant to grade the provinces in that matter. We
can and should look at it as a progress card for all of us in Government, a
way for us to monitor where we are, how many schools have been built, how
many children have access to running water, how many children are infected
or affected by HIV/Aids. Members will all receive a copy of the report
tomorrow and we can continue to engage with the issues that it raises. I
hope it will motivate each and every one of us to continue to fight the
battle against poverty and for the rights of children.

On 16 June 1995 the South African Government ratified the UN Convention on
the Rights of the Child. Our new democracy has placed great stress on
children, with section 28 of the Constitution highlighting their rights.
Ratifying the CRC further solidly defined our commitment. With the
ratifying of the CRC, former President Nelson Mandela launched the national
programme of action for children, the NPA, as a mechanism to encourage co-
ordination and co-operation among Government departments, NGOs and civil
society and as a body that could monitor the rights of children.

In 1999 the secretariat of the NPA, the Office of the Rights of the Child,
became housed in the Presidency. There is a direct link between the NPA and
the NCOP and to each province. With the creation of the NPA came the
formation of PPAs, or provincial programmes of action. It is particularly
pleasing to tell the House that each province has a PPA. Some are more
established than others and contribute to the national process. We have
seen some very good and very dedicated work coming from the provinces. This
year, through the PPAs, advocacy workshops have run throughout the
provinces and children were informed about their rights.

Today and tomorrow in many provinces, provincial legislatures are working
with their PPAs to highlight children's issues. After a few years of
working through the PPA structure, we feel that we face some challenges
which need to be addressed by all of us. The PPA is an intersectoral
committee. Its members are Government departments which deal with
children's issues, NGO representatives and other children's organisations.
In most provinces co-ordination of the PPA comes from a line-function
department. One has, for instance, a member of the Department of Social
Development co-ordinating the PPA. At the national level it was decided to
locate it in the Presidency due to the crosscutting nature of the work.

We are faced, nationally and provincially, with the challenges of
monitoring. There is a lack of monitoring of children's rights and issues
at provincial level. Connected to that is the lack of reporting once an
area or issue has been looked at. As Government we are responsible, first
and foremost, to our citizens, but as a country we are also obliged to
report internationally on our situation.

Last year we were in Geneva reporting to the UN Committee on the Rights of
the Child, and at such forums one must go with accurate and current
information. As the PPA is developed and begins flourishing, it is our hope
that soon there will be the blossoming of local plans of action for
children, or LPAs. We have seen interest in mobilisation in some
municipalities and communities, but with our new local structures and
recent local government elections it seems an appropriate time to develop
these plans in collaboration with the PPAs and local communities, and to
take this process forward.

Lastly, the issue of budgeting is a challenge that faces our PPAs. I know
how tight our budgets are, and how difficult it is to reallocate resources
or find money, but if we are to sustain a provincial process we must look
at how we budget for it. I raise these issues because I see the beginning
of a vibrant and important process. The PPAs are experiencing some growing
pains, but I think that they are, in many ways, simple solutions to the
challenges we face. As I mentioned, nationally the LPA is located in the
Presidency.

May I suggest that the NCOP could examine the locations of the PPAs and, if
necessary, make recommendations to the premiers as well as to the
Presidency. We are monitoring and reporting nationally and we need to work
together to establish consistent monitoring systems that give us an
accurate picture of children. Accompanying this would be a regular
reporting mechanism.

The last issue concerning LPAs is that we have learnt many lessons in this
process, nationally and provincially, and I think it is important for us to
share some of those experiences in local government and to work with them
in establishing functioning LPAs. Taking it to local level will mean
improved delivery of services for children, and that, in the end, is the
goal for all of us.

I wish again to take this opportunity to thank you for giving me this
opportunity to address the NCOP on this topic that affects all of us.
Perhaps I might encourage hon members to create more space and time in this
forum for children and their issues. The role of this House is crucial to
the broader process and I hope that we will be able to complement each
other's roles and responsibilities in the lives of our children and to make
sure that the most precious asset that this country has is always nourished
and sustained. [Applause.]

Mr B WILLEM: Mr Chairperson, Comrade Minister, permanent delegates and
distinguished guests who are here, particularly the children, first and
foremost I wish to thank you, Chairperson, for awarding me this noble
opportunity. I suppose that I am the only one who will be addressing this
House from a wheelchair today.

There has never been a moment in the lives of our nation and our country
when a single day has been a children's day. This is the moment that has
dawned today with the ascent of the ANC into power. Never before has this
country seen the rights of the child being the business of the day.
International Children's Day gives us a perfect opportunity to take stock
of whether those policies, laws and conventions that are geared towards
transformation and the enhancement of our lives, which we, as the ANC-led
Government, have adopted and ratified, have made any meaningful difference
in our children's lives.

I believe that the fact that this joint monitoring committee exists in
Parliament now is a signal of the seriousness with which we regard our
children as our future and that this joint monitoring committee is not the
only one in Parliament that will continue to hold dear the rights of the
children. Almost every committee has one or the other aspect for the
improvement of the lives of children at heart, whether or not it is social
development which ensures that the rights of children are fundamental and
protected.

Today we have a committee in Parliament that ensures that the legislation
we pass in this House protects the wellbeing of our children and their
rights. At no stage shall we, as responsible legislators, ignore the rights
of our children. We have a responsibility as parents to educate our
children and make them responsible, because they are the future leaders of
our country. Our Government realises that it takes not only the combined
efforts of our politicians in all three spheres of Government to ensure
that our children are nurtured, but also an active partnership with the
private sector, the business sector, the NGOs and CBOs. We shall ensure
that the legislation that we create legitimises and improves the lives of
our children.

We have an enormous advantage in this country that will serve us well in
the struggle for the rights of our children. We have a proven track record
of fighting for our liberation from the apartheid regime. We perceive the
challenge of protecting our children's future within this same fighting
strength. We have the political will to ensure that our children do not
suffer, as we did, from racial discrimination, gutter education, criminal
elements, the ravages of HIV/Aids and, these days, the snares of the
perverts on the Internet and other menaces that threaten the most
vulnerable in our country.

We as the ANC have not yet finished with the process of reconstructing our
country from the harshly inequitable environment of the past into a real
working democracy. Our accomplishments here in Parliament and on the ground
will guarantee that we ratify transformative human rights conventions such
as the UN conventions on the rights of children. Our efforts here ensure
that transformation forms the backbone of our new policies. Let me
highlight one or two of the articles contained in the Convention on the
Rights of the Child that we believe are fundamental in our determination to
nurture our nation's future.

In terms of article 1, South Africa has agreed to respect and ensure the
rights set forth in the present convention to each child within our
jurisdiction without discrimination of any kind. This means that we will
not discriminate on the grounds of race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, property,
disability, birth or other status.

We have endorsed, in article 3, the fact that in all actions concerning
children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare
institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative
bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
We are determined to be vigilant to ensure that no child living in South
Africa finds himself or herself subjected to exploitation of any kind.

It is only through our collective and individual efforts that we can
guarantee the safety of our children. I believe that we should listen
attentively to the voices of our children. In fact, we are sitting here in
this House today where some of those children in 1976 that were at the
forefront of challenging an illegal government demanded that the National
Party government hear us and release our leaders. We taught our elders well
that they should fight back and we were even prepared to sacrifice our
lives, so that we, in turn, should not discredit the voices of our children
or treat them as lesser human beings because they are younger.

Our committee has been actively engaging in discussion with the Office on
the Status of the Child. This is the committee which is the mouthpiece of
our children. Our children in all the nine provinces have structures called
provincial programmes of action. These structures articulate and express
the aspirations of our children.
We regard the future of our country embodied in our children so seriously
that we are willing to do whatever it takes to ensure that the voices of
our children are heard. [Applause.]

Mnr J L THERON: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister en die agbare kinders van Suid-
Afrika, dit is beslis 'n voorreg om vandag te kan praat in die debat oor
internasionale kinderdag. Dit is natuurlik 'n saak wat veral die mense wat
self kinders het, baie na aan die hart lê. Ek wil in die kort tyd tot my
beskikking veral let op die gesondheidsaspekte rondom kinders, en veral die
klem op die MIV/Vigsepidemie en watter geweldige negatiewe invloed dit op
die kinders se jong lewens kan uitoefen.

Volgens 'n verslag van ABT Associates in Love Life, is meer as 3,5 miljoen
mense tans in Suid-Afrika MIV-positief en dit word geprojekteer dat hierdie
syfer sal verdubbel in die volgende tien jaar. Hieruit word afgelei dat ses
tot tien miljoen mense in die volgende dekade in Suid-Afrika kan sterf aan
MIV/Vigs. Volgens die verslag gaan meer as die helfte Suid-Afrikaners onder
20 nie ouer as 35 word nie. Alhoewel die siekte tans nie gestop kan word
nie, is daar tog 'n kans om hierdie geweldige gety wat Suid-Afrika getref
het, te probeer draai. Dit kan die beste gedoen word deur versigtige,
gerigte voorkomingstrategieë, veral onder die 45% van die Suid-Afrikaanse
bevolking onder die ouderdom van 15 jaar.

Jongmense veral word baie ernstig deur die MIV-virus besmet en die
navorsing toon dat 60% van alle mense wat MIV-besmet raak, jonger as 25 is.
Jong vroue is veral sagte teikens vir hierdie dodelike virus. Jong vroue
het 'n groter risiko om besmet te word, as gevolg van biologiese, sosiale
en ekonomiese faktore. 'n Onlangse studie in KwaZulu-Natal onder
universiteitstudente het die besmettingskoers gestel op 26% onder vroue en
12% onder mans in die ouderdomsgroep 20-24. 'n Totaal van 36% onder vroue
en 23% onder mans in die ouderdomsgroep 25-29. Hierdie inligting beklemtoon
dus die dringende behoefte vir prioriteitsvoorkomingsprogramme onder veral
jongmense en jong vroue wat die grootste segment hiervan uitmaak.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follow.)

[Mr J L THERON: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and honourable children of
South Africa, it is indeed a privilege for me today to participate in the
debate on International Children's Day. It is a matter which lies very
close to the heart, especially for those people who have children
themselves. In the short time at my disposal I want to highlight the health
aspects concerning children, and especially emphasize the HIV/Aids epidemic
and what an enormous negative impact it has on the young lives of children.

According to a report from ABT Associates in Love Life, more than 3,5
million people in South Africa are presently HIV-positive and it has been
projected that this figure will double in the next ten years. From this it
is deduced that 6 to 10 million people will die of HIV/Aids in South Africa
in the next decade.

According to this report more than half of South Africans below 20 years of
age will not get beyond 35 years of age.  Although this illness can
presently not be stopped, there is still a chance to turn this fierce tide
which has hit South Africa. This can best be done by safe, directional
preventive strategies, especially amongst the 45% of the South African
population under the age of 15 years.

Young people especially are seriously infected by the HI virus and research
has shown that 60% of all people who are HIV- infected are younger than 25
years. Young women especially are soft targets for this deadly virus. Young
women have a greater risk of becoming infected, as a result of biological,
social and economic factors. A recent study in KwaZulu-Natal amongst
university students has set the infection rate at 26% amongst women and 12%
amongst men in the age group 20-24. A total of 36% amongst women and 23%
amongst men in the age group 25-29. This information emphasises the urgent
need for priority preventive programmes especially amongst young people and
young women who make up the biggest segment of this group.]

Orphans are perhaps the most tragic and enduring legacy of the HIV/Aids
epidemic. By 2005 there are expected to be around 800 000 orphans under the
age of 15. This figure will rise to more than 1,95 million, that is about 2
million, in 2010. Models of providing support for these vulnerable children
and their communities urgently need to be explored because traditional
coping mechanisms are likely to break down.

The sharpest economic effect of the South African epidemic will probably be
on wealth distribution rather than on the size of the economy as a whole.
In the field of human and social development, however, the consequences are
expected to be much more profound. Increased illness and deaths and reduced
life expectancy will clearly compromise development objectives, while the
survival of poor households will be made more difficult. Increasingly,
HIV/Aids is expected to be a major determinant of the ability of households
to extricate themselves from long-standing poverty.

Ek wil in dié verband graag 'n voorbeeld aanhaal, wat na aan my eie gesin
gekom het. Ons het 'n huishulp wat al baie jare by ons werk en baie lank
een van die gesin is. Twee maande gelede het my vrou agtergekom dat sy baie
ontsteld was na 'n telefoonoproep. Haar suster is oorlede en haar vyf
kinders is wees gelaat. Ons huishulp se gesin is skielik met twee kinders
vergroot, terwyl die res van die familie die ander drie kinders sal
versorg. Hieruit kan gesien word hoe hierdie dodelike epidemie baie skielik
'n gesin se welvaartsituasie baie ernstig kan beïnvloed. Ek wil graag
afsluit.

Ek het probeer aantoon hoe ernstig die MIV/Vigsepidemie veral die jeug van
Suid-Afrika beïnvloed. Daarom wil ek nou graag 'n beroep op die Minister
van Gesondheid en haar departement en die hele uitvoerende gesag doen, om
weer eens baie ernstig aandag te skenk aan hierdie epidemie en veral sy
invloed op die jeug van Suid-Afrika. Ek vertrou daarom dat die agb Minister
die boodskap sal oordra. Ons weet dat daar reeds baie geld begroot is om
hierdie epidemie te beveg, maar dit is hoegenaamd nie genoeg om te verseker
dat ons in die toekoms sal kan staatmaak op 'n gesonde en goedopgeleide
werkerskorps nie. Daar sal in die toekoms beslis groter dele van die
begroting aan gesondheidsorg en onderwys bestee moet word, indien daar
enigsins doeltreffend teen hierdie MIV/Vigsepidemie opgetree wil word in
die belang van die jeug van Suid-Afrika. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to cite an example in this regard which came close to my own
family. We have a domestic worker who has been working for us for many
years and who has been one of the family for quite some time. Two months
ago my wife discovered that she was very upset after she received a
telephone call. Her sister had died and her five children were orphaned.
The family of our domestic worker was suddenly increased by two more
children, while the rest of the family would look after the other three
children. Through this one can see how this deadly epidemic can suddenly
very seriously influence the welfare of a family. I would like to conclude.


I have tried to indicate how seriously the HIV/Aids epidemic can influence
especially the youth of South Africa. For this reason I now want to appeal
to the Minister of Health and her department and the entire executive
authority, to once again give serious attention to this epidemic and
especially its influence on the youth of South Africa. I therefore trust
that the hon the Minister will convey the message. We know that a lot of
money has already been budgeted to fight this epidemic, but it is still not
enough to ensure that we can depend on a healthy and well-trained workforce
in the future. In future we will have to spend bigger parts of the budget
on health care and education, if we want to efficiently counter this
HIV/Aids epidemic in the interests of the youth of South Africa.
[Applause.]]

Mr P D N MALOYI: Mr Chairperson, at least for the first time today, hon
Theron did not try to parade his face, which is not that pretty, by trying
to mix water with oil.

The ANC is deeply concerned about the alarming reports concerning child
abuse throughout South Africa, particularly in children's homes and
institutions in areas - I direct this to the hon Kgware - around Gauteng
and the Western Cape.

Draft protocol documents on the management of child abuse and neglect cases
were developed in each province. I hope that Thoko is here. If what I am
saying is not correct, she will come to the committee and we will deal with
these things. The nine provinces submit quarterly reports to the department
on the progress and implementation of these protocols. If that is not
happening, we must deal with that in the committee.

The provision of free medical care and food nutrition schemes to children
under the age of six is clearly an indication that the ANC Government is
prepared to invest in the child for the good future of the country. The
most destructive manifestation of family violence and upheaval is child
abuse and neglect. Our goals should be, amongst others, prevention, early
identification and comprehensive treatment of child abuse victims.

Children's contribution in the everyday life of families and in society
should be recognised and encouraged, as long as this contributes to the
child's own development. In contrast to this, exploitation of children in
the labour market may deprive them of their childhood and educational
opportunities and even endanger their health both in the present and in
future. Issues of child labour have reached such demonic proportions that
until people at grass-roots level are mobilised enough, desired results
will remain just a dream. The use and abuse of these little souls is an
unpardonable sin.

Since child labour is a worldwide problem, simply blaming the
ineffectiveness of the law will not absolve us of our responsibilities.

Quite a number of children disappear from our streets on their way home
from school, particularly in the two provinces I spoke about, Gauteng and
the Western Cape. I hope the hon Kgware is listening. This growing
affliction has the capacity and strength to go deeper and wider, unless
every heart, every mind and everybody sheds the attitude of complacency and
takes small but significant steps towards its complete elimination.
Our Government is therefore committed to curbing various forms of child
abuse, which include physical, sexual and emotional abuse. Child neglect
represents the failure of a parent - I direct this to Comrade Archie or any
other person legally responsible for a child's welfare ... [Laughter] ...
to provide for the child's basic needs and an adequate level of care.

The worldwide spreading of violence against girls in schools amounts to a
gross violation of human rights, and if allowed to continue unchecked will
represent a failure of society to protect vulnerable sections of the
community. Such violence and harassment not only cause direct physical and
emotional harm to those affected, but also undermine the safety of the
general schooling environment.

In 1998 - I direct this to the Comrade Minister - the Ministerial Gender
Equity Task Team addressed sexual violence prevention in its report and
made wide-ranging recommendations, including the need for focused attention
on gender equity in the curriculum, the monitoring of all violence against
girls and women in educational institutions, and ensuring that disciplinary
procedures are not only in place, but are being implemented with respect to
both learners and educators.

In conclusion, the eradication of sexual abuse in schools is not the task
of the Government only. Parents, learners, teachers and community
structures all need to become involved in the fight against this problem.
Only then will the safety, dignity and right to education of all young
women be adequately protected by our society, including myself, as a
father. [Applause.]

Mev J WITBOOI: Mnr die Voorsitter, agb Minister en agb lede, ek is self 'n
ma en daarom sal ek, soos die agb lid aan die anderkant vra, mooi praat.

'n AGB LID: Ja! Praat mooi!

Mev J WITBOOI: Toe ek by 'n familiegeleentheid gevra word om die woord
``demokrasie'' aan die jonger lede te verduidelik, het ek, nadat ek dit
gedoen het en gevra het of hulle verstaan, 'n antwoord gekry wat my weer
eens laat besef het hoeveel onskuld in kindwees opgesluit lê. Een van die
kleintjies het my ná my verduideliking bedank en na sy ma gedraai en vir
haar gesê: ``Niemand mag van nou af vir my forseer of met my raas as ek
éérs my poeding wil eet en daarná my kos nie.'' Vir sommige van ons kinders
het die wreedhede van die lewe nog nie getref nie. Dit is genade.

Kindwees is mooi-wees tyd, droomtyd, bloeityd. Ons weet egter daar is
vandag miljoene onskuldige kinders vir wie kindwees alles behalwe droomtyd
is. Ek is seker as ons vandag hierdie debat aan kinders sou oorlaat, ons
verslae sou sit oor wat ons dalk sou hoor. Miskien sou 'n klein, bang
seuntjie vandag hier voor ons kom sê: ``Ek weet nie waar my pa is nie. Hy
betaal geen onderhoud vir my nie, en alles wat ons al gedoen het om hom op
te spoor, was tevergeefs. Die toepassing van ons land se wette help ons ook
nie veel om hom in die hande te kry nie, en om hom te dwing om my te
versorg nie.''

Dalk sou 'n ander kind vandag hier kom staan het om hulde te bring aan
duisende vrywillige hande en harte wat vir hulle langs die lewenspad
oopgegaan het toe hulle wees gelaat is deur siektes soos MIV/Vigs,
tuberkulose, ens. Ons moet vandag hierdie mense eer wat, sonder om te
aarsel, ánder mense se kinders húl kinders gemaak het. Sou die kindertjies
vandag hier kon staan en 'n voorstel indien, is ek seker dat nie een van
ons sou omgee of dit 'n voorstel met of sonder kennisgewing is, indien die
voorstel soos volg sou lui nie: ``Ons pleit vir kinderbeskermingseenhede
regoor die land, in elke uithoek van Suid-Afrika, vir ons wat verkrag,
gemolesteer en aangerand word, soms deur familielede. Ons het nêrens heen
om te vlug nie. Ons pleit vir die opleiding van onderwysers vir kinders met
spesiale behoeftes, sodat ons wat, na die beste van vermoë, nie in 'n
normale skool kan vorder nie, ook 'n menswaardige kans gegun word.''

Oor die regte van die kind bestaan daar van graffiti tot lywige dokumente
ter bewusmaking. Dit is ons taak om die boodskap uit te dra sodat ons
kinders kan weet hul stemme word gehoor. Ek wil aan die voorsitter en die
lede van die gesamentlike moniteringskomitee vir die verbetering van die
lewe en die status van kinders, jeug en persone met gestremdhede sê: gaan
voort met die goeie werk! Ek moet byvoeg dit is vir my 'n besondere voorreg
om in daardie komitee te dien. Ons moet moniteer of die wette wat bestaan,
wel geïmplementeer word, en enige struikelblok verwyder wat mag verhinder
dat ons ons pragtige wette tot uitvoering bring. Ons moet seker maak dat
ons die kinderstemme hoor. Kom ons gaan voort om ander mense se kinders óns
kinders te maak.
'n AGB LID: Dit is mooi! Dit is mooi! [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs J WITBOOI: Mr Chairman, hon Minister and hon members, I am a mother
myself and that is why I, like the hon member on the other side is asking
me to, speak nicely.

An HON MEMBER: Yes! Speak nicely!

Mrs J WITBOOI: When I was asked, at a family gathering, to explain the word
``democracy'' to the younger members, I received a reply, after doing so
and asking them whether they had understood, that once again made me
realise how much innocence is locked up in childhood. One of the little
ones thanked me after my explanation, turned to his mother and said to her:
``From now on no one may force me, or scold me if I want to eat my dessert
first and then my food.'' Some of our children have not yet been affected
by the cruelties of life. That is grace.

Childhood is the time to be beautiful, to dream, to blossom. We know,
however, that there are millions of children today whose childhood is
anything but the time to dream. I am certain that if we had left this
debate today to children, we would be dismayed at what we might hear.
Perhaps a fearful little boy would stand here before us today and say to
us: ``I do not know where my father is. He does not pay any maintenance for
me, and everything that we have done to find him has been in vain. The
enforcement of our country's laws does not help us to find him and force
him to care for me.''

Perhaps other children would have stood here today to pay tribute to
thousands of voluntary hands and hearts that had been opened to them along
the course of their lives when they were orphaned by diseases such as
HIV/Aids, tuberculosis, etc. We must honour those people today who, without
hesitating, made other people's children their children. Would the children
have been able to stand here today and move a motion, I am certain that not
one of us would have minded whether it was a motion with or without notice,
if the motion went as follows: ``We plead for child protection units right
across the country, in every corner of South Africa, for those of us who
are raped, molested and assaulted, sometimes by family members. We have
nowhere to flee to. We plead for the training of teachers of children with
special needs, so that we who, even to the best of our ability, cannot make
progress in a normal school could also be given a dignified chance.''

In respect of the rights of the child, from graffiti to substantial
documents exist to create awareness. It is our task to convey the message
so that our children could know that their voices are being heard. I want
to say to the chairperson and members of the Joint Monitoring Committee on
the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
Disabled Persons: Continue with the good work! I must add that it is an
exceptional privilege for me to serve on that committee. We must monitor
whether the existing laws are being implemented, and remove any obstacles
that may prevent our beautiful laws from having an effect. We must ensure
that we will still hear children's voices. Let us continue to make other
people's children our children.

An HON MEMBER: That is lovely! That is lovely! [Applause.]]

Ms M P THEMBA: Modilasetilo, ke rata go leboga Mme Witbooi gore gompieno o
buile jaaka mme. O lateletse mafoko a a reng mmangwana o tswara thipa ka fa
bogaleng. [Chairperson, I would like to thank Mrs Witbooi because, today,
she spoke like a woman. She confirms the old saying that identifies a woman
as somebody who will always protect her children.]

As we mark International Children's Day on 1 June, we are reminded of how
South African children have been denied basic human rights for decades.
They suffered horribly under the brutal apartheid system.

The ANC, on this particular day, would like to thank all organisations
working towards promoting the awareness, engagement and mobilisation of
South African citizens in denouncing the violation of children's rights.
Equally important are welfare organisations that are working hard to
provide shelter, food and clothing to the deprived children whose family
lives have broken down due to violence, unemployment and other societal
evils.

Children have been and continue to be abused, tortured, mistreated,
neglected and abandoned by the people they live with. Children are not
treated with the respect and dignity that human beings deserve, but are
instead subjected to violence, poverty, racism and ignorance on the part of
adults. I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate the commitment of the
SA Government to a comprehensive programme to ensure that children of our
country grow up in secure families and enjoy all the rights and privileges
they deserve.

On 1 June 1994, we committed ourselves to the UN Declaration on the Rights
of the Child. The motion mechanism which was announced at the opening of
the first Parliament has been a success. The programmes that we had to
implement included the provision of free medical care in state hospitals
and clinics for children under six years of age; a nutritional feeding
scheme in primary schools; programmes of the Departments of Justice and
Social Development to empty the jails of children and to provide
alternative care centres; and legislation to introduce free and quality
education for children.

In addition to these successful programmes, which are currently in place,
we have implemented child support grants for unemployed mothers with
children under the age of seven. On this day we also extend our solidarity
to children throughout the world whose lives are ravaged by the scourges of
hunger, war and ignorance. We commit ourselves to contribute to the best of
our ability to the international efforts aimed at resolving these problems.
In particular, the ANC would like to emphasise the following clauses of the
Children's Charter of South Africa, which was adopted on 1 June 1992 by the
International Children's Summit. Articles 8 and 9 say:


  All children have the right to free and equal, nonracial, nonsexist and
  compulsory education within one department, as education is a right, not
  a privilege.


  All teachers should be qualified and treat children with patience,
  respect and dignity.


  All children have the right to be protected from child labour and any
  other economic exploitation which endangers a child's mental, physical or
  psychological health and interferes with his/her education so that he/she
  can develop properly and enjoy childhood.


   All children have the right to be protected from prostitution and sexual
  exploitation.

The sexual abuse of girls in South African schools, documented in a report
released on 30 March this year by Human Rights Watch, should be a source of
concern for our entire society.  The report says that South African girls
continue to be raped, sexually abused, sexually harassed and assaulted by
schoolmates, classmates and teachers. For many, violence and abuse are an
inevitable part of the school environment.

The department has embarked on introducing sexual abuse prevention in the
life-skills learning area, through analysing different kind of
relationships that exist between the sexes, and also evaluating these
relationships. Learners are enabled to reflect on their behaviour and that
of others and to critically evaluate human rights values and practices.

I call upon all provincial legislatures to establish committees like the
Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of
Children, Youth and Disabled Persons and the Joint Monitoring Committee on
Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women. [Applause.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Mr Chairperson, hon MECs present and hon members, it is
very interesting that almost everyone in society dreams of having a child.
Yet very few stop to think about what it means to be a parent. If it were
not so, the courts would not have to grapple with cases of nonpayment of
maintenance fees for children, and with child labour, child trafficking,
sexual abuse and the murder of innocent children. I may name a lot.
Children are precious. Let us love them, so as to promote love instead of
hatred.

Let us promote leaders instead of criminals. Let us promote lovers, instead
of fighters. When God gave leadership and authority to parents, he intended
that we would also shoulder the responsibilities which parenthood places on
us. Such unavoidable responsibilities are to ensure that children grow up
in decent homes, in a warm and healthy environment. In addition, God
intended that parents would shoulder their responsibilities to be teachers
of morals and ethical values to their children, in both word and deed.

How we treat our children today, and how we conduct ourselves before them
will, by and large, determine the type of adulthood we bequeath to our
children.

Inkalankala izala inkalankala. Inkomo ingazala umuntu ungahleka?
[Ubuwelewele]. Engiqonde ukukusho yolokhu,umzali kufale anikeze umntanakhe
uthando aludingayo empilweni yakhe. Uyoludlulisela phambili empilweni
yakhe. Kuyoba uchungechunge lothando kwabanye abantu ngoba umfundisile
wena.[Uhleko]. Uluncele ebeleni.

Uma umkhulisa ngesankahlu, unya, inzondo namagqubu, uyobe utshala lokho
empilweni yakhe. Kuyokhalwa ngaye kusukela emphakathini, emsebenzini,
emndenini nakuyo yonke indawo. Akunduku, akusibhaxu, akumadivosi isimanga
nje. [Ubuwelewele].

Kunezwi elimnandi eNcwadini eNgcwele elithi: ``Khulisa umntanakho ngendlela
ofuna abe yiyo. Uyothi angakhula angadedi kuwe.''Ukugcizelela lokhu thina
be-IFP sithi abantwana badinga ukudla, okokugqoka, indawo yokuhlala,
ukudlala, ukufunda, ukululekwa, ukuhlonipha, inhlanzeko kanye nokusebenza.
Konke lokhu nokunye engingakubalanga, inkosi yakho luthando, uthando,
uthando. [Ihlombe]. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[A crab gives birth to another crab. Would you not be surprised to see a
cow giving birth to a human being? [Interjections.] What I want to say is
this: A parent should give his or her child the love that the child needs
in his or her life. That child will do the same to his or her children. It
will be a chain of love in which one generation passes love to the other
just because you as a parent have been a role model to your child. To your
child it is breastfeeding.

If you bring up your children in a rude, cruel, hateful and resentful way,
you will be growing these things in your child's life. Your child will be a
pain in the neck in the community, in the workplace, in the family and
almost everywhere. Fights, beating other people and divorces will be part
of your child's life. [Interjections.]

There is an interesting verse in the Scriptures, which says bring up your
child the way you want him or her to be. Even when he or she is an adult,
he or she will be what you have made that child to be. To emphasise this,
we, the IFP, say children need food, clothes, places to stay, playgrounds,
education and advice. They also need to be taught how to respect other
people, how to clean their bodies and how to work so as to survive. All
these things and other things, that I did not mention, could be categorised
under one word, which is love, love, and love. [Applause.]]

Love, love, love. Love chain. [Laughter.]

Manana C NKUNA: Eka Muchaviseki Mutshami wa xitulu, eka Holobye, Holobye wa
vana ni vatsoniwa, yena Holobye E G Pahad ni le ka vatirhikulobye, ndzi twa
ndzi tsakile ngopfu ku kuma nkarhi wa ku vulavula. Hi Xitsonga va ri,
N'wana a hi wa un'we. Hileswaku n'wana wa mina, i n'wana wa wena. Naswona
n'wana wa wena, i n'wana wa mina. Ndzi tshemba leswaku na hi tindzimi
letin'wana mi vula sweswo. Lawa i mavulavulelo lawa ya tirhisiwaka hi vaaki
va laha Afrika Dzonga leswaku hi pfunana ku kurisa vana.

U nga ri loko u vona n'wana a ri ekhombyeni u n'wi tshika u ku:
(Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs C NKUNA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister dealing with the improvement of
quality of life and status of women, Dr E G Pahad, hon members, I feel very
happy to be given this opportunity to participate. In Tsonga we say a child
does not belong to one person alone because my child is your child and your
child is my child too. I believe it is the same with other languages as
well. This is the expression used by South African citizens so that we may
assist one another in the bringing up of children.
If you happen to see a child in danger you should not leave that child
alone and say:

Akusiye  umntwana wami. Umntwana wakho ngumntwana wami, umntwana wami
ngumntwana wakho. [He is not my child. Your child is also mine, my child is
also yours.]

Jou kind is my kind, en my kind is jou kind. [Your child is mine, and my
child is yours.]

Leri i vhiki leri ha rona hi tsundzukaka vana va hina laha Afrika Dzonga.
Hi ta tsundzuka leswaku Mfumo lowu wa hina loko wu ta va wu ve kona hi
1994, wu ve wu swirhalanganya swo karhi, wu lavile ku vona leswaku vana va
vekiwa emahlweni eka ajenda ya vona. Ndzi navela ku sungula ku vulavula hi
ku vula leswaku, leri i vhiki ro tsundzuka vana, no vona leswaku vana va
hlayiseka. Xosungula, hi ku landzelela timfanelo ta vana eka Vumbiwa, no
vona leswaku vana va sirheleriwa. No kambisisa leswi Mfumo wu swi endleke
ku fikela nkarhi wa sweswi.

Ndzi kombela ku humanyana emhakeni, ku na vanhu vo tala lava vulaka leswaku
Mfumo a wu endli nchumu. A hi swi voni leswi Mfumo wu endlaka swona. Ndzi
kombela leswaku hi nga dyi nkarhi wa hina hi vanhu lava nga tiyimiselangiki
ku vona kumbe ku twa leswi swi endlekaka.

Matiko yo tala ya Afrika ya hlanganile namuntlha eCairo, ku languta xiviko
lexi nga ta nyikiwa entsungeni, hikuva ku nga ri khale ku ta va na
nhlangano wa matiko entsungeni. Ndzi pfumeleleni ndzi thlelela eAfrika
Dzonga, ku langutisa leswi Mfumo wu swi endleleke vana. Xosungula,
hikokwalaho ka nhlayo ya ku lova ka vana, mortality rate, Mfumo wu endle
leswaku vamanana va kuma ku hlayisiwa. Va langutiwa lomuya titliliniki na
lomuya swibedlhele loku va rhwele vana lava.

Mfumo wu tlhela wu yisa emahlweni leswaku vana lava, va kota ku nghena
xikolo, va kota ku kuma mirhi lomuya swibedlhele ku fikela loko va va na
malembe ya tsevu, va ri karhi va nga hakeri nchumu. Mfumo a wu helelangi
kona kwalaho, kambe wu yile emahlweni wu vona leswaku loko vana va ta va ri
le xikolweni va phakeriwa swakudya Feeding Scheme. I mani loyi a nga vulaka
leswaku Mfumo lowu a wu le ku endleni ka nchumu? Mfumo lowu sungulaka hi
n'wana kwale ndzeni ka khwiri ra wena?

Ku na leswi vuriwaka Child Support Grant, na swona swi famba kun'we na
swilo leswi hinkwaswo. Hi na vana va ku ringana 60 000 lava kumaka Grant
leyi. Nomboro ya kona yi ya emahlweni, yi tshinelela eka miliyoni. Kambe
hambi swi ri tano, Mfumo lowu wu na swirhalanganyi.

Ku na vana lava nga na vatswari lava nga tirhiki. Sweswo na swona swi endla
leswaku vana va nga koti ku kuma ku hlayiseka. Ntsena, hi khensa minhlngano
leyi pfunaka ku vona leswaku vana va kurisiwa hi ndlela leyinene.
Mihlangano ya ku hambana-hambana leyi nga ri ki minhlangano ya Mfumo, leswi
vuriwaka leswaku i ti Non Govermental Organisations, lava va tikereke kumbe
vukhongeri byo hambana-hambana, na va swa mahungu, ku va va kota ku hi
komba leswaku vana va hlayiseka ku fika kwihi.

Hi khensa na vavanuna na vavasati lava mi nga kona laha, ni lava mi nga
kona le handle, lava mi sapotaka vana va n'wina, hikuva va kona vanhu lava
nga sapotiki. Ka ha ri na swirhalanganyi swo tala. A hi sirheleleni vana va
hina eka swirhalanganyi leswi.  Ndzi yimile ndzi vulavula emahlweni ka
n'wina tani hi thicara, ndzi dyondzise vana malembe ya 17, ndza swi tiva
swivanana. Ndzi yime tani hi mutswari. A hi sirheleleni vana va hina, hi
nga va xanisi, ngopfu eka timhaka ta swa masangu. Hi nga xanisi vana va
hina emimoyeni, emirini wa vona ni hi ku va hi nga va hlayisi.
A hi nga swi koti ku vulavula hi vumundzuku bya Afrika Dzonga loko hi ya
emahlweni ni ku xanisa vana.  (Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[This week we commemorate our children in South Africa. We should remember
that when our Government came into existence in 1994, it was faced with
certain problems and had to see to it that children received first priority
on its agenda. I would like to start by saying that this week in which we
remember our children means that we must see to it that they are well
looked after. Firstly, if we follow children's rights in the Constitution,
children should be protected. Let us review what the Government has done up
to now.

Allow me to deviate a little from my subject, and say there are a lot of
people who say that the Government is not doing anything. We do not see
what the Government is doing. I request that we should not waste time on
people who are not prepared to see or hear what is taking place.

Most African countries are holding a meeting today in Cairo, to consider
the report which will be presented abroad, because in the near future there
will be an international meeting abroad. Allow me to come back to South
Africa, to see what the Government has done so far. In the first place, due
to the infant mortality rate, the Government made a point of seeing to it
that women should be well looked after. They go for consultations at
clinics and hospitals when they fall pregnant.

The Government also assists parents by giving free medical care in order to
enable parents to send their children to school, and children get free
medication until they turn six. The Government did not end up doing that
only, but made provision for feeding schemes at schools. Who can say that
the Government did not do anything? The Government takes care of people
from the time a child is in its mother's womb.

There is the so-called child care grant, that also goes together with
everything I have said. We have 60 000 people who benefit through this
grant. The figure is increasing: it is nearly a million. However, this
Government is still faced with problems.
There are children with parents without jobs. That also causes a lack of
support for children. We would like to thank organisations responsible for
taking care of such children in order to bring them up in an orderly
manner. Different NGOs, church organisations, and the media should show us
to what extent these children are protected.

We also wish to thank men and women who are present here, and others out
there, who support our children, because there are those who do not support
children. There are still a lot of problems. Let us protect our children
and do away with these problems. I stand and speak in front of you here as
a teacher. I taught for 17 years, I know children very well. I am standing
here as a parent. Let us protect our children. We should not abuse them,
especially when it comes to sexual abuse. We should not punish our children
emotionally or physically and we should not neglect to support them. If we
continue to abuse them, we will not manage to speak about the future of
South Africa.]

It is appropriate to repeat the cliché that today's children and young
adults are tomorrow's adults and leaders.

Hinkwaswo leswi swi endleriwa vana va hina laha tikweni ra Afrika Dzonga.
Laha Afrika Dzonga a hi lo tshama ntsena hi khondla mavoko, ku na pulani
leyi vuriwaka leswaku i National Plan of Action for Children, leyi Mfumo wu
yi salasalaka hi le ndzhaku ku vona leswaku vana va hlayisekile. A hi va
rivalangi vana hikuva ha swi tiva leswaku vana i vumundzuku. They are the
future of tomorrow.

Nakambe ku na Convention on the Rights of the Child, ya matiko lama nga
hlangana, The United Nations, laha Afrika Dzonga na rona ri sayineke yi
pfumelela leswaku vana hi ta va hlayisa. Ku na The African Charter on the
Rights of the Children. Lama hi man'wana ya matsalwa lama hi ya salaka hi
le ndzhaku ku vona leswaku vana va hlayiseka laha Afrika Dzonga. Vana va
hina lava xanisiweke, va chava ku hlangana ni vanhu lavakulu. Ndzi byeleni
vakulukumba, hi ya va vatswari va njhani loko vana va hi chava?  Vana va hi
chava hikuva hi va xanisile. All those different types of abuse. Vana va
chava vatswari va vona. Va chava ku muka. Va chava ku muka loko xikolo xi
humile.

N'wana loko a ya exikolweni, mi kuma a ambala swiambalo, a ambala xikipa,
hembhe na jesi, a fihla swivangula leswi, wena mutswari u nga n'wi endla
tona. [Va phokotela]. (Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Again we have the Convention on the Rights of the Child, of the United
Nations, which South Africa has also signed and pledged to support
children. There is The African Charter on the Rights of the Child. We are
also monitoring this in order to see to it that children are protected in
South Africa. Our abused children are afraid to meet adults. Tell me, hon
members, what type of parents are we going to be if children are afraid of
us? Children are afraid of us because we abuse them. Children are afraid of
their parents. They are afraid to go home after school.

When a child goes to school, you will find that that child puts on clothes,
puts on a vest, a shirt and a jersey, in order to hide the marks caused by
its parents. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, allow me, first of all, to
please express my very deep gratitude and appreciation for this very
positive debate that has taken place this afternoon. When we were having
lunch - no, earlier - President Mbeki said to the Prime Minister of France,
as we were going to the National Assembly, that it was very noisy there.
Perhaps if he comes here he will find that it is not very noisy.

I thought the debate was very positive and really very helpful. A number of
our people who spoke, spoke with a great deal of feeling and passion about
our children and about our responsibilities both as the legislatures and,
in that sense, as elected representatives of our people, and the
responsibility that would also devolve upon the executive. So I am very
appreciative of that.

If I may say something about what Mr Theron said: It is not a criticism,
but the interpretation from Afrikaans referred to the term ``domestic
servant.'' I do not know if he used it, but that is what the interpretation
said and I just wanted to say that all of us are workers. Perhaps it is a
matter of interpretation and, perhaps the officials themselves will look at
it. Because it seems wrong to me that the word ``servant'' should be
mentioned in the interpretation if it was not used. I thought I should
bring this to his notice. That is the word that was used in the
interpretation. We might want to look just at that. I will convey the hon
member's views to the Minister of Health. I suppose when she comes here the
hon member will himself also express his views to her.

Let me say this that as a Government we need to address the issue of a
policy on health, which is a health-for-all policy. There are also very
many other killer diseases in this country, such as tuberculosis, malaria
and other opportunistic infections. We need to deal with all of these in
such a way that we treat and enable our people to get the best health
services that may be possible.

I knew Mr Maloyi as a young man, and I am glad to note that he is now a
father. [Laughter.] If I may disagree with him in this august House: I do
not think that the issues of child labour have reached demonic proportions
in South Africa. I think it is wrong to say that they have. There was a
survey that was done and brought to the Cabinet, and we sent it back. The
reason I am raising this is not to criticise the hon member, but if child
labour has reached demonic proportions, that has very serious policy
implications. It will also have very serious implications with regard to
the budget and everything else. There is a problem of child labour, but I
am not sure that it has reached demonic proportions. And since he comes
from the North West, he had better watch it because I do my political work
there. [Laughter.]

Ms Themba spoke about solidarity with children of the world. I want to
agree with that, because as we stand here today, there are Palestinian
children who are being killed. They are being killed because they want
something that we ourselves wanted, and that is their freedom and national
liberation. I want to join her in expressing that solidarity with the
children of the world, in particular with those millions upon millions of
children who still have to suffer from the ravages of poverty and
underdevelopment.

Well, I agree, let us have a chain of love. I think that is a nice slogan.
I hope Thoko heard that. Next time we go and make a report to the United
Nations, we will call it ``the chain of love''. Let that chain of love go
right across the world.

I am very glad that Mrs Nkuna raised the issue of the conference in Cairo.
Let me say that the Deputy Minister of Minerals and Energy, Susan Shabangu,
is attending that conference on behalf of the Government. President Mbeki
will also attend the special session of the United Nations on children that
will be held in September this year. It will be a special session that is
going to be attended by many heads of state, and he will be there on behalf
of South Africa.

Let me make this last point, because it has come up quite often, and that
is a question of orphans. It is a serious problem. Maybe the way we should
deal with it is to go back to what the hon member said: ``Your child is my
child and my child is your child.'' Something is happening in our country.
That fundamental human way of approaching many things seems to be breaking
down, and the consequence is that one gets a greater number of orphans, who
then pose a specific problem for us.

It might be a useful exercise, when the hon members go on their provincial
visits, to actually do some serious research about orphans. A lot of
statistics are thrown about and members do not know where they come from.
They are sometimes extrapolated from some narrow survey that is done. In a
sense sometimes we are operating a bit in the dark. It might be helpful if
the hon members themselves paid a little more attention to that question
during their provincial visits.

They should come back and through the NCOP we can see how the provinces and
the local government can deal with it. Through the reports of this House we
will be able to see how we at the national level can pay attention to the
question of orphans.

Every child on the street should be our child. Every child that walks and
sleeps on the street is a damning criticism of our failure to do something
about it.

Finally, what I would like to say is that this is an issue, as this debate
has shown us. All of us can rise above party politics and regard this as a
national issue. All of us can get together and try to do something to make
a difference in the lives of our children. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 19:03.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           WEDNESDAY, 30 MAY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry on 23 May 2001 submitted a
         draft of the International Trade Administration Bill, 2001 as well
         as the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs
         by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance
         with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 29 May 2001 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:
         (i)     Agricultural Research Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2001]
                 (National Assembly - sec 75).


         (ii)    Counterfeit Goods Amendment Bill [B 27 - 2001] (National
                 Assembly - sec 75).


         (iii)   Alexkor Limited Amendment Bill [B 29 - 2001] (National
                 Assembly - sec 75).


     (3)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 29 May 2001 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


         (i)     Consumer Affairs (Unfair Business Practices) Amendment
                 Bill [B 28 - 2001] (National Council of Provinces - sec
                 76).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote No 6
     - Communications for 1999-2000 [RP 115-2000].

                            THURSDAY, 31 MAY 2001

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote No 29
     - South African Police Service and the Secretariat for Safety and
     Security for 1999-2000 and Performance Audits of Human Resource
     Management and the Management of the Central Firearms Register [RP 138-
     2000].


