---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 May 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-05-11
---

FRIDAY, 11 MAY 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCCEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

The House met at 09:02.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M T GONIWE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Minister of Safety and Security, Steve Tshwete,
       recently said that Pagad was behind the urban terror on the Cape
       Flats and was ridiculed by the Opposition;


  (2) also notes that, subsequent to the Minister's statements, the
       following Pagad members were charged, convicted and sentenced:


       (a)  Ismail Edwards - 25 years;


       (b)  Dawood Osman - 32 years;


       (c)  Mansoer Legget - 11 life sentences;


       (d)  Faizel Waggie, Haroon Orrie, Shahied and Nazeem Davids charged
           with attempted sabotage, possession of an explosive device and
           intimidation; and


       (e)  Ebrahim Jeneker, Abdullah and Ismail Maansdorp facing 138
           charges ranging from murder, attempted murder, kidnapping and
           robbery to illegal possession of firearms; and


  (3) congratulates the Minister and denounces the silence of the DP on the
       vindication of the Minister.

[Applause.]

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the ludicrous attempts of Deputy Minister Aziz Pahad and the
       Minister of Foreign Affairs, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, to suggest that
       Mr Tony Leon is responsible for the bad image which South Africa
       currently enjoys in the rest of the world;


  (2) further notes that Mr Leon has had a very successful trip to France
       where he told the truth about South Africa and where he stressed that
       South Africa is a stable democracy with the potential for a bright
       future; and


  (3) should realise that statements by opposition members have not had,
       and never can have, the disastrous effect caused by exponents of the
       conspiracy theory such as Minister Steve Tshwete and the President.

[Applause.]

Mr J H SLABBERT: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) is disappointed that Afinta Motor Corporation (AMC), which was the
       top-rated candidate to provide the 18-35 motor vehicle, is currently
       under provisional liquidation;


  (2) is further disappointed that the other six bidders who could be
       considered for the tender are far away on the latitude of
       Government's specifications for the tender; and


  (3) appeals to all concerned parties to the recapitalisation process to
       give this matter the urgent attention it deserves.

Mr D A HANEKOM: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes news reports that our economy's long-term prospects are sound
       because of the fiscal discipline of the Government;


  (2) also notes that interest rates fell a great deal in 1999 and are now
       broadly on a par with rates in the US and Europe;


  (3) further notes that, following a complete reversal of the old NP
       policies, the dissaving of the apartheid government will have
       disappeared completely in two years' time;


  (4) commends the ANC and the Minister of Finance for -
       (a)  the budget deficit and inflation reduction;


       (b)  the greater financial stability;


       (c)  the tariff regime reform;


       (d)  reducing the balance of payments constraint; and


       (e)  lessening our vulnerability to external economic shocks; and


  (5) pledges its support for the ANC's continuous efforts to build a
       globally competitive economy.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with disgust that Sudan, whose government stands accused of
       enslaving segments of its population and of trampling on the rights
       of religious minorities, has been elected a member of the UN Human
       Rights Commission;


  (2) furthermore notes with dismay that the SA Government did nothing to
       block Sudan's candidature;


  (3) agrees that the election of Sudan as a member of the UN Human Rights
       Commission makes a mockery of the Universal Declaration of Human
       Rights; and


  (4) urges the Government to convey South Africa's protest in the
       strongest possible terms to the Secretary-General of the United
       Nations.

[Applause.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the decision by Eskom to increase tariffs, which comes as a
       huge shock to consumers, especially in rural areas and townships, and
       exposes the ANC's election promise of free electricity as a hollow
       promise;


  (2) acknowledges that this tariff increase is not commensurate with
       consumer inflation rates and that in fact tariff increases seem more
       profit-driven than service-orientated;


  (3) agrees that this decision will have a negative impact on the investor
       environment and will put greater pressure on the manufacturing sector
       (a leading consumer of electricity), leading to price increases in
       goods and higher inflation, and that these effects will inevitably be
       passed on to the consumer and the poor; and


  (4) calls on the Minister of Minerals and Energy to intervene and on
       Government to give urgent attention to alternative energy solutions,
       instead of exploiting hard-pressed consumers with additional
       expenses.

Mrs M S MAINE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes news reports that the Scorpions made a breakthrough in the
       money-for-jobs corruption scandal at the Pretoria Central Prison with
       the arrest of two people, and the  promise of more arrests;


  (2) also notes that the Scorpions also made a breakthrough in the
       investigations into the theft of Telkom cables with the arrest of two
       businessmen who delivered these cables on subcontract;


  (3) further notes that President Thabo Mbeki has recently referred to
       these scams and promised that arrests are expected soon;


  (4) commends the Scorpions for the sterling work they are doing in the
       arduous fight against crime and corruption; and


  (5) commends the President for his hands-on approach to crime-fighting.

[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag van die Huis namens die VF sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem -


       (a)  van die heldhaftige optrede van die twee Bosmanbroers, Pieter
           (16) en Mark (17), wat twee Basotho-drenkelinge uit 'n siedende
           Oranjerivier gered het;


       (b)  daarvan dat die AEB gaan aansoek doen om die broers in oorweging
           te bring vir die Wolraad Woltemade-medalje vir dapperheid in
           vredestyd; en


       (c)  daarvan dat die optrede van die twee broers van besondere
           betekenis is in hierdie tyd waarin die land gebuk gaan onder 'n
           wolk van rassepolarisasie;


  (2) dit betreur dat hierdie positiewe optrede so min publisiteit geniet
       het, vergeleke met die negatiewe gevalle van oortredings met 'n
       moontlike rassekonnotasie; en


  (3) elke lid van die Huis asook die media in die land oproep om deur
       positiewe leierskap en 'n positiewe fokus mee te werk tot die uitbou
       van die groot mate van ``goodwill'' wat daar tog tussen die
       verskillende bevolkingsgroepe in Suid-Afrika bestaan.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the heroic action of the two Bosman brothers, Pieter (16) and
           Mark (17), who saved two drowning Basotho's from a seething
           Orange River;


       (b)  that the AEB is going to request that the brothers be considered
           for the Wolraad Woltemade medal for courage in times of peace;
           and


       (c)  that the action by the two brothers is of particular
           significance at this time when the country is burdened by a
           cloud of racial polarisation;


  (2) deplores the fact that this positive action has received so little
       publicity in comparison with the negative cases of offences with a
       possible racial connotation; and


  (3) calls on every member of the House as well as the country's media to
       co-operate, through positive leadership  and a positive focus, in the
       development of the great degree of goodwill that does exist between
       the various population groups in South Africa.]
Ms T R MODISE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Popcru has exposed the Western Cape MEC Hennie Bester  for
           playing politics with people's lives instead of dealing
           effectively with gang violence in poor communities on the Cape
           Flats; and


       (b)  Popcru confirmed the ANC's contention that the DP and the New NP
           are using the police, community patrol officers and municipal
           police to safeguard white businesses in low-crime areas, and are
           disregarding  the safety of poor people in high-crime areas; and


  (2) calls on the DP and the New NP and their incompetent MEC Bester to
       stop playing politics with the lives of poor people and to deploy
       police resources in areas where crime occurs most, not only in areas
       where their rich constituents live.

Mrs G M BORMAN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that by Christmas this year an additional 400 fully-trained
       municipal police officers will be patrolling the streets of Cape
       Town;


  (2) congratulates the DA in the Western Cape and the City of Cape Town
       for co-operating with each other to ensure that all the people of
       Cape Town live in a safe and secure environment;


  (3) notes that the Western Cape government has already set aside R21
       million for the training of municipal police officers;


  (4) recognises that the ``Bobby on the Beat'' concept is recognised
       worldwide as an effective deterrent to crime; and


  (5) calls on the other provinces and municipalities of South Africa to
       follow the example of the DA in the City of Cape Town and the Western
       Cape.

[Applause.]

Dr O BALOYI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) sadly notes that the HIV infection rate at Diepsloot in Gauteng is
       between 30% and 40%, which is about 10% higher than the rest of
       Gauteng;


  (2) notes also that research accords this state of affairs to the high
       percentage of young residents, unemployment and the abundance of sex
       workers; and


  (3) exhorts the health authorities and other stakeholders to strengthen
       the health education campaign in order to save human lives.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the captain of the South African national women's soccer team,
           Banyana Banyana, Ms Desire Ellis, became the first female soccer
           commentator over the weekend; and


       (b)  she achieved this magnificent feat during Bafana Bafana's
           crucial 2-1 victory over Zimbabwe on Saturday;


  (2) congratulates Ms Ellis on her leadership both on and off the field
       and on pioneering the cause of women in areas previously uncharted by
       women; and
  (3) echoes the salute, ``Malibongwe, igama lamakhosikazi'' in paying
       tribute to this outstanding national leader and others like her who
       push the boundaries of excellence ever further.

[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that due to negative political and economic
       developments, the business confidence index slipped further in April;


  (2) further notes that the index has now dropped 7,3% in the past two
       months, and that confidence is further being eroded by falling
       consumer demand aided by slower credit extension, retail sales and
       vehicle sales;


  (3) calls upon the Government to express serious concern regarding the
       recent attacks on SA businesses in Zimbabwe and the clarify the
       resurfacing of allegations of corruption in the arms procurement
       process; and


  (4) believes that the abovementioned developments must be seen in context
       regarding the weakening of the rand against the dollar and added
       inflationary expectations, which may put pressure on interest rates.

[Applause.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its disgust that the provincial welfare department in the
       Eastern Cape has lost more than R18 million since January this year
       through theft and pilferage committed by welfare officials;
  (2) notes that the effects of such losses are far-reaching, as pensioners
       who do not receive their grants, most of whom are solely dependent on
       these grants, do not have the means to meet their basic needs;


  (3) notes that in an attempt to curb the wave of fraud and corruption,
       the department wrongfully struck off the roll close to 100 disability
       grant recipients and pensioners and that this has resulted in an
       embarrassing court action to reinstate them; and


  (4) calls upon the Minister of Social Development to urgently attend to
       this horrific situation, which is causing many South Africans to
       suffer unnecessarily on a daily basis.

Ms B O DLAMINI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the reports in the media about alleged criminal behaviour and
       unprofessional conduct by some members of the SAPS VIP Protection
       Unit;


  (2) believes that the VIP Protection Unit is an elite unit which should
       be the pride of the SAPS through high levels of professionalism and
       efficiency;


  (3) congratulates those members of the SAPS VIP Protection Unit and other
       members of the Police Service for executing their responsibilities
       diligently; and


  (4) calls on the Department of Safety and Security to intensify its
       efforts to eradicate corruption in the unit and the SAPS in general.

[Applause.]

                          MOTHER'S DAY CELEBRATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the House -


  (1) recognises the very important role that mothers play in a family and
       in society;


  (2) expresses its appreciation for all that mothers do;


  (3) wishes all mothers a happy, restful Mother's Day on Sunday; and


  (4) also remembers those mothers who have passed on.

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 6 - Government Communication and Information System:

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, hon members, it gives me great
pleasure to rise and present to the House the GCIS Vote. For an
organisation which was formally launched a mere three years ago, on 18 May
1998, it has notched up some significant advances. While highlighting GCIS'
several achievements, it is important to bear in mind the several key
challenges faced by this body and some of the areas it will be attending to
in the 2000-2001 financial year.

At the beginning of this year the President, in his state of the nation
address, called on South Africans to unite in our active commitment to
achieving change. Today there can be no doubt that this country faces
several challenges through which it can either emerge as a united nation or
persist in the legacy of a country of two nations. In the past year GCIS
has been involved in several initiatives to give expression to this
Government's commitment to achieving national unity. This is in stark
contrast to the divisive and destructive efforts in the communications
sphere by the apartheid regime, which achieved national disunity.

Our recently designed coat of arms is an eloquent manifestation of this
democratic approach to communication. In crafting it, we sought not only to
dig into the deepest recesses of this land's history, but also to dignify
it with elements from the various tributaries which make up this great
nation, South Africa. The national Conference on Racism, where the
organising theme was, ``Nation in Dialogue'', was aimed at galvanising all
sectors of South African society in a thoughtful conversation on the
scourge of racism which still stalks our beautiful land.

In mentioning the role of GCIS in the international marketing of our
country in my address last year, I pointed out that it was a matter of
critical importance that we join hands as South Africans to promote our
country abroad. This is an issue about our self-esteem as a people. It is
about our national identity, and it is about our pride as South Africans.

Most of the trends reported in surveys indicate that there is a growing
appreciation of the gains of our transition to democracy. Furthermore,
there is confidence in this Government to bring about a better life for
all. But to see this transition through, to consolidate this fragile
democracy, we need a nation which has been able to overcome its historic
fault lines.

Ours is not a unique challenge. The former Prime Minister of Piedmont
remarked after the unification of Italy, and I quote:
  We have made Italy, now we must make Italians.

Now that we have a democratic South African state, we must all become South
Africans, proud citizens of a South Africa which revels in its multiplicity
of identities, and yet seeks to connect with its African core and destiny.
Our very diversity is our strength.

We want a South Africa in which society celebrates the unique attributes
that it is blessed with; a South Africa in which the overarching identity
of its people derives from the critical things that together we hold dear.
In my view, among the symbols of our unity should be the institutions that
are provided for in the Constitution, including the bodies of state charged
with the regulation of national affairs.

Here we expect not blind loyalty to Government, but a deep commitment to
the Constitution of this land and the terms of the settlement which helped
us achieve this Constitution. This Government's vision is a profoundly
modern one - the creation of a modern state on the basis of a common
commitment to build a better life for all.

In essence, then, this year has to mark the strengthening of the millions
of threads which bind us as South Africans; the deepening of our democracy
through the strengthening of the political institutions which guarantee our
basic rights; greater commitment to the Constitution which is the
foundation stone of our democracy; and the desire to let our pride as South
Africans shine through for the world to see. The Government, the
Opposition, the public at large and the media, all have important roles to
play in this endeavour.

In our Vote last year we expressed appreciation of the commitment made by
the SA National Editors' Forum, Sanef, to engage the outcome of the Human
Rights Commission, HRC, hearings into racism in the media. The Human Rights
Commission entrusted Sanef and the managers of media institutions with the
responsibility to address these issues as part of transforming the media
into a more professional corps worthy of the title of fourth estate.
[Interjections.]

We are pleased to note that Sanef has already held several workshops with
the HRC to take this process forward. We take note of Sanef's intentions to
revise the guidelines for the office of the Press Ombudsman. We trust that
those who are to be the primary beneficiaries of such an office, the
public, will be empowered to make better use of it.

As this process gathers momentum, it should become possible for us to
transcend the trappings of innuendo and sensationalism, and together to
blaze a new trail under conditions of democracy towards rational debate,
criticism that enriches and discourse inspired by the central injunction to
build a better life for all.

I am reminded here of a comment made by the respected American journalist
Richard Reeves, who, in his book, What the people know: Freedom and the
Press, said, and I quote:


  We took down politicians and politics without pausing to think that maybe
  we should be down with them. If we are in decline, it is because we have
  fallen into the trap of ignoring what government does and focusing on
  what it has done wrong.

South Africa may not yet have reached those depths, but we must be
vigilant, and constantly ask ourselves the question whether what we do in
all areas of endeavour, including the media, is driven by the desire to
provide a public service to build a better South Africa.

In this context, I express my appreciation to those eminent African
businesspeople and professionals who took out an advertisement in the
Sunday Times of May 6, 2001, regarding the President. Allow me to quote
extracts from that statement:


  So vicious, so underhand and so sustained have the attacks on him been
  that even fair-minded patriotic whites have started asking serious
  questions about the motive behind these attacks.


  We have full confidence in our President. He is intelligent, circumspect
  and passionate about the condition of our people and our future. We
  respect his leadership qualities. Yet, he is human and therefore will
  sometimes behave as such. Where he stumbles, we will hold out a hand.
  Where he errs, we will criticise and caution, sometimes publicly and
  sometimes privately, always however from a deep love of our country and
  people. Under his leadership we have the best Government this country has
  ever had. He deserves acknowledgement and support.
We raise all these issues in order to underline the critical challenge for
all of us to reach national consensus on issues that really matter. At the
centre of the GCIS mandate is the task of ensuring that South Africans join
hands in changing their lives for the better.

The objective of ensuring that all our people, including the poor, have
access to information that will make them active participants in the
process of change is one that has inspired our work in the past three
years. In this regard, a number of critical steps have been taken to
improve Government communication. However, we would be misleading this
House if we were to pretend that we were anywhere near the accomplishment
of this objective.

A government communication system should have a corps of professional
communicators, in all departments and all spheres, capable of ensuring that
the message of Government, the message of fundamental change, reaches all
the people and galvanises them into action. Systems to ensure training and
a common methodology across Government have been put in place, but much,
much more needs to be done to ensure professionalism in planning and
execution.

A government communication system should reflect, in its day-to-day
operations, integration and consistency in the content of its messages and
creativity in their delivery. Through interdepartmental and other
structures, joint planning and implementation have started to find concrete
expression. But we would not be true to our profession if we did not
continually strive for the level of integration that is way ahead of what
has been achieved in the areas of policy planning and implementation.

A government communication system should make its presence felt in all
areas of policy discourse across the nation, so that the thinking, the
decisions and the practical work of the nation's elected representatives
are fully appreciated by society as a whole. Strategies and practical
programmes in this regard have improved over the years, creating better
possibilities for proactive interventions and the necessary rapid response
capacities. But too many of our people are compelled to rely on sensation,
innuendo and sound bytes as the basis of knowledge on critical social
issues.

In brief, we have started on the journey towards an effective government
communication system, but the road ahead is still long, and negotiating its
torturous bends will require even greater determination and effort on the
part of all communicators. Central among the tasks we face is ensuring
direct communication between Government and the people. We therefore place
a high premium on the Imbizo campaign, a style of governance that ensures
interaction between members of the executive and citizens. We have started,
this year, to organise more and more of such events, be it in the launch of
water projects, in the introduction of the legislation campaign for taxis,
in the stand of the Housing Department at the Rand Easter Show or the
consultations with the elderly concerning issues that affect them.

Just over a week ago, President Thabo Mbeki paid a visit to the Northern
Province for such comprehensive interaction with the people, as the first
of such visits, which will take him to all the provinces. During this
visit, the President interacted with over 25 000 people, having had
discussions at nine meetings. He visited six projects and went live on a
phone-in programme, simulcast on three radio stations and regional
television, reaching over 1,5 million people and, as the Sunday Times
wrote: ``A sense of history pervaded the visit''.
Another critical element of Government's communication with the public is
the initiative to set up multi-purpose community centres. To date, 10 such
centres have become fully operational, and we are striving to ensure that
by the end of the 2000-2003 financial year at least one such centre should
be operational in each district of the country.

I want to use the opportunity to thank the Minister of Home Affairs for
opening the MPCC in Mpuluzi, as well as other Ministers who have taken the
project to heart. I also convey my thanks to the Minister of Public Works
for the sterling efforts made by her department to renovate and, where
necessary, construct new sites for the MPCCs, and the Minister of Public
Service and Administration for the efforts of her department to integrate
this important endeavour into the shared service delivery programme of
Government. My deepest gratitude I extend to the various provincial
governments, who have spared no effort in ensuring that this programme is
successfully implemented.

Direct and effective communication of the public also means the preparation
of products that are as relevant in their content as they are attractive in
their form. In as much as there may be weaknesses, we are proud of the fact
that examples of good products abound across Government. Among these are
the multimedia interventions by the GCIS about the state of the nation
address by the President, encompassing radio packages, leaflets and
posters, special ministerial briefings, and a link-up with community radio
stations and participation by Ministers in radio programmes, in as many of
our official languages as possible.

The challenge of ensuring dissemination of objective information, on
balance, within South African society, is also closely linked to the
question of the ownership of the platforms for the generation of news and
analyses. In the last Vote, I dealt extensively with the step towards the
creation of a media development and diversity agency. The Government has
embarked on the road to an MDDA, to assist in redressing the imbalances in
media concentration, which persist, seven years into this democracy.

The GCIS released a draft position paper in December, after a range of
meetings with most of the stakeholders concerned. The process, since, has
been marked by in-depth consultations, including the welcome and highly
appreciated initiative by the Portfolio Committee on Communications, in
March this year.

I am glad to report to this House that the call I made for greater
flexibility in achieving an objective that we are all committed to, has
been warmly received across the board. Steadily, we should arrive at even
greater degrees of consensus, and this should open the way for the
amendment of the draft position paper and, in time, if needed, the
submission to this august House, of necessary legislation.

The introspection that has underpinned the discussion around the MDDA is
required in even greater measure, with regard to how we project the reality
in our country to the outside world. Since the last Vote, the International
Marketing Council has been appointed. Government is profoundly grateful for
the single-minded commitment that has been shown by the eminent leaders
from the private sector, who have given of their time and expertise in
serving their country in this particular area. Again, in the IMC, the
expression of the power of joint efforts by citizens inspired by their love
for their country, stands out for all to see.
Already powerful movement of these united efforts is starting to gather
momentum across the land. Many private companies have offered their
services for this purpose and one hears daily of initiatives being
spontaneously taken to promote the boundless energy and creativity of South
Africa unlimited.

The Proudly South African campaign launched by Nedlac, backed by members of
that partnership, the tourism campaign of Satour embodied in the Circle of
Sunshine initiative, the creative efforts to attract even greater
investment by South Africans in their own country, all these and others are
starting to work on the basis of a common approach, which highlights the
best that South Africa can offer.

I am confident that this House, in its various components, will give the
lead to the nation on this critical matter. We should all encourage our
constituencies to work in the interests of South Africa first. We must use
the platforms afforded to us to advance the objectives of our country,
rather than seek to attract attention to ourselves by undermining the
nation's institutions and efforts.

These are some of the core tasks undertaken by the GCIS. They underpin the
approach to the many campaigns the Government is engaged, including the
challenge of spreading the message about HIV/Aids, promotion of the rights
and obligations enshrined in our Constitution, entrenching the co-operate
identity of the Government and specific projects in the areas of economic
growth and job creation, prevention and combating of crime, rural
development and urban renewal.

To fulfil all these responsibilities, the GCIS continues to improve itself
as a young and vibrant member of the public service family. In this regard,
I should say that I am proud to be associated with a department which, in
three quick years, has made tremendous strides in building a creative
establishment representative of the South African population.

Of the 318 positions currently filled, Africans make up 68,5%, whites
20,1%, coloureds 7,9% and Indians 3,5%. I am pleased to report that the
level of gender representivity has improved tremendously. Women comprise
48,1% of the entire staff, with women making up 41,7% of senior management.
African, Indian and coloured women make up almost 30% of senior management.
To put this in another way, 7 out of every 10 women in senior management
are black. [Applause.]

The percentage of disabled is almost 1%. While it is short of the 2%
objective set out for the Public Service, it is an area that management has
undertaken to look into with a mind to ensure representation in the
management echelons.

I wish to express my warm appreciation to Mr Joel Netshitenzhe the CEO of
the GCIS, his deputy Mr Abba Omar and the senior management and staff of
the GCIS for their sterling work and contributions during the past year.
May I also thank the chairperson, Mr N Kekana, and all members of the
portfolio committee. It remains a pleasure and a privilege to work with
them. It is therefore with pride and confidence that I commend this budget
of the GCIS for adoption. [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, there are striking similarities between the
programme for the GCIS for this year and the analysis titled ``The balance
of forces'' in the new edition of the ANC's quarterly Umrhabulo.

The party organ in Umrhabulo asks for improvements in Government and ANC
communications, in order to pursue the unity of the motive forces of the
national democratic revolution and to manage the secondary contradictions.
[Interjections.] More and more ways should be found, it says, to ensure
that the messages of transformation reach the people without relying only
on the conventional established media institutions.

Now taxpayers' money is not appropriated to pursue the crumbling unity of
the motive forces of the national democratic revolution, especially when
the secondary contradictions have produced a challenge to its leader. Yet,
sure enough, the GCIS now wearing a Government hat and the taxpayer's
wallet, likewise says it is critical that Government should interact in an
unmediated way with the public. The reasons for this unmediated approach is
that the media says the party organ is mostly owned or controlled in terms
of content by forces whose agenda is either to weaken the ANC or to shape
an ANC that satisfies its interests. The GCIS version states that the media
opposes social transformation and is bent on a single issue, which is an
anti-Mbeki and anti-Government crusade.

At the same time, the GCIS states that any progress on the part of the
media to take heed of the findings of the HRC on racism in the media and to
focus on the critical issues of transformation will help towards creating a
truly informed public.

In other words, a media which supports a new racial oligarchy will be
acceptable. The ANC ideologues do not believe all that stuff about white
racism. Anybody who believes them is a sucker. The transformation that they
accuse us of voting against - ie the ANC ideologues accusing the other side
of the House of voting against - does not mean transformation, but
revolutionary change away from the compromises that the ANC had to make at
the point of liberation and I quote: ``... when they held only elements of
state power''. In other words, the constitutional settlements that members
and I worked at and believe in are for the Mbeki ANC only - and I quote
from Umrabulo - ``a beachhead for new revolutionary advances''. The party
organ tells members so. That is what transformation means - the
transformation of both the media and the country.

Why do the members think that the Human Rights Commission tried to redefine
the freedom of expression in its media racism report? It is really a
shocker as it comes from the body that is supposed to protect the
Constitution. But I have yet to see the media protest. When the media
watchdog wakes up from time to time it is a relief because the other
watchdog, Parliament, is being neutralised as we speak. Umrabulo celebrates
the post-1999 mastery of Parliament to pursue transformation. It would like
nothing better than to do an Andrew Feinstein on the media, thus shifting
the balance of forces. [Applause.]

Mr N N KEKANA: Chairperson, I am really taken aback by what Madam Smuts has
said. At least what is comforting is that she reads Umrabulo. She needs to
do more. However, I doubt if she will qualify to be a member of the ANC,
because we would have to take her through a lot of scrutiny.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr N N KEKANA: The GCIS Vote has the staggering amount of R50 million in
its budget to be spent on international marketing. It is by far the biggest
line item on the budget and there is a compelling reason for that amount to
be allocated to the GCIS - simply to improve the image of our country
abroad. We need to remodel our image because of the negative stories that
are fed to the international community about South Africa and the African
continent as a whole.

In his introduction to the Unesco publication Many Voices, One  World, Sean
MacBride said that there was no magic solution to efface, by a single
stroke, the existing complicated and interconnected web of communication
problems. I earnestly believe that the GCIS, with its currently proposed
budget, will be able to address, in many strokes, the negative swings of
public mood that is largely the doing of bearers of bad news.

There are South Africans who are bearers of bad news, including those who
left the country after 1994, those who could not be governed by black
savages apparently, and those who regard the ANC leadership as having
African venality and is incompetent, like the rest in the continent. Those
forces are there in London, Washington, Sydney and other major centres of
the world. They ululate the utterance of the DA leadership every time they
paint a negative picture of our country and help destroy our country's
image without fail.

The Government has to spend a great deal of financial resources to undo,
negate and rectify the bad press which emanates from those do not have the
best interests of our country at heart. If one throws dirt into a well, one
pollutes the water for those who require to drink it. There is a saying in
Sesotho that goes - members will have to pardon my French: Go nyela sediba
sa metse. [To poison one's own well.] I agree with the GCIS. South Africa
can no longer afford the default positioning by the media or indeed by
those who are persistently vociferous and passionate only about matters
that are negative in our society.

Indeed, there are those among us who wilfully and deliberately campaign to
rob from and ruin for our people the sweet fruit of their hard-won freedom
that they are finally able to enjoy today. To what end I do not know,
except perhaps that they are motivated by blinkered political interests.

We need to realise that often the only exposure people in other countries
have to South Africa are articles written by those who portray our country
as a rapidly decaying democracy, most recently depicted as an autocracy
besieged by crime and HIV/Aids, over which Government has no control and
that it has no desire to combat, a country plagued with unmanageable
corruption, which Government encourages - really no different from any
other African country.

These are, indeed, the words of bearers of bad news. Is it any wonder that
when tourists do visit, they are surprised that South Africa is not on the
verge of collapse? The reality quickly defies the erroneous images
portrayed by an irresponsible and sensational media, which is either acting
unwittingly or is downright ignorant of its impact or simply has no concern
for the interests of our people.

It is in the national interest that we should encourage foreign direct
investment in and tourism to South Africa. Do hon members for a minute
imagine that such negatively portrayed exposure might accomplish these
objectives? A definite ``no!'' On the contrary, they create fear and
reluctance in the hearts and minds of potential investors and tourists and,
in fact, discourage their business and visits outright.

In an attempt to diffuse the impact of an irresponsible media campaign, the
GCIS has had to establish the International Marketing Council to rectify
these misconceptions and to promote international marketing initiatives,
foreign direct investment, export and tourism. We should thank those South
Africans from the business community and former politicians who are working
together with our Government, saying that they are proud to be South
Africans. We as Parliament must commend these noble leaders of our country
and deepen our understanding of the bold steps they are taking to market
South Africa abroad.

An advertisement entitled ``The media versus the President'' was placed in
the Sunday Times of 7 May 2001 by respected African professionals in our
country. It is worth noting in this debate today that this advertisement
could not have come at a more appropriate time. The time is nigh for the
leadership from our own communities to speak out against the often blatant
misrepresentation and outright derision perpetuated by the enemies of our
democracy. [Interjections.]
Our leadership in the country must be dedicated and vocal on matters of
national importance. I applaud this effort and encourage each and every one
of us in this Chamber here today, each and every member of civil society,
and each and every South African to take up the baton and participate in
this effort, determined and undaunted, until truth prevails.

What the country needs are patriots, not bearers of bad news. Regrettably,
our professionals do not control newspapers and neither are their views on
national debates particularly sought or solicited. Apart from a sprinkle of
comments in this or that column or radio show, sources quoted in the media,
deplorably, still reflect the views of the previously dominant groups.
Despite an abundance of information and plurality of opinion, only a few
are given the platform to express their views.

Diversity, I argue, is not plurality. These leaders had to resort to
placing an advertisement in the newspaper in order to have their views
published, without compromising the content and message through editing and
spiking in the so-called interests of the style of the said paper or
magazine. I agree fully with the analysis. Their views are compelling and
pertinent. They are a reflection of the state of the media in our country
today.

However, what dismays and disappoints so profoundly is the response of the
DA to this advertisement. Just yesterday, Ntate Seremane also referred to
this. True to their very nature and apartheid upbringing, every member of
the DA without exception firmly believes and is convinced that the
advertisement can only be the product of a conspiracy.

We had another conspiracy here today. On Tuesday, in the committee, Madam
Smuts intimated that the language and style of the advertisement reflected
an ANC influence. I want to ask Madam Smuts to consider for a moment how
patronising and disdainful the implications of her assertion that those men
and women who exerted the effort, time and money on placing this
advertisement do not have the ability to think for themselves.

This attitude begs the question whether the DA believes that the domain of
critical thinking is their privileged terrain only. Had the message been a
different one, perhaps one espousing the views of the opposition, would the
DA then still be so alarmist about the revelation that black people are in
fact able to engage society? With due respect, does the DA have the
propensity to understand how loaded their insinuations are?

Loaded? Yes, of course, with all sorts of racial undertones with regard to
incompetence, lack of intelligence, initiative and the head-like mentality
of the black majority. This will certainly expose their strategies further.
They have been relying on what they perceive to be this unquestioning so-
called silent black majority mentality so that they might use their
ownership and power in the media to sow discontent among our people.

Well, the message is abundantly clear. The people of South Africa are
``gatvol'' and will engage publicly, especially now that they are bored
with the sensational, titillating and destructive strategies of the DA's
propaganda machine. Of course, the DA needs and wants to believe that the
ANC is behind the pronouncement. To do anything else is to betray the
apartheid conditioning through which they have arrived at the family-held
view that the place of black people is to be silent and passive.

I regret to inform Madam Smuts that the majority of South Africans who
happen to be of African origin can think for themselves. They do not need
the ANC to tell them what to think or say. Moreover, they will not stand by
and allow her ilk to vilify and crucify the leadership of our country, our
President and our Government. They have reached the end of their tether.
[Interjections.] They have had it with the campaign to undermine our
institution of democracy and those who have been democratically elected -
if I may remind them - by those very people the DA appears to scorn and
scoff at, to represent them in these institutions.

The leadership of the DA and those bearers of bad news must respect the
Constitution, the instrument of our democracy and the institutions of our
democratic dispensation, regardless of who occupy them. No individual or
person entrusted with a position of power is beyond criticism. On the
contrary, constructive criticism is a necessary ingredient for our young
democracy.

However, what the DA and its bunch of hoodlums say under the guise of
freedom of expression is more often than not counterproductive and an
attempt to undermine our democracy and the interest of our people. What we
are calling for is respect for the institutions of our democracy. We are
calling for common courtesy and dignified behaviour. I implore each and
every South African to please criticise and contribute in trying to
influence the direction of policy process, but also to be aware that we are
constructing, not destroying.

The critics of Government policy must have a sense of balance and must not
just concentrate on their own class or social position exclusively.
Government has a mandate, a responsibility and moral obligation to serve
the wider interest of society. If the critics of Government are
constructive, and we will most certainly consider every opinion that is
sincerely expressed, then Government can deliver its mandate more
efficiently and effectively to serve the broad public interest.

The media has a responsibility to make a positive contribution to the
development of our country. The media should not regard itself as a
counterweight to a strong and determined ANC Government. There are those
who believe, wrongly, that the ANC is too powerful and that its strength
should be diluted. Through their publications, they have adopted a posture
that negates everything that the ANC-led Government stands for and does.

However, the damage caused by apartheid colonialism in our country can only
be redressed under the leadership of a dedicated, principled political
movement. Political stability is possible today in South Africa because the
majority of our people believe in the leadership of the ANC to deliver a
better life for all.

While there is a need to check on those in authority, to act as a
counterweight to the ANC simply because of the weaknesses and the inability
of Mr Tony Leon and his party, is backward-looking. We believe in the
independence and the freedom of the press in our country. We fought for
these freedoms, and we are not about to renege on them. We also believe
strongly that the media should occupy its rightful place in our country and
provide information that contributes to the development of a proud South
African nation.

The media must also assist in ensuring that our socioeconomic political
system gains strength and stability. The media should report the truth and
be a platform for dialogue and a healthy exchange of ideas. Furthermore,
the media should be informative, educational and engaging, as well as
cultivate a habit of connecting cause and effect. We are calling for
professionalism in the media, but we also expect our Government media
liaison persons to be professional and understand the needs of the media.

The GCIS is under the direction and leadership of Minister Essop Pahad. The
CEO, Mr Joel Netshitenzhe and the entire management are working very hard
to build a dedicated communication and information service. They deserve
more than we are allocating them today, and we support this budget of the
GCIS. [Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson, hon members, when approaching this debate, our
point of departure in the IFP is the understanding that the GCIS neither
formulates nor implements Government policy. Its role is to use
communication as a multifaceted strategic tool to facilitate the service
delivery and access to resources designed and approved by this Government.

By its own admission, the GCIS has found the communication environment
challenging, to put it mildly. However, one gains a sense that under the
very skilful leadership of Mr Joel Netshitenzhe, Government communication
is beginning to develop, as it should, into a two-way process, both from
Government to the people and vice versa.

When one examines the work and the vastly increased capacity of the GCIS
since its recent inception only a few years ago, the IFP has no doubt
whatsoever that its leadership is comprised of hugely competent and hard-
working professionals. The mission statement of the GCIS and its vision,
objectives and strategies appear, in many ways, faultless. The devil is, of
course, always in the detail. Nevertheless, for some in our position, an
effective government communication team, comprised of people who know what
they are doing, is not always seen as a good thing.

All over the world, government communicators are accused, in one way or
another, of overtly or covertly promoting ruling party policies and
ideologies, ahead of nice, neutral, bland government outreach. We have seen
this happen here today - Ms Smuts set the ball rolling. The IFP believes it
would be naive not to recognise these natural strains, and accepts that for
many communicators representing the Government of the day, it is a hard act
to walk the fine line of fairness and objectivity required.

Mr Netshitenzhe and his team give us the impression of being well aware of
the tension on the tightrope upon which they operate. The fact of the
matter is, however, that following the collapse of the old Sacs, Government
communications are now in the hands of persons who appear to know what is
required to develop and co-ordinate positive outreach, both nationally and
internationally, and this is precisely why the IFP is supporting this Vote.

We congratulate the GCIS on the slow but steady roll-out of multipurpose
community centres and its liaison with provincial governments in this
regard. Numerous other projects are worthy of mention and past and future
programmes aimed at actively involving our citizens in recognising a long-
treasured IFP philosophy, namely that self-help and self-reliance are the
keys  to ensuring sustainable development and that citizens and Government
must work in partnership to effect workable solutions to our myriad
problems.
The IFP supports a recent Cabinet initiative to allow the GCIS to monitor
and co-ordinate Government communications more effectively. We are also
encouraged by early indications that Government communicators may, in
future, be consulted earlier, rather than later, in policy processes.

Finally, the IFP has sympathy with the viewpoint expressed by Mr
Netshitenzhe that for South Africa to emerge as a cohesive nation, proud of
itself and its people, and a country respected internationally, it is
important that we reflect ourselves positively. We believe he is right when
he claims that the tone and the intensity of the vitriol heaped on this
Government and its leadership by certain sections of the media, for
whatever reason, is not helping the positive development of our democracy.

We do not see this viewpoint as being antimedia, antifreedom of expression
or whatever. It is merely a statement of fact and a wake-up call for all of
us, each in our own way, to consider ways and means to reverse this very
serious situation, starting with our own attitudes and utterances.

Time and again, throughout the struggle for liberation in our country, our
people have risen to challenge crises. Now it is time to again reassert and
communicate our pride in being South Africans, and to rise and address all
of the challenges this entails. [Applause.]

Mr R D PIETERSE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members and the DP, it
is an absolute honour and pleasure for me to participate in this debate. It
is this debate that will ensure that the mandate of the people is adhered
to and carried out. The people of this country have elected the Government
and have the right to know what their Government is doing.

Maar dit moet gedoen word sonder enige ongevraagde invloede en
interpretasies, soos somtyds oorgedra deur die hoofstroom media. Die
regeringskommunikasie-en-inligtingdiens, wat so ongeveer drie jaar gelede
gestig is, is presies die organisasie wat kan verseker die Regering
kommunikeer regstreeks met die mense. Dit is 'n organisasie waar politiek
nie plek het nie, maar waar slegs die Regering se voorneme en besluite aan
die mense oorgedra word.

Ek is vandag trots en ek glo ook elke lid van die Parlement is trots,
ongeag party, om met die regeringskommunikasie-en-inligtingdiens
geassosieer te word, want hulle is mense wat hul werk uitleef met die
nodige professionaliteit. Aan die voorpunt van hierdie knap span is
natuurlik minister Essop Pahad wat bygestaan word deur 'n kommunikeerder
van die hoogste gehalte, mnr Joel Netshitenzhe.

Baie kere leef ons asof daar nog nooit apartheid was nie, asof daar nooit
swart en wit was nie, asof daar nooit baas en klaas was nie, asof daar nog
nooit verdrukking was nie, en asof hulle, wie by al hierdie dinge betrokke
was, nie bestaan nie. Ek glo eers wanneer ons al hierdie dinge erken, kan
ons begin om dinge reg te maak in die land.

Die media, vernaamlik die geskrewe media, was van die voorbokke wat ons
gebreinspoel het rondom die rooi en swart gevaar. Ek kan nie onthou nie ...
[Tussenwerpsels.] Stil, Boy! Ek kom by jou! Ek kan nie onthou of enige van
die hoofstroom media te eniger tyd van die regering van die dag, die NP,
terwyl hulle in hul gekkeparadys geleef het, verskil het nie en dit nog
boonop gepubliseer het nie. Dit is dieselfde media wat hulle vandag voorhou
as die groot verdedigers van die demokrasie, asof hulle die uitvinders van
die demokrasie was. Net omdat hulle die media is, gee dit hulle nie die
alleenreg op reg en verkeerd nie, gee dit hulle nie die alleenreg op
intelligensie nie, en gee dit hulle nie die alleenreg om te kritiseer nie.

Die demokrasie aanvaar dat daar geen heilige koeie is nie. Met ander
woorde, as die media ander wil kritiseer, moet hulle aanvaar dat ander ook
die reg het om hulle te kritiseer. Die vraag is natuurlik: het hulle die
moed om daardie kritiek te publiseer, en ook nie op bladsy drie nie, maar
op die voorblad, waar hulle ander mense kritiseer? Wanneer dit wel gedoen
word, moet dit nie gesien word as inmenging met vryheid van spraak nie.
Geen vryheid is absoluut nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[But this should be done without any uncalled-for influences and
interpretations, as are sometimes conveyed by the mainstream media. The
Government Communication and Information Service, which was established
about three years ago, is precisely the organisation that can ensure that
the Government communicates directly with the people. It is an organisation
in which politics has no place, but which only conveys the Government's
intentions and decisions to the people.

I am proud today, and I believe that every member of Parliament,
irrespective of party affiliation, is proud to be associated with the GCIS,
because they are people who perform their work with the necessary
professionalism. At the forefront of this capable team there is Minister
Essop Pahad, of course, who is assisted by a communicator of the highest
calibre, Mr Joel Netshitenzhe.

We often live as if there never was apartheid, as if there never was black
and white, as if there never was master and servant, as if there never was
any oppression, and as if those persons who were involved in all these
things, did not exist. I believe that only once we have acknowledged all
these things can we start rectifying matters in this country.

The media, namely the printed media, was one of the ringleaders that
brainwashed us about the red peril and the black peril. I cannot remember
... [Interjections.] Quiet, Boy! I am coming to you! I cannot remember
whether any of the mainstream media at any stage disagreed with the
government of the day, the NP, while they were living in their fools'
paradise, and went so far as to publish it. This is the same media that is
presenting itself today as the great defender of democracy, as if they
discovered democracy. Just because they are the media does not give them
the sole right to distinguish between right and wrong, does not give them
the sole right to intelligence, and does not give them the sole right to
criticise.

Democracy accepts that there are no sacred cows. In other words, if the
media wants to criticise others, they should accept that others also have
the right to criticise them. The question is, of course: Do they have the
courage to publish that criticism, and not on page three either, but on the
front page, where they criticise other people? When this is, in fact, done
it should not be seen as interfering with freedom of speech. No freedom is
absolute.]

Remember, the ANC was, and still is, at the forefront in the struggle for
freedom and democracy. Yet, the same media that enjoys so much freedom
today is leading the attack against the ANC-led Government, the ANC-led
alliance, and trying, on a daily basis, to play the Communist Party off
against the ANC, the ANC against Cosatu, the media against the ANC, the
people against the ANC, etc. They even have the audacity to suggest that my
President, the President of the people, is not fit to rule. Who the hell
are they to suggest that? They are also ably assisted by the bunch of cross-
dressers sitting on my left-hand side, led by a half-man. [Laughter.] These
attacks also normally take place when there is no credible opposition.

The media then consciously takes up the position of opposition, even if
there is nothing to oppose, or they are sucked in by the fact that they are
enjoying so much freedom they never had before and do not know what to do
with it. Is this the political agenda of the owners of these big media
houses?

Ek wil herhaal: Met persvryheid en vryheid van spraak kom
verantwoordelikheid. [I want to repeat: Press freedom and freedom of
expression come with responsibility.]

We do not want the media to be the lapdogs or mouthpiece of the Government,
but to be responsible. The GCIS has no intention of taking over the media,
but would rather work with them to ensure that all the people, whom we are
supposed to serve, receive proper, unfettered information at the earliest
possible time, at the lowest cost or no cost at all.

The GCIS has started to communicate in a very creative and unparalleled way
to all South Africans through the print and electronic media, using
pamphlets, booklets, newspapers and radio. The GCIS has now embarked on
making multipurpose communication centres available to a number of regions
across the country. They will establish approximately 15 of these centres
during this year alone, and where they have already been established these
centres are very popular amongst the people. These centres obviously go
beyond the ordinary use of the telephone. They give people access to a
world that has or knows no boundaries.

Die mense sê dankie aan die GCIS. Toe daar 'n oproep van ons mense gekom
het, vernaamlik van die platteland, vroue, gestremdes en die hoofstroom van
eertydse en huidige onderdruktes, het die GCIS dit gehoor en duidelik
geantwoord. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The people say thank you to the GCIS. When there was an appeal from our
people, notably from the rural areas, women, the disabled and the
mainstream of the previously and presently oppressed, the GCIS heard it and
replied clearly.]

A process to establish an agency has been initiated by the GCIS, and they
are now in the final stages of setting up the Media Development and
Diversity Agency - MDDA. The MDDA will be a partnership between Government
and the private sector and, very importantly, it will be an independent and
statutory body. While being at arm's length from Government, it will be
governed by a board and be accountable to Parliament. The MDDA will benefit
all South Africans and will lend support, particularly to community and
nonprofit media by offering training programmes and assisting small
commercial media, particularly community radio, etc.

Die gemeenskapsradio is natuurlik baie belangrik in ons lewens en lig ons
in omtrent dinge wat ons raak binne 'n spesifieke groep. Die hantering van
lisensie-aansoeke moet bespoedig raak en so gou moontlik uitgebrei word.
Icasa doen goeie werk in dié verband, maar moet ook so gou as moontlik
versterk word. Ek wil die GCIS tog aanraai om meer betrokke te raak by die
gemeenskapsradio. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[Of course, community radio is very important in our lives and informs us
about things that affect us in a specific group. The handling of licence
applications should be expedited and extended as soon as possible. Icasa is
doing good work in this regard, but should also be strengthened as soon as
possible. I want to advise the GCIS to become more involved in community
radio.]

These community radio stations are facing difficulties. They are under-
resourced and are concerned about skills, marketing and funding in general.
But, most importantly, they need permanency regarding their licences. They
need all our help. Very often the only information that gets to the people
from the Government is through the GCIS and my constituency office.

Again, I want to thank the GCIS, which is run by an unbiased and absolutely
professional Mr Joel Netshitenzh and his impressive team.

Baie dankie aan die agb Minister Essop Pahad vir die voortreflike werk wat
hy doen. Die ANC ondersteun hierdie Begrotingspos. [Thank you very much to
hon Minister Essop Pahad for the outstanding work he is doing. The ANC
supports this Vote.]

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Mr Chairperson, hon members, today we live in an
age in which information and knowledge is power. Information via easy and
accessible communication is important. The Government Communication and
Information System has a vision: making an indispensable and widely valued
contribution to society, working with Government for a better life for all
and meeting Government's needs, especially the public's information needs.
With this vision it has to provide leadership in Government and
communities, and keep the public informed of Government's implementation of
its mandate.

The GCIS strategies focus on informing the public and developing government
communication systems. This will be done through the building of
multipurpose community centres in all provinces. So far ten centres have
been opened, and these are located in the Eastern Cape, Mpumalanga, the
Northern Cape, Gauteng, QwaQwa, the Eastern Cape, the Northern Province and
the Western Cape, to mention but a few.

The MPCCs are to ensure that the Government brings information about its
policies, its programmes, the rights of women, men, youth and disabled
persons to the community. The centres will bring information about job
opportunities, training people how to protect themselves from diseases such
as Aids, and how to get bursaries, pensions, and birth certificates. These
centres will also provide the people with the opportunity to tell
Government what they want.

One of the principles of the ANC-led Government is about people's
participation. The process which led to the building of the centres
reflects that. The centres will also be able to provide much-needed social
services, something which we take for granted.

During the GCIS presentation to the Portfolio Committee on Communications,
it was mentioned that an MPCC in the area between Port St Johns and Umtata
was being visited by approximately 300 people every day for services such
as, for example, applications for ID books. Our people in the remote rural
areas will now be able to have access to all kinds of services by just
pressing a button. Now, for the first time, the areas mentioned above will
have the opportunity to participate in the information technology
revolution.

No longer do our people have to travel far, stand in queues and wait ages
for information or to receive much-needed documents such as ID books and
birth certificates. Now, at the press of a button they can receive
documents via the latest technology, namely, the public information
terminal, a machine that can produce these documents.

I enjoy reading the quote taken from Bua Magazine published by the GCIS,
which says, and I quote:


  No longer will we have to be singing Siyaya ePitoli [We are going to
  Pretoria], because Pretoria has finally come to us.

[Applause.] That is so true.

One concern about the MPCCs is accessibility. The buildings may be
accessible, but information and the programmes are not. One example was
that during the presentation to the committee, the lights had to be
switched off to enable them to present the video. As a deaf Member of
Parliament, my eyes are my ears and, therefore, I cannot have all the
lights switched off.

A recommendation was made to the effect that in order to make the video
tape more accessible it should be captioned or subtitled, or a sign
language interpreter should be at the video presentation. Now the question
is asked: Is the information provided by the GCIS accessible to all the
people of South Africa, such as those who are blind or partially sighted,
or those who cannot read or who are dyslexic? Provision must be made for
those people with disabilities. The answer to my question was that they
would continue to work with the Office on the Status of Disabled People in
the President's Office. This office would be able to advise the GCIS about
all the technologies that are advancing very fast.

Those who cannot read or write will need to be provided with audio
equipment or tape cassettes. The language used in this information must be
accessible to all South Africans. For example, in the Western Cape,
documents and literature must not only be available in English or
Afrikaans, but must also be translated into isiXhosa. The language must
also be simplified so that all South Africans can understand what our
Government is doing.

During the apartheid years information was suppressed and nonexistent to
our people, especially those in the rural areas. All of that has now
changed, and Government is making an effort so that information is more
accessible and available. As the GCIS indicated, for a long time President
Thabo Mbeki has said that the Government must have a one-stop centre in
order that information could be accessible. The idea behind the MPCCs is
that they will be served by local, provincial and national government, as
well as parastatals, NGOs, CBOs and the private sector. This is also in
line with our Government's Batho Pele programme, which means ``people
first'', in which we emphasise that only quality services will be made
available to our people.

It is also important that the universal service agencies, Telkom and
community radio stations, as well as other governmental departments, should
also be involved with the MPCCs, so that we can adopt a much more
integrated approach. I would like to add that what I have noted is that the
GCIS report says that 0,9% of disabled people are employed there. I would
like to recommend that that figure be increase to 2%, and I would like to
see this happen within the next year.

I would also like to recommend that the GCIS uses us disabled people as
consultants. I want to take this opportunity to compliment and congratulate
the GCIS on the sterling work that they have done. However, I would like to
see much more. I also want to see more centres being set up so that more
disabled people can have access. The work to provide information to our
people continues. Power to our people!

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate and wish all
mothers here in Parliament a happy Mother's Day on Sunday. [Applause.]

Mr F T MASERUMULE: Chairperson, Comrade Minister, the CEO of the GCIS, his
deputy and their colleagues, my colleagues in the Portfolio Committee on
Communications, hon members, we need to remind ourselves that we are
dealing with a living legacy, namely communication, which is, indeed, a
life and death question. This is the most fundamental question faced by the
South African people, that is communication, a living legacy, the right to
know, the right to express oneself and the right to be listened to.

My focus, therefore, will be on the President's Imbizo campaign launched in
the Northern Province on 5 May. For those who were historically
disadvantaged and could not learn other languages, imbizo/pitso is a
gathering of minds, a gathering where people come together to share ideas,
to share warmth, to strengthen one another emotionally and spiritually,
and, above all, to comfort one another, particularly those in distress.
This is communication, a living legacy. This is what human nature is made
of.

I hope I would not be far off base if I were to say that the President has
shown, in practical terms, what the African Renaissance is all about. Rural
people in the Northern Province, simple, ordinary, average-minded South
Africans, demand recognition of the fact that they are a reality and that
they have a role to play in shaping the future of this beautiful country.

Americans have a very exciting way of describing people who have
everything, including dust, but are never satisfied. They say: ``Do not be
fooled by the silence and the cleanness of running water, there are
crocodiles inside.''

If I were to quote from one of the most time-tested documents of the
congress movement, produced in 1955, the living organism, the Freedom
Charter:


  ... South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white, and ...
  no government can justly claim authority unless it is based on the will
  of all the people.

If one were to unbundle this statement alone, one would begin to appreciate
the daunting and convoluted processes of the tasks behind the drawing up
and the adoption of the statement by the congress movement.

For those who care to follow historical events as they unfold, a house-to-
house campaign was embarked upon to talk to families individually as to
what kind of a South Africa they would want to live in. Much as information
technology has developed to these levels of sophistication, it still
remains to be proven otherwise that person-to-person, shoulder-to-shoulder
communication has a huge, positive impact. Here one experiences the warmth
generated by eye contact, body language and patience, especially when one
talks to people who, unfortunately, are not at one's level when it comes to
understanding issues.

This type of communication enables one to acquire certain levels of
education without paying school fees. The current information technological
development has made it easier for us to communicate faster with people at
a striking distance, but it will never replace person-to-person
communication, unless it can be convincingly persuaded otherwise.

For each of us who are peasants like myself, the establishment of the MPCCs
out there in the remote areas will be an improvement. One goes a long way
to improve communication between us and the Government, because we rely, at
most, on our two feet. One begins to wonder about people with disabilities
who cannot walk a distance. How will they communicate with one another if
they are separated by distance?

Let me hastily assure members of this House that before they begin to
contemplate matters in terms of figures, like those concerning a school-
going child during exams, our demands in the rural areas are not too huge.
We only demand conditions conducive to our own development, otherwise the
rest we are capable of doing ourselves. Hon members should stop saying that
living in the rural areas is too expensive. They should ask us, the people
who are directly affected by these conditions.

Now the fundamental question as such is that one does not have to waffle
about this. All of us in this House, irrespective of where we come from,
support the GCIS programme, in order to make it possible for rural masses
to have access to information necessary for their development. There will
no need, otherwise, for shacks and road accidents, because centres of
development are too far from us.

In conclusion, I wish to congratulate the Minister, the GCIS and my
colleagues in the committee for the sterling work they have done on this. I
just want to say to everybody: Vumani bo? [Do you agree?]

HON MEMBERS: Siyavuma! [We agree.]

Mr J J DOWRY: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, different positive aspects came
out of the report by the CEO of the GCIS, such as the establishment of ten
multipurpose community centres in various provinces, as well as the planned
media development and diversity agency. The MDDA is not unique to South
Africa, and it is important to change the media environment and to ensure
that development communication becomes a reality, especially in a country
like ours.

Diversiteit in media-eienaarskap word deur die Regering gesien as 'n poging
om die mediamaatskappye soos Naspers, Times Media en ander te verbreed, ten
spyte daarvan dat die groepe reeds in agtergeblewe gebiede teen 'n groot
verlies betrokke is. Die bevordering van mediadiversiteit is natuurlik 'n
belangrike grondbeginsel van die demokrasie. Die aanpak en verwesenliking
van die ideaal verg egter deeglike besinning. So byvoorbeeld is die
volhoubaarheid van media-ondernemings 'n belangrike kriterium waaraan
voldoen moet word. Die vraag is: Kan die MDDA volhou word of gaan dit ook
'n kwessie wees soos die agt gemeenskapsradiodienste wat reeds
gelisensieerd is en waarvan slegs twee nog kop bo water hou? (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[Diversity in media ownership is viewed by the Government as an attempt to
expand the media companies like Naspers, Times Media and others, in spite
of the fact that the groups are already involved in disadvantaged areas at
a significant loss. Of course the promotion of media diversity is an
important basic principle of democracy. However, tackling and realising
this ideal requires thorough consideration. In this regard, for example,
the sustainability of media enterprises is an important criterion which
must be met. The question is: Can the MDDA be sustained or is this also
going to be a case like that of the eight community radio services which
have already been licensed and of which only two are still keeping their
heads above water.]

A very important factor that could enable the MDDA to succeed is
independence. The MDDA will relate to the media and can only provide viable
and quality development and diversity to the media environment if its
independence is fully guaranteed. Therefore the MDDA should be free from
Government intervention and its mandate should be crystal clear. If, as
planned, the Government will fund the MDDA to the tune of 40% of the R60
million the agency will need every year, its independence is already
compromised, unless arm's-length mechanisms are carefully built in.

Die plan is verder om ook deur die MDDA R46 miljoen per jaar aan
gemeenskapsradio te bestee, terwyl Icasa slegs R30 miljoen kry vir
dieselfde doel. Dit is een geval waar die mandaat aan die MDDA asook aan
Icasa nie duidelik onderskeibaar is nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The plan is furthermore also to spend R46 million per year on community
radio through the MDDA, while Icasa receives only R30 million for the same
purpose. This is one case in which the mandate to the MDDA and to Icasa is
not clearly distinguishable.]

A media environment must be created in which to redress the disadvantages
of the past. But diversity in ownership does not necessarily result in
diversity in content. In this sense, unless the word ``diversity'' is
clearly defined it can be misused for party-political propaganda and
ideology, especially in community radio.

The media is a primary source of news and information, and plays a
significant role in influencing the political, social and cultural agendas
of a country. The question is: How would the Media Development and
Diversity the WDDA, Agency, the MDDA, promote diversity, because in the
GCIS discussion document greater emphasis is placed on development and
funding, than on diversity.

Thirdly, it is not clear what the objectives of the MDDA are. A comparison
of the functions of the MDDA and the Independent Communications Authority
of South Africa, Icasa, shows that there are duplications of the mandates
between the two. How will clashes between Icasa and the MDDA over
disagreements, for example, on the issuing of licences, be handled? To say
the MDDA and Icasa will work closely together is not the answer. Icasa is
the constitutionally mandated broadcast regulator. No other body may do
that work.

Ons moet dus besin of ons twee instansies wil hê met dieselfde mandaat en
of ons Icasa, die onafhanklike kommunikasie-owerheid, eerder na behore moet
bemagtig om sy werk behoorlik te doen.

Die GCIS, die regeringskommunikasie en -inligtingsdiens, wil graag die
boodskap van die Regering aan die mense bring. Dit het egter pas aan die
lig gekom dat radiostasies soos YFM en Khaya, wat swart beheerde dienste
is, sukkel om 'n advertensie-inkomste van die Regering te kry.

Die GCIS bestee liewer dié bedrag aan die sogenoemde wit-beheerde media.
Ons moet ons prioriteite regkry. Dit help nie om te raas oor omvorming,
maar wanneer die daad by die woord gevoeg moet word, belê ons ons geld op
ander plekke nie. Khaya en YFM bereik 'n baie groot deel van die swart
gemeenskap en die Regering behoort hulle ten minste in ag te neem.

'n Groot klad op die GCIS se rekord vir vanjaar is die verslag van die
Ouditeur-Generaal wat aandui dat hy bykans R4 miljoen ongemagtig bestee
het. Daarby het die OG ook swak interne beheer by die GCIS geïdentifiseer,
onder meer ten opsigte van bateregisters en oordragte. Ten spyte hiervan
het die Regering sy begroting feitlik verdubbel tot R120 miljoen, terwyl
Icasa sukkel om meer geld te kry en sy personeel met voertuie moet ry wat
meer as 300 000 - 400 000 kilometer afgelê het.

Ons hoop die saak sal in die volgende begroting reggestel word. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We must therefore consider whether we want two institutions with the same
mandate or whether we should rather empower Icasa, the independent
communications authority, to do its job properly.

The GCIS, the Government Communication and Information System, wants to
convey the message of the Government to the people. However, it has
recently come to light that radio stations like YFM and Khaya, which are
black-controlled services, are struggling to obtain an income from
advertising from the Government.

The GCIS prefers to spend this amount on the so-called white-controlled
media. We must get our priorities right. It is no good to make a noise
about transformation, but when actions must suit the words we invest our
money elsewhere. Khaya and YFM reach a very large sector of the black
community and the Government should at least take them into account.

A big blot on the GCIS's record for this year is the report of the Auditor-
General which indicates unauthorised expenditure of approximately R4
million. In addition the Auditor-General also identified poor internal
control at the GCIS, inter alia, with regard to asset registers and
transfers. Despite this, the Government has virtually doubled its budget to
R120 million, while Icasa is struggling to get more money and its staff are
forced to use vehicles which have covered more than 300 000 to 400 000
kilometres.

We hope that this matter will be rectified in the next budget. [Time
expired.]]

Dr S C CWELE: Somlomo, ngisukuma ohlangothini lwe-ANC ukuze ngixhase iVoti
leSabiwomali soMnyango weziNhlelo zikaHulumeni zoKwazisa umphakathi. [Madam
Speaker, I come from the ANC's side to support the Vote of the Department
of Communications.]

We support their budget because they have made advances despite some
difficulties in our national communications environment. While many South
Africans were upbeat about our country and our Government, a small but very
powerful minority was thriving on negativity. This negativity in our press
is based on false prejudices: the legacy of our past. It is based on an
incorrect mindset, not on facts. Sometimes it borders on racism.

What can we do as South Africans to deal with this problem? Surely, we
cannot sit down and fold our arms while these negative elements undermine
our common nationhood, our newly found democracy and our Constitution. We
cannot be silent when, without any facts, the very institutions of this
democracy, including the highest office, the Presidency, enjoy absolutely
no respect from these elements. We cannot be silent when, without any
facts, our country is constantly being portrayed to the outside world as
corrupt and the crime capital of the world.

Surely it could never be acceptable in any democracy, on the morning of the
state-of-the-nation address, that the public was being discouraged from
even listening to the address and the President was presented as a
discredited person by some national broadcasters. The rights and the sweet
fruit of the hard-earned freedom we enjoy impose responsibilities on all of
us. It is the responsibility of every South African to uphold national
values and respect a democratic government and its institutions. For us to
take pride in being South African, we must first and foremost accept
ourselves as Africans.

We in the ANC are the first to welcome criticism and open debate on
critical questions facing our nation. We benefit nothing from negativism
and sensationalism. We hope to find less and less journalists who are
deployed from our media houses with the following brief: Go and listen,
interview and look for something controversial. The media, and the parties
that lost the elections, are also welcome to bring critical issues of
development facing the nation to the centre court for public debate.

It is not the responsibility of the GCIS alone to ensure that we have
empowered citizens. All of us must ensure that we have correctly informed
citizens who can participate in their own development. It is informed
citizens who will ensure that our limited resources are protected, and who
will rout out corruption in both the public and the private sectors.

The ANC welcomes the efforts of the GCIS and the leadership of our media
houses to reduce or eliminate these negative perceptions. Some of these
efforts include interaction with the media houses, the meeting between the
President and the editors' forum, and the proposal of the media houses to
have specialist journalists who are frequently informed and briefed about
the work and programmes of Government. These specialist journalists would
play a critical role in holding the Government accountable to their
pronounced programmes and schedules.

As the President said in his state of the nation address this year, and I
quote:


  ... gradually, step by step, our country proceeds further away from its
  painful past. We, its citizens, who are very close to the coalface of
  change, may not easily see the steady transformation that informs all
  aspects of our national life.

We should not be distracted in our efforts to build unity in action for
change by this small minority who are fundamentally opposed to
transformation or bent on an anti-Mbeki, anti-Government or even anti-ANC
crusade.

The ANC welcomes the findings and recommendations of the Human Rights
Commission on racism in the media. We encourage those in the media who see
the opportunity of moving forward by taking heed of these findings. We
welcome the proposed workshop between the HRC, Sanef and the GCIS on
transformation of the media. When we talk about transformation, we are not
just talking about putting a few blacks in positions, but we are talking
about substantive measures, including a paradigm shift, in the mindset of
the media houses. This should include retraining of our journalists.

One is tempted to ask why black editors are being removed from some of our
newspaper houses. Why was Mr Nyatsumba removed from The Daily News? Was it
because the readership did not like a black editor, and hence the profit
motive drove him out to England? Why was Mr Ryland Fisher muscled out of
the Cape Times and John Scott marshalled in, despite increasing readership
during his time as the editor? Was it because Mr Fisher was attracting many
new coloured readers at the expense of losing a few conservative white
readers? Is it simply a problem of a racist attitude in the media or the
effect of the profit motive, directed by an untransformed advertising
industry in South Africa which perceives the South African market as white
only? Are newspaper adverts the only platform for the black majority to
adequately express their views? Is money the only gate available to them,
while other races are given a free platform?

I hope that hon members will agree that we need to answer all these
questions. In order to be fair to all stakeholders, we need to have an
inquiry into the functioning of the advertising industry in South Africa.
This may be one of the roles of the MDDA.

It is clear from the above that the Government and the GCIS may use these
traditional platforms to communicate with the public. However, they are
inadequate. In addition, we need to explore dedicated nonmediated forms, or
direct forms of communication, in order to reach the majority of our
citizens, particularly the poor.

We have done well in strengthening our communication machinery at national
and provincial level, now it is time to move to the most critical level,
local government. This is crucial if we aim to mobilise the masses to
participate in changing their lives for the better, particularly in the
nodal areas, for the implementation of the integrated rural development
strategy.

In conclusion, we must move away from negativism, sensationalism and the
prejudices of the past. We must, collectively, create a sense of common
nationhood. We must yield to the call of the President to all our people
across the colour line to dedicate this year to building unity in action
for change. The ANC supports this Vote. [Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Speaker, let me first of all thank
all hon members who participated in the debate this morning and I thank in
particular all of those members who praised the efforts of the management
and staff of the GCIS. I think they highly appreciate it.

I would like to start where hon Smuts began. It is always pleasing to note
that hon Smuts - and I hope others of the apartheid era do the same - now
actually reads and studies Umrhabulo. I am very glad to hear that. However,
it might help if the hon member did not read it with a jaundiced eye.

Now, I know many sayings, and one of my favourite sayings is an old
Afrikaans saying. Now that the hon member is reading Umrhabulo, let me say
this: ``Die agteros kom ook in die kraal.'' [Slow but steady wins the
race.] [Interjections.]

Secondly, to argue that anybody who believes the ANC ideologues is a sucker
is, fundamentally, following the wrong approach, because then nearly two
thirds of the voters of this country are suckers. Now if the hon member
wants to win their votes in the next election, she had better find another
word to call them. [Interjections.] Because they are not, you see ...

Mr M J ELLIS: They are educated by them.

The MINISTER: Yes, that is Ellis's problem. Regarding this problem about
``we will educate'', for too long the whites have been trying to educate
us. For too long. In the process, they gave us Bantu education, they gave
us Coloured education, they gave us Indian education. Now, I suppose, we
had better bring in some White education, so that Mr Ellis might just
improve his own understanding of his own country. [Interjections.] He
might.
Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER: There is always hope. Then we are told that Parliament is
being neutralised. Why is Parliament being neutralised?

An HON MEMBER: The ethics committee. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: No, let me finish. Hear me out. Some of the hon members and
their predecessors sat in this Parliament when this Parliament had no
credibility, either in this country or in the world, and instead of
neutralising this Parliament, they were giving this racist Parliament an
unnecessary status. I think it is unbecoming of hon members to come and say
here now that a democratically elected Parliament is being neutralised. It
is not being neutralised. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Neutralised by you and by others.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It is not Mandela's view either.

The MINISTER: Look, let me teach you something about Mr Mandela.
[Interjections.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: He praised Helen's presence in this Chamber.
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER: Yes, and when Helen Suzman herself one day spoke a lot about
the Chamber of Mines, a Cabinet Minister called Mr M C Botha stood up and
said: ``Well, you, you are talking a lot. But the people who back you are
Anglo American.'' [Interjections.] So do not talk too much about the mining
industry.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: What is the point, or the relevance, to this
House? [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: Now, Mr Mandela is, was and remains, a loyal and disciplined
member of the ANC of South Africa. It is the ANC that enabled Mandela to
become what he became, not that hon member. [Applause.]

May I take this opportunity to thank Ms Sue Vos. I know she is not well
today and, in spite of not being well, she did come to participate in this
debate. I thank her very much for coming and for participating in the
debate today.

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.] [Laughter.]

An HON MEMBER: Mike, bly stil, man! [Mike, keep quiet, man!]

The MINISTER: Mr Ellis's problem lies in his being so unsophisticated that
any attempt at sophistication passes him by. Now, it might just help him to
go to some courtesy college and learn some good manners. [Interjections.]

I would like now to mention what Mrs Newhoudt-Druchen said to us today. We
accept her criticism that we need to do a great deal more to employ people
with disabilities in senior management positions at the GCIS. We certainly
have heard her message that we need to do a great deal more to ensure that
information becomes more accessible to people with disabilities. I want to
assure her that the GCIS will certainly take her message to heart.

In conclusion, let me try to comment on what Mr Dowry from the New NP said.
If he actually reads the document properly, he will find that central to
the document, regarding the setting up of the MDDA, is that it should be at
arm's length from the Government. We have written that in the document.

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER: Because the MDDA has not yet been set up. But that member is
so foolish, he will never understand anything.

Secondly, in all of the discussions we have had with the major
stakeholders, we have addressed this issue with them, because we do not
expect that the major stakeholders, if they are to put any money into it,
would put money into something which would not be able to make an
independent contribution in order to meet their diversity and development
needs.

The objectives of the MDDA are very clear. There is no attempt, and no
attempt will be made, to get the MDDA to carry out the functions of Icasa.
Icasa, as the hon member said, has to license the electronic media. The
MDDA's responsibility is to see how we can broaden the media diversity and
the development of media diversity, and they will continue to carry out
their functions quite separately. The hon member does not have anything to
fear.

What may be a good thing is that, in terms of what actually happens in this
new entity - I do not know if it really exists - called the Democratic
Alliance, my advice to the hon member and to the Mayor of the City of Cape
Town is to be careful of those people who go and hold their own private
caucuses, because they have already decided who they want to be the Mayor
of Cape Town. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                    CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Speaker, hon members, I can
see the word ``weekend'' written on the faces of some members. So I will
not detain hon members longer than is necessary.

I welcome this opportunity to introduce to the House the Correctional
Services Amendment Bill of 2001. The Correctional Services Act, Act 111 of
1998, which is also referred to as the principal Act, marked the beginning
of the transformation process towards prison reform in South Africa. It was
assented to by the hon President on 27 November 1998.

The drafting of the new Act in order to repeal the Correctional Services
Act of 1959 was necessitated by the democratic revolution which has been
taking place in our country in the past decade. In order to grasp the
fundamentals that formed the basis for the drafting of the principal Act,
it is important to understand the context which defines the history of the
South African correctional system. The history of the South African prison
system has been described as a history of a system that formed part of the
state apparatus of a minority government which applied explicitly racial
criteria. The prison system itself was governed by a highly restrictive
legal regime which included explicit racist elements.

In creating a completely new legal framework, the principal Act had to be
underpinned by the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa Act of 1996. The principal Act also incorporated the requirements of
the United Nations International Conventions on the Treatment of Offenders.
It is often said that a nation is judged by the way it treats its own
prisoners.

The primary objective of the principal Act was therefore to create a new
legal framework in conformity with the principles which underpinned an open
and democratic society. This is therefore only the beginning. The actual
transformation process is currently under way, which will culminate in the
development of a White Paper on Correctional Services. The White Paper
process will assist the department to generate interest and understanding
amongst shareholders of the challenges facing the correctional system in
playing an effective role in crime prevention within the overall context of
the criminal justice system in our country. It was therefore necessary to
bring forward certain amendments to the principal Act to ensure that the
transformation process remains on track and continues to deliver the
desired outcomes.

In the process of drafting subordinate legislation and implementing certain
aspects of the Act, it became apparent, and based on practical
considerations, that certain amendments would be necessary in order to
fully implement the principal Act and to be more compliant with the
provisions of the Constitution. We will find that clause 9 of the Bill
places a duty on the department to provide, as far as is practicable,
measures to accommodate prisoners with disabilities and to create an
environment that is gender-sensitive. I am sure that very few hon members
know that there are disabled prisoners. Very few hon members know this.

Whereas clause 12 puts in place certain procedural and substantive
safeguards in disciplinary proceedings of prisoners, such as the proper
recording of proceedings at an informal hearing before the head of prison
and the right to legal representation at a formal hearing before a
disciplinary official, clauses 17, 18 and 19 provide for the circumstances
under which force may be used by a correctional official, including the
procedures to be followed for the use of firearms and other nonlethal
incapacitating devices.

Of importance is that that matter will now be dealt with in the Act itself
and not be relegated to the regulations as suggested by the initial text of
the principal Act. This also contributes to the efficient checks and
balances to prevent the abuse of physical power and to ensure the safety of
prisoners. Clause 20 inculcates the right of child offenders to education
and training and prohibits utilisation of child offenders for labour, other
than for work aimed at developing their skills.

The lack of community involvement in the parole system has been a matter of
great concern for many of us. In terms of the principal Act, the
composition of the parole boards will now include two members of the
community and two full-time ex officio members from the Department of
Correctional Services, the Department of Justice and the SAPS. It will be
chaired by a member of the community.

We, however, have been unable to implement the new parole boards so far
owing to the unavailability of full-time ex officio members who represent
the police and justice, because of funding problems. The two departments
could not fund those members on a full-time basis. Thus, we had to amend
that provision further. We had to amend the principal Act in terms of
clauses 27 and 28 of the Bill to make provision for the co-option of ad hoc
members from those two departments, ie Justice and Police Services. That
was done on a need-to basis.

The new parole system also provides for representations to be made to the
parole board, either by the victim in person or by a representative of the
victim. The inclusion of clause 30 is intended to assist the department and
Government in managing the scourge of overcrowding in our prisons. Part of
these provisions which deal with unsentenced prisoners were not included in
the principal Act.

In terms of the resolution passed by the Cabinet legotla that was held on
22 and 23 January 2001, departments must intensify their fight against
manifestations of corruption in the Public Service. In this regard,
departments must therefore employ all their resources or resources at their
disposal to spearhead the fight against corruption.

In terms of the principal Act, the office of the inspecting judge is
required to report any corrupt or dishonest practices in prison. It is my
contention that that provision is consistent with the above-mentioned
resolution. I am further advised that this provision does not in any way
contradict the decision of the Heath case. Therefore the attempt to remove
the legal duty to report corrupt or dishonest practices in prisons, in
terms of clause 29 of the Bill, will indeed harm the department's efforts
in its fight against corruption in prisons.

It is important to draw a distinction between the requirement to report and
the actual investigation of corruption. The inspecting judge is only
required to report corrupt and dishonest practices and not to investigate
them. In fact, the inspecting judge has himself indicated that he is quite
comfortable with his role, as it currently stands, with regard to this
matter. I am therefore not comfortable with the removal of that duty to
report corrupt and dishonest practices in prisons in terms of clause 29 of
the Bill.

In conclusion, I must also mention the fact that I am currently considering
further amendments in line with the recommendations of the management audit
investigation report dated February 2000 by the Department of Public
Service and Administration to remove any ambiguity which may have been
created by the principal Act regarding powers of the executing authority as
provided for in terms of the Public Service Act of 1994.

I therefore welcome and support this Bill as a positive step forward for
the desired transformation of our correctional system. [Applause.]

Mr N B FIHLA: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and hon members, the
Correctional Services Amendment Bill emanated from proposed amendments to
the Correctional Services Act, Act 111 of 1998. More specifically, the
amendments arose out of the call for a totally new structure of subordinate
legislation and from the fact that the implementation of correctional
supervision and of the parole boards presented difficulties.

The Correctional Services Amendment Bill has recognised the fact that the
department has the duty to control prisoners efficiently, to improve the
behaviour and personality of prisoners and to develop the administration of
correctional affairs. To this end, the amending Bill serves to implement
measures which recognise the complexity of the correctional facility and
the environment.

A promising and notable amendment to the Bill is the streamlining of the
functions of the Judicial Inspectorate, which now include the facilitating
of inspections of prisons so as to report any corrupt and dishonest
practices in prisons and the empowering of the inspecting judge to regulate
the administrative affairs of his or her staff.

A significant change has been made regarding the composition of parole
boards to allow them to co-opt officials of the SAPS and of justice who
will then have voting rights. The task of determining a schedule of
offences and terms of sentences is decided upon by the commissioners of the
Department of Correctional Services, the SAPS, the Director-General of
Justice and the National Director of Public Prosecutions.

The composition of the boards emphasises that natural justice for prisoners
be met and, in a specific cases, that the boards advise justice officials
and the SAPS two months in advance of a board sitting with the purpose of
obtaining recommendations on the granting of parole and correctional
supervision.

In instances of conditional release, it is paramount that consideration is
given to the protection of society. These decisions are based on available
information and careful assessment of risk. This awesome responsibility
rests with the board and, with the amendment to the composition of the
present board structure, it is hoped that this will continue to refine the
framework for enhancing the effectiveness and accountability of
correctional programmes.

Central to the effective management of Correctional Services is the mandate
given to the Minister of Correctional Services. The inclusion of the
amendment, which authorises the Minister not only to establish prisons, but
also to revise the establishment of prisons, is an important and necessary
inclusion. It serves to empower the Minister to intervene not only in
prison management, but also in times of prison crisis.

Various clauses have been inserted into the amending Bill, amongst which
are clauses referring to disability and gender sensitivity so as not to
discriminate. Notable amendments have been made to the circumstances under
which mechanical restraint devices may be used; the conditions under which
force or nonlethal incapacitating devices may be used; the provisions on
the labour of sentenced children; and the provision of single-cell
accommodation under normal circumstances.

However, the crucial issue of HIV testing in prisons has presented the
committee with many questions and no satisfactory solutions. The issue of
overcrowded prisons is a veritable time bomb. Subsequent to briefings by
the state law advisers and the Judicial Inspectorate, it was stated
categorically by all that, according to the Constitution and the Bill of
Rights, any attempt at compulsory testing of prisoners for HIV would be in
violation of the South African Constitution.

The HIV/Aids pandemic is cause for concern, not only for Correctional
Services, but for the nation as a whole. With the ever-increasing numbers
of prisoners incarcerated in our prisons, this issue requires further
vigorous debate. [Applause.]

Mev P W CUPIDO: Mev die Speaker, die DA verwelkom die wyse waarop die
portefeuljekomitee en die departement die nodige wysigings gehanteer het.
Ons verwelkom veral die wysiging in klousule 6(b) wat bepaal dat gevaarlike
verhoorafwagtende gevangenes apart aangehou mag word. Klousule 21(a) in die
wetsontwerp bepaal ook baie duidelik dat kinders in gevangenisse slegs mag
werk indien dit as opleiding of vaardigheidsontwikkeling gesien kan word.

Ons grootste kommer is egter dat die Regering se wetgewing en ander
glansdokumente van die ministeries en departemente altyd baie indrukwekkend
voorkom, terwyl die uitdaging vir die Regering is om dit wat op skrif
gestel is suksesvol uit te voer. Die DA doen 'n ernstige beroep op die
Minister van Korrektiewe Dienste om die wetsontwerp wat vandag gedebatteer
word, op grondvlak uit te voer. Die DP steun hierdie wetgewing. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs P W CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, the DA welcomes the way in which the
portfolio committee and the department dealt with the new amendments. We
especially welcome the amendment contained in clause 6(b), which provides
that dangerous awaiting-trial prisoners might be detained apart. Clause
21(a) of the Bill also provides very clearly that children in prisons may
only do work if it can be viewed as training or skills development.
Our greatest concern, however, is that the Government's legislation and
other glossy documents of the ministries and departments always look very
impressive, while the challenge for the Government is successfully to
implement what was put on paper. The DA makes a serious appeal to the
Minister of Correctional Services to implement the Bill that is being
debated today at grass-roots level. The DP supports this legislation.
[Applause.]]

Prof L G B NDABANDABA: Madam Speaker, hon Chairperson of the portfolio
committee, hon Minister and hon members, in discussing the amending Bill,
we need to emphasise that society's reaction to crime falls into three
major phases: firstly, the phase in which punishment was meted out without
any regard to the offender; secondly, the phase in which the offender came
into prominence and imprisonment became the general rule; and  thirdly, the
modern phase, known as the phase of treatment of the offender, which is
being addressed by the present amending Bill. Each of these phases was the
product of complex social, economic and historical factors.

The present Bill confirms the foregoing by stating that there should be
supportive structures for the effective treatment of prisoners, effecting
improvements on the structures of correctional services supervision and
parole boards. The structure of these institutions has not always been
financially viable.

The Bill also addresses the eradication of corruption by proposing the
placement of a unit that will deal with this in the department and not the
judicial inspectorate. Whilst we fully support the unit to assist in the
eradication of corruption the concern is that it is taken away completely
from the judicial inspectorate. However, it is encouraging to note that the
National Council of Correctional Services has been given a brief by the
Minister to study the independence of the anticorruption unit in the
department and to report to the Minister.

Another concern is clause 34(b), the implications of which are that the
commissioner will take charge of investigating theft, fraud, etc. We have
been encouraged by the fact that the Minister's department is currently co-
operating with the Department of Public Service and Administration in
developing regulations which will revisit the powers of the Commissioner of
Correctional Services so that these powers will be in line with the Public
Service.
In conclusion, we wish to assure the Minister that the good work that he is
doing in Correctional Services does not pass unnoticed. This forward-
looking Bill will give the Minister a further boost by amplifying and
redefining his powers to make regulations, and to further encourage co-
operation between his department and other departments involved in the
administration of justice.

Finally, the Bill addresses measures which will make the disabled lead a
better life in prisons. We thank the Minister and congratulate him on this
piece of legislation, which is user-friendly in the treatment of inmates.
The IFP supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr H A SMIT: Madam Speaker, as this is the first debate after the
appointment of Mr Fihla, generally known to us as Oom Ben, to the position
of chairperson of the committee, I think it is only appropriate that I also
congratulate him on his appointment. I do hope that we will have a long and
fruitful working relationship with Oom Ben.

On a lighter note, members will know that this committee has a record of
shelving chairpersons on a continuous basis. However, I do hope that this
will not happen to Oom Ben. [Interjections.] Also, as the hon Minister
knows, we were without a chairperson for about five months, I think, and I
still regard this as unacceptable. I think the ANC had their own reasons
for not filling that post. I believe that at one stage even the hon Mr
Jannie Momberg aspired to become the chair of that committee.
[Interjections.]

We have discussed this amending Bill thoroughly, and I am not going to
waste the Minister's time by going into all the amendments. Personally, I
would have liked to have certain additional amendments inserted. However, I
am not going to waste this honourable Chamber's time with my own personal
ideas, because I will raise certain of my own ideas within the Portfolio
Committee on Correctional Services in due course.

However, there is one aspect that I am very concerned about, and that is
the recent statement made by the Minister regarding the question of
HIV/Aids. And I am just going to mention a few figures. According to an
answer given by the hon the Minister in this Chamber, over the past 13
months, a total of 457 prisoners have died of HIV/Aids in our prisons.
According to the report of Judge Fagan, the Inspecting Judge for
Correctional Services, presented to our committee some time ago, it is
estimated, if I am not wrong, that in five years' time, a total of 7 000
prisoners will die in our prisons annually. Even more alarming is that in
10 years' time, according to the report, a total of 45 000 prisoners will
die annually in our prisons of HIV/Aids. Of course, this also has major
consequences regarding the personnel of the department. As I see it, this
crisis will have to be tackled more effectively. In this regard I will come
back to our chair in due course.

We in the committee submitted a request to the effect that the Departments
of Health and Justice must look into this matter and report to us. We did
receive a report from the Department of Justice. But even more so, I
personally feel that prisoners who are HIV-negative also have rights. I
will come back to the hon Minister on that.

I am still not satisfied with the fact that I could not get sound proof
that the Human Rights Commission had been consulted on these amendments. I
requested, as the hon Minister will recall, proof of their comments from
the parliamentary secretary to this committee, but up to now I have not
received anything from our secretary. This is absolutely unacceptable to
me. I personally believe that our chairperson - I know he will do it - will
have to jack-up that secretary.

Regarding clause 29, which my colleague from the IFP has also referred to,
and clause 32, I am still of the opinion that many powers have to be vested
in the commissioner, and that he will have to be monitored. However, having
said that, we will support the adoption of the Correctional Services
Amendment Bill. I think these are good amendments, and I also want to
congratulate the Minister and his team.

Dr S E MZIMELA: Madam Speaker, when in 1998 we replaced the 1959
Correctional Services Act, the intention was not to replace a bad Act with
a perfect one. There will never be a perfect Act, and we knew in 1998 that
further work would have to be done to constantly improve what we have.

We need, therefore, to congratulate the department and the Ministry for
having been vigilant over these past three years and for having discovered
the discrepancies in the 1998 Act, and for bringing forward the necessary
remedies in order to strengthen the department and to make the whole
correctional services atmosphere much better than it was in the past.

We in the UDM therefore not only accept all the amendments, but also
encourage the department and the Ministry to look further and effect
further amendments to an Act which is basically a sound Act. However,
anything that is done by humans can never be perfect, therefore they should
continue to effect the necessary amendments and make this Act as good as it
possibly can be.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, the members of the ACDP believe in the
principle that whatever privileges and amenities cannot be provided by
Government to law-abiding citizens should not be provided free of charge to
those who have broken the law. Therefore the emphasis is not on the
amenities, but on the principle of their being free of charge. Amenities
are not free, and if the prisoner does not pay, it will surely be the
taxpayer who does. Therefore there has to be some quid pro quo.

Section 6(5) of the Act, as amended by this Bill, provides that every
prisoner must bath or shower as soon as possible after admission. We
support that! However, we are saying that Government must ensure that the
many law-abiding citizens who do not have access to baths and showers
should be prioritised.

The ACDP supports the amending Bill, but we also want to caution Government
with regard to section 6(5), as amended, which places a very strong onus on
the prison authorities to ensure that prisoners who are infected by
HIV/Aids do no infect those who are not infected. [Interjections.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, man is created in the image of God, and
whatever treatment is meted out to human beings has to keep this dictum in
mind. Human beings have to be loved, respected and served with the greatest
love, without counting their misdeeds towards others.

The UCDP accepts that the department should accept the responsibility for
the eradication of corruption. This is not a matter to be left to another
body, such as the inspecting judge, whose primary responsibility is to
report on the treatment of prisoners and conditions in prisons.

We welcome the provision made to detain dangerous prisoners who are
awaiting trial or sentence apart from other prisoners. The amendments to
the Act are a revamp of the entire Act and deserve support. No effort
should be spared in doing our utmost to rehabilitate prison inmates, so
that when they are eventually released, they should be citizens of good
moral, psychological, social and economic standing. They should be able to
take their rightful place in life. The UCDP supports the Bill.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the MF supports the Correctional Services
Amendment Bill, and appreciates that the Bill will address a number of key
concerns, which include overcrowding in prisons, community representation
on boards and various other matters. However, the MF is deeply concerned
about the reduction in the size of the correctional supervision and parole
boards for financial reasons and would like to appeal to the department to
look at the effect this will have on the activities of the boards.

Whilst appreciating the fact that the number of community representatives
will remain two or three, the MF still feels that there should be equal
representation. We also accept that the chairperson of the board will be a
community member, and we appeal to the board that before prisoners are
released on parole, they should have gone through proper rehabilitation, so
that they can be successfully reintegrated into the community and be no
further hindrance to society, and also help to combat crime and to bring
peace and stability to our country.

In addition, the MF suggests that measures should be taken to combat theft,
fraud, corruption and any other dishonest practices or illegalities, and to
investigate instances where these occur.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Speaker, firstly, I would like
to conclude by thanking the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services
and the hon Mr Fihla, who is the new chairperson, for deliberating on this
Bill and finding it appropriate to support it.

I also want to thank individual members who made their contributions with
regard to these amendments, even those who expressed their concerns. I
think it is a national duty to do that - we not only support, but also
express concerns because there will always be concerns. Dr Mzimela said
that nothing was perfect, that we have to keep on developing and changing
whatever we create as human beings.
The question of HIV/Aids in prisons has become one of the major concerns in
the portfolio committee and also among members of the general public. But I
think we should also realise that we as a Parliament need to observe the
objectives of the constitutional state, which is equality, the freedoms and
the basic rights of all individuals, including privacy and bodily
integrity.

Prisoners are also citizens of this country. They also enjoy those rights,
except for the fact that they have been removed from society. If one wants
to deal with this question of HIV/Aids and establish or have mandatory
testing for Aids in prisons, then one would have to work for a legislative
intervention. This means that one would have to revisit section 36 of the
Constitution until one has proved that the fact that the prisoners
suffering from Aids is an impediment to other members of society or other
inmates. But one should remember that they also need to have that right to
privacy to be able to say: ``No, do not test me compulsorily or
mandatorily''.

I am not pleading for or against this, but I am saying that this is the
kind of process that one would have to embark upon. One would also have to
state the purpose of putting in place a legislative intervention in order
to have mandatory testing in prisons when, in fact, globally other
countries are moving away from that. What would be the purpose? It would
have to be a higher purpose, not simply because one is dealing with
prisoners and one feels that they suffer from these diseases or that
whoever comes into prison needs to be subjected to that simply because they
are prisoners.

After one has done that, what is one going to do? Would one have all the
resources or medication? Is one going to separate or segregate them? What
would be the implication socially? Would one be able to cope with the
suicides that would ensue, or even the homicides, where they would kill one
another because of that? Those are the implications.

Yes, we will try to implement the Bill on the grounds that Mrs Cupido
requested. I think that is the intention of these amendments. I heard what
Prof Ndabandaba said regarding his concerns. As I said, concerns are also
accepted and I also take his encouragement to heart.

Regarding Mr Smit's comments, I have already responded to the question of
HIV/Aids. This is not going to be a simple process, but a complex one. But
if the general public feels that they want to do this to prisoners, well
... However, we also have to remember that prisoners are also our
constituents, and hon members write to me about them. Therefore we must
also treat them as we would other members of our constituencies. Some of
them are members of our families or our friends. Hon members write to me
about them or write to the President about their suffering and the
President writes to me about it.

Therefore, when we are here we should not behave as if we do not know them.
They come from amongst us. They do not come from Mars or the moon, but from
amongst us. I think that is why Cabinet or Government has decided to make
rehabilitation a priority, because now we all know that when they go into
prison, they will eventually come back. Now we are saying that when they
come back they should be useful citizens and not criminals anymore.
[Interjections.]

I accept Dr Mzimela's encouragement. His are worthwhile comments, because
they come from a person who has been working in this field. Where is he?
[Interjections.] I would like to remind the UCDP that some people read in
the papers that prisoners brought in revenue of R103 million in the past
year through metal work, woodwork, etc. Those hon members who have been
inside the NCOP Chamber and looked above the presiding officer's head have
seen the coat of arms which was created or made by prisoners in Boksburg.
And most of the Ministers's offices do have that coat of arms. I think we
need to have one in this Chamber as well.

As I have said, rehabilitation and overcrowding have become priorities to
Cabinet. I would like to say to Miss Rajbally that those are the things
that we will try to concentrate on in the next two or three or four years.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 11:24.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:
The Speaker:

1.    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
     Committees, viz:


     Constitutional Review:


     Appointed: Bakker, D M (Alt); Beukman, F; Camerer, S M; Gaum, A H; Van
     Deventer, F J (Alt).


     Ethics and Members' Interests:


     Appointed: Blaas, A; Matthee, P A; Pretorius, I J (Alt).


     Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
     Disabled Persons:


     Appointed: Dhlamini, B W (Alt); Morkel, C M.


     Improvement on Quality of Life and Status of Women:


     Appointed: Camerer, S M; Nel, P J C (Alt).


     Intelligence:


     Appointed: Matthee, P A; Olckers, M E.


     Joint Programme:


     Appointed: Ackermann, C; Dowry, J J; Greyling, C H F.


     Joint Rules:


     Appointed: Ackermann, C; Bakker, D M; Gaum, A H; Greyling, C H F.

2.    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
     Subcommittees, viz:


     Parliamentary Symbols:


     Appointed: Dowry, J J (Alt); Van Wyk, A.

3.    The following changes have been made to the membership of Standing
     Committees, viz:


     Private Members' Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions:


     Appointed: Niemann, J J; Odendaal, W A (Alt).


     Public Accounts:


     Appointed: Beukman, F; Blaas, A (Alt).

4.    The following changes have been made to the membership of Portfolio
     Committees , viz:


     Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Appointed: Le Roux, J W (Alt); Van der Merwe, A S.


     Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Appointed: Rhoda, R T (Alt); Van Wyk, A.


     Communications:


     Appointed: Dowry, J J; Van Wyk, A (Alt).
     Correctional Services:
     Appointed: Durand, J (Alt); Smit, H A.


     Education:


     Appointed: Gaum, A H (Alt); Geldenhuys, B L.


     Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Appointed: Le Roux, J W; Olckers, M E (Alt).


     Finance:


     Appointed: Blaas, A (Alt); Rabie, P J.


     Foreign Affairs:


     Appointed: Geldenhuys, B L; Schoeman, R S (Alt).


     Health:


     Appointed: Baloyi, O (Alt); Gous, S J; Rhoda, R T (Alt).
     Discharged: Sibiya, M S M.


     Home Affairs:


     Appointed: Beukman, F; Pretorius, I J (Alt).


     Housing:


     Appointed: Durand, J; Rhoda, R T (Alt).


     Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Appointed: Bakker, D M (Alt); Camerer, S M.


     Labour:


     Appointed: Bakker, D M (Alt); Blaas, A.


     Minerals and Energy:


     Appointed: Nel, A H; Odendaal, W A (Alt).


     Public Enterprises:


     Appointed: Rabie, P J (Alt); Van Jaarsveld, A Z A.


     Public Service and Administration:


     Appointed: Van der Merwe, A S (Alt); Van Jaarsveld, A Z A.


     Public Works:


     Appointed: Schippers, J; Van der Merwe, A S (Alt).


     Social Development:


     Appointed: Baloyi, O; Olckers, M E (Alt); Van Jaarsveld, A Z A.
     Discharged: Middleton, N S.


     Sport and Recreation:


     Appointed: Morkel, C M.


     Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Appointed: Simmons, S; Van der Merwe, A S (Alt).

TABLINGS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chaiperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of the National Agricultural Marketing
         Council for 1998-99 [RP 36-2001];


     (b)    Annual Financial Statements of the Land Bank of South Africa for
         1999 [RP 24-2001].

2.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Report of the Department of Home Affairs for 2000 [RP 39-2001].

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission for
     1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 1999.
COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Committee on Taxation Laws Amendment Bill on the
     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
     77), dated 11 May 2001:


         The Joint Committee on Taxation Laws Amendment Bill, having
         considered the subject of the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 17 -
         2001] (National Assembly - sec 77), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a Money Bill, reports that it
         has concluded its deliberations thereon.


