---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 June 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-06-08
---

FRIDAY, 8 JUNE 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:01.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Rev A D GOOSEN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with pleasure the R14,5 million donated by the Italian
       government to assist this ANC-led Government in its tireless efforts
       to ensure access to institutions of higher learning for especially
       students in rural areas, black women, those struggling financially in
       historically black institutions and poor black students;


  (2) notes that this donation is an example of the support that this
       Government enjoys because of its sterling efforts to level the
       playing fields and ensure quality learning for all people; and


  (3) commends the Italian government and other European countries for
       their continuous support and vote of confidence in the South African
       Government's efforts to transform our society and strengthen our
       economy.

[Applause.]

Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) takes note with alarm and concern of the imminent food shortages and
       possible starvation that could occur in Zimbabwe as a result of the
       anarchy unleashed by the government of Zimbabwe;


  (2) urges the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs to put in place a
       contingency plan in South Africa to reserve sufficient grain stocks
       to meet this crisis facing our neighbours, because the deregulated
       grain market in South Africa is not capable of handling such a crisis
       without major disruption;


  (3) accepts that Zimbabwe will be unable to pay for such food; and


  (4) requests the South African Government to negotiate with donor
       countries to pay for the food relief, as South Africa cannot afford
       to do so.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -
  (1) empathises with hungry children in the Kleinvlei area in Cape Town
       who are scavenging for rotten food illegally dumped near their homes;


  (2) notes that this plight has led to these children developing sores on
       their faces and bodies; and


  (3) calls upon the Cape Town Unicity to take action against the truck
       that illegally dumps waste on a daily basis in the Amsterdam informal
       settlement, so that the lives of the community and children can be
       protected.

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the DA in the Cape Town Council has back-tracked on its
       much publicised policy of political appointments after immense public
       pressure;


  (2) welcomes the abandonment of ``jobs-for-party-hacks'' policy by the
       DA;


  (3) believes that the DA's about-turn comes too late because the City has
       lost out on competence, confidence and continuity ...

[Interjections.] Would the hon member mind speaking or shouting up?
[Laughter.]


  (4) concurs with the ANC in the Western Cape that the DA is ``lurching
       from crisis to crisis''; and


  (5) calls on the DA to develop proper policies before grandstanding them
       in the media.

[Applause.]

Mnr I J PRETORIUS: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die VF sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met ontsteltenis kennis neem van die tientalle plaaslike owerhede wat
       ernstige finansiÃ«le probleme ondervind en nie hulle verpligtinge kan
       nakom nie in die lig van die volgende:


       (a)  die uitstaande dienstegelde en munisipale belasting het op 31
           Desember 2000 reeds R11,7 miljard beloop;


       (b)  bogenoemde uitstaande bedrag is meer as die begrote bedrag van
           31 staatsdepartemente vir die huidige boekjaar; en


       (c)  die skuld beloop meer as dubbeld die begroting van die
           Departement van Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering; en


  (2) die Minister vir Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering versoek om
       dringend 'n ondersoek te gelas na die landwye krisis met die oog
       daarop om 'n kultuur van betaling aan te moedig.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr I J PRETORIUS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with alarm that dozens of local authorities are experiencing
       serious financial problems and cannot meet their obligations in the
       light of the following:


       (a)  on 31 December 2000 the outstanding service fees and municipal
           taxes already amounted to R11,7 billion;


       (b)  the abovementioned outstanding amount is more than the amount
           budgeted for 31 state departments in the current financial year;
           and


       (c)  the debt amounts to more than double the budget of the
           Department of Provincial and Local Government; and


  (2) requests the Minister for Provincial and Local Government urgently to
       order an investigation into this countrywide crisis with a view to
       fostering a culture of payment.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with alarm that many African countries are not on track to meet
           set poverty reduction targets, and this raises fears about how
           effective the countries will be in selling the Millennium
           African Recovery Programme, Marp, to developed countries; and


       (b)  that one in twelve African countries are now reporting worsening
           conditions; and


  (2) challenges the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of
       Finance to meet the United Nations Millennium Summit proposals of
       debt cancellation, improved market access, enhanced official
       development access, increased flows of foreign direct investment,
       transfer of technology and more broadly, bringing Africa into the
       mainstream of the world economy.

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Department of Trade and Industry launched an
       investigation into how credit bureaux treat customers;


  (2) believes that -


       (a)  the operations of unregulated credit bureaux have caused a
           number of problems for the public and particularly lower income
           people; and


       (b)  there is an urgent need to establish an appropriate regulatory
           framework to govern the operations of credit bureaux;
  (3) welcomes the investigation into the functioning of credit bureax; and


  (4) calls on the people to make submissions to the investigation to
       enable the department to develop measures to regulate the functioning
       of credit bureaux.

[Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that the misunderstanding between Metrorail and the Johannesburg
           Traders Association representing station hawkers is a cause for
           concern, as the hawkers representatives claim that they have
           been given a grace period of 14 days to continue trading on the
           platform and there is a counter-denial by Metrorial to this deal
           or agreement; and


       (b)  last month's events, when guards and hawkers were involved in an
           ugly confrontation and shots were fired, putting the safety of
           passengers at risk; and


  (2) calls for -


       (a)  a debate on the safety of passengers at Metrorail stations; and


       (b)  the institution of a commission to investigate the rights of
           passengers, which should include the taxi industry.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that there is a border dispute between Namibia and South
       Africa;


  (2) notes that colonial boundaries have created serious problems in
       Africa, resulting in endless wars among African states, such as
       between Ethiopia and Somalia, Somalia and Kenya and Ethiopia and
       Eritrea;


  (3) takes cognisance of the fact that the PAC, although believing that
       colonial boundaries must be negotiated, nevertheless goes along with
       the Charter of the Organisation of African Unity that African
       countries must accept colonial boundaries, unpalatable as they are,
       because their pursuit by military means can only destabilise the
       country;


  (4) notes that Pan-Africanism is the solution to a number of problems
       Africa is facing, including border disputes, and urges the African
       Union to vigorously pursue the objectives of Pan Africanism which,
       inter alia, are Pan African unit ...


  [Time expired.]

Mr S T BELOT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a provisional agreement was reached between the SA Local
       Government Association and the SA Municipal Workers Union to resolve
       the protracted wage dispute;


  (2) believes that the stabilisation of labour relations in the local
       government sector is of paramount importance for service delivery in
       the communities; and


  (3) welcomes the agreement reached between Salga and Samwu.

Mr R J HEINE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that the draft R1,7 billion budget of the Nelson Mandela
       Unicity is R100 million short;


  (2) is of the opinion that -


       (a)  this can largely be attributed to the growing levels of debt
           under the mismanagement of the ANC in the previous six years of
           the city; and


       (b)  this shortfall and rising debt of at least R600 million could
           result in the unicity not being able to provide basic services
           to its citizens;


  (3) further notes that -


       (a)  the ANC Mayor, Nceba Faku, has upgraded his flying status from
           economy to business class;


       (b)  despite the dire financial straits of the municipality, the ANC-
           led council is planning to purchase a building for R2,5 million
           to house the members of the mayoral committee; and


       (c)  ratepayers are facing a 16% to 18% rates increase; and


  (4) calls on the municipality to revoke any plans for lavish expenditure
       and focus on placing the municipality on a sound financial footing
       and delivering municipal services to all the people.

[Applause.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  South Africa is rightly proud of its beautiful and largely
           unspoilt beaches and marine reserves; and


       (b)  some South Africans utilise these God-given treasures as if
           tomorrow did not exist or that our children ought not to inherit
           the world in a state as good as we found it;


  (2) welcomes the intention of the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
       Tourism to impound or confiscate vehicles driving on the beaches or
       boats sailing into certain restricted bays where whales are found;
       and


  (3) calls on its members to put themselves squarely behind the
       Government's tough stance to keep and preserve the environment in a
       pristine condition for its own intrinsic reasons as well as for the
       economic benefits that this promises.

[Applause.]

Mr M T GONIWE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -
       (a)  two men were arrested in Soweto for running a mandrax factory;
           and


       (b)  members of the police task force, crime intelligence and
           forensic units also found factory machines, and chemicals that
           are used to manufacture mandrax; and


  (2) commends the police for this huge drug bust.

[Applause.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that-


       (a)  Cosatu is once again threatening to engage in a programme of
           action that could include a two-day general strike to protest
           against privatisation and the corporatisation of Eskom; and


       (b)  this immature threat comes after the Portfolio Committee on
           Public Enterprises refused to rubberstamp their amendments to
           the Eskom Conversion Bill; and


  (2) urges the Government to publicly reprimand its alliance partner,
       Cosatu, for the reckless and undemocratic manner in which they choose
       to try and impose their will on the people of South Africa.

Mr D G MKONO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its concern about the ongoing crisis in the Education
       department, which was highlighted by the Universities of Transkei,
       Fort Hare and Rhodes merger;


  (2) questions this merger as the National Working Group for National
       Higher Education's report has not been tabled yet;
  (3) notes with exceptional concern the distances between the campus and
       the illogical suggestion by the Department of Education to merge, as
       it posed practical obstacles with regard to administration and
       distances; and


  (4) calls upon the Minister to clarify the matter urgently and
       constructively and to give direction.

Mrs M P COETZEE-KASPER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the residents of Warrenton in the Northern Cape engaged in
       violent protests complaining about lack of service delivery;


  (2) believes that the destruction of property and infrastructure will not
       accelerate service delivery; and


  (3) calls upon the residents of Warrenton to desist from engaging in
       violent actions and engage the authorities constructively, and work
       with them in improving service to the community of Warrenton.

         CONGRATULATIONS TO SOUTH AFRICA ON HOSTING OF EARTH SUMMIT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates South Africa on the fact that it will host the Earth
       Summit in September 2002;


  (2) is of the view, given the deep significance of this summit to the
       planet and its people, that time could be set aside for a special
       debate on this question; and


  (3) is further of the view that we, as South Africans, should do
       everything in our power to have a successful Earth Summit with the
       theme: "How sustainable development can alleviate poverty."

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 31 - Trade and Industry:

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, I would like to thank you for, once again, having the
opportunity to address the House on Vote 31 of the Department of Trade and
Industry budget.

The director-general, Dr Ruiters, and his team have presented the Vote to
the portfolio committee and the NCOP select committee responsible for trade
and industry. I think we are very fortunate, as a department, to have such
active committees under the leadership of Dr Rob Davies and Mr Mohseen
Moosa, and I would like to thank them very much for their continued support
and active interest in the success of our work.

When our President addressed this House at the opening of Parliament, he
indicated our macroeconomic successes. He set out an integrated action plan
and placed great emphasis on further microeconomic reform. The integrated
action plan focuses on specific areas with the objectives of raising the
growth rate and accelerating employment creation, reducing poverty and
inequality and having a greater impact on small enterprise development and
black economic empowerment.

We are of the view that there is no doubt that we have moved South Africa
onto a sustainable growth path. Last year our country experienced a growth
rate of 3,1%. It is also important to note that since the Asian and Russian
crises of 1998, South Africa has experienced 10 consecutive quarters of
economic growth.

Though the quarter-on-quarter growth rate figure for the first quarter of
2001 was a little disappointing at 2% - this was partly a result of
climatic factors that led to a significant fall in agricultural production
- the transport, communications, finance, commerce and tourism sectors
remain strong, while real estate sales continue to provide positive
indicators. The progress towards our inflation target is good and we have
stabilised producer prices. This certainly increases our macro policy
flexibility.

On the trade front, our performance has been very strong this year. Exports
have performed exceptionally well, rising to a total of R78,5 billion for
the first four months of 2001. This is a 29% increase on the same four
months in 2000. Imports have grown more slowly, leaving us with a positive
balance of R14,1 billion for 2001 so far.

We do not expect the current account to continue to perform at such an
exceptional level - exports will probably grow more slowly for the rest of
the year due to a softening in world market conditions. Also imports are
likely to grow a little faster as investment plans by Government and the
private sector are implemented. But most economists are still confident
that the worldwide slowdown will be relatively short and not too deep, and
could turn around later this year or early next year.

We can now look back on the period since 1994 and assess our performance in
the manufacturing sector. Overall, production in this sector is rising
slowly, at a little over 1% per annum. This could be seen as weak, but in
the light of the tremendous pressure we have put on the manufacturing
sector to restructure through tariff reform and more effective competition
policies, there is little doubt that it could have been worse. Certainly,
most countries going through similar structural reforms as we have gone
through, have seen manufacturing shrink in real terms. Ours is still
growing.

When it comes to manufacturing exports, we have done very well. Between
1994 and the end of 2000, exports grew from 15% to 28% of total
manufacturing production. Overall, manufactured exports grew at about 11%
per year, in real terms. At the same time, the overall role of manufactured
products in our export range has grown very substantially. The strongest
growing subsectors have been transport equipment, electronic consumer
products, electrical machinery and equipment. This shows that we do have
the capacity to be competitive in sophisticated segments of the world
economy.

At the same time, investment in manufacturing has generally been weak. Real
gross investment in manufacturing has grown by only 2,8% per year since
1994. Some sectors such as transport, equipment and petrochemicals have
done better at 5% to 6%, but overall the levels remain too low. Clearly,
therefore, one of the key objectives of the DTI must be to support and
facilitate higher levels of investment in manufacturing.

As a result of the deep restructuring in manufacturing, formal employment
growth is a problem area. The figures we have indicate that formal
employment in the manufacturing sector has fallen by about 1,7% per annum
since 1994. There is no doubt that some of this apparent fall derives from
changes in the classification of workers, as manufacturing companies
outsource more and more activities such as transport, cleaning, design,
information technology and so on. Also, we suspect that the number of
employees in the less formal part of the manufacturing sector has risen
considerably.

However, the improvement in productivity levels in South Africa has been
very impressive indeed. One South African banking economist recently wrote:


  We are having a productivity revolution on a par with Australia in the
  1980s, that is leaving the US standing still.

To be a little more precise, output per employee in manufacturing has grown
on average at over 3% per year, every year since 1994. The only sector that
has experienced some significant decline in labour productivity has been
the clothing, textile and footwear sector. Another key contributor to
improved manufacturing productivity must be the decline in person days lost
due to strike activity since the improvement in the industrial relations
environments since 1994.

A further indication of the very considerable progress we have made since
1994, is the trend in the registration of new companies. In 1993 the total
number of registered companies and close corporations registered in one
year, was 42 076. This number had been falling before 1993. By the
beginning of 1996 we were registering 73 425 companies per year. The
numbers continued to grow in 2000, reaching a total of 108 886 companies
and close corporations registered in a single year - a record for the
companies office. Also noteworthy is that since 1994, 1 200 foreign-owned
companies have registered in South Africa.

The meaning of these company registration numbers is, firstly, that the
rate of economic activity has clearly increased considerably; secondly,
that optimism amongst entrepreneurs continues to grow; and thirdly and very
importantly, that there is a very significant growth in the establishment
of companies by historically disadvantaged persons. This could include, to
some extent, the formalisation of previously informal firms.

The President has issued us with a challenge: To move beyond our
macroeconomic stability, to implementing microeconomic reforms. Our task is
to examine more closely the nature of competitiveness at the level of the
enterprise or firm. This is the focus of the DTI's recently released
discussion document on an integrated industrial strategy. It asks the
question: What determines a firm's competitiveness? There are essentially
two categories of factors: Firstly those that are internal to the firm and,
secondly, those that are external to the firm.

The four primary external factors to ensure the competitiveness of South
African firms are: Firstly, to lower our input costs, particularly to
continue stabilising and lowering energy, telecommunications and transport
costs, as this would have a very positive effect on the entire structure of
the economy; secondly, to lower the regulatory burden for firms, which is
essential and must be achieved through a more efficient and effective
government, capable of managing a sophisticated regulatory regime; thirdly,
we as Government sometimes in partnership, and often in partnership with
the private sector, must continue to invest heavily in infrastructure such
as roads, railways and ports; and fourthly there is a persistent
difficulty, namely access to finance.

The internal factors that drive firm-level competitiveness are dealt with
at length in our industrial strategy paper and we have made a booklet on
this paper available to all members. The main thrust of the document is
that South Africa's firms must adapt to the fact that the world economy is
rapidly becoming a knowledge-based economy. This means that the value
embodied in products is increasingly derived from the knowledge embodied in
those products, rather than the value of the materials incorporated. This
is a result of the fact that information and communication technologies
have changed the nature of products, the way in which they are made and the
way in which they are sold.

Secondly, the rate of innovation and new product development is far faster
today than at any time previously, and thirdly the relationship between
suppliers and customers is changing in such a way that customers are able
to demand, more and more, the exact type of product that they need at the
time that they need it. The services that accompany the development, supply
and support for the product contribute an increasingly significant part of
the value of that product.

The old modes of competitiveness, therefore, are less and less important
and useful in such an environment. The cost of raw materials, access to
cheap labour, control over proprietary technologies and privileged access
to markets are advantages that are of less and less value. This does not
mean that we should abandon our traditional strengths in South Africa based
on energy and raw materials, but rather that we should seek to further
enhance the competitiveness of these areas by integrating the knowledge-
intensive processes into those sectors.
The success of the industrial strategy depends upon a complementary
socioeconomic strategy that is able to counter the powerful tendencies
towards inequality, uneven development and marginalisation that
characterise the globalisation process. This strategy must address the
challenges of black economic empowerment, the promotion of small business
and the creation of sustainable and well-paid employment. This latter
objective can only be achieved through widespread education training, and
the DTI welcomes the framework provided by the integrated human resource
development strategy. Extending the scope of our industrial strategies into
areas such as tourism, health services and telecommunications will have an
important impact on employment creation.

The integrated industrial strategy needs to be read in conjunction with
other aspects of DTI policy strategies. We have given hon members the first
copy of Sisebenza Sonke, the department's new policy journal which will be
released on a quarterly basis. In the first issue we carry the
international economic strategy, among other articles, and this consists of
exploiting preferential trade agreements and arrangements such as the
African Growth and Opportunity Act, restructuring our foreign offices,
improving the regulation of international trade, and providing export
credit reinsurance.

Underpinning all of this is a regulatory system that establishes and
enforces a set of rules that govern economic conduct. These rules ensure
the effective functioning of markets, competition, innovation and access,
as well as entry into the market. Increasingly, it is clear - and this is a
very healthy sign - that citizens have expressed their public interest more
forcefully. The DTI will be paying greater attention to areas such as the
economic and social impact of gambling. We are once again planning to
introduce new liquor legislation during the course of this year and we will
continue our efforts to promote greater transparency and corporate
governance through amendments to the Companies and Close Corporation Act.

Consumer protection is an area that I would admit my department has not yet
been able to strengthen sufficiently. However, through the changes that are
being made in the department and increased financial support for this area,
the Deputy Minister will lead a process of reform and change in this area.
On 8 May I did express my concern that the applications for lottery funds
were a mere trickle. But I am pleased to say that since this time, there
has been a very significant increase in applications to the distributing
agencies.

In order to play the role that is envisaged for the department, it must
play an integrating role. We require a connected Government. The department
and other economic departments are managing our macroeconomic reform
programme. This includes other levels of government and last year the
department intensified its efforts to align economic policies through a
process of corporative governance and our work with provinces and local
governments.

These efforts have included the review of mandates and the consolidation of
the various agencies and institutions that report to the department and
that now comprise what is referred to as the DTI group. This brings into
the department's ambit assets to the value of R25 billion, to be managed in
support of the department's objectives. I am very pleased to see that the
Chief Executive Officer of the Industrial Development Corporation is here
with us today. This is one of our premier institutions.
A greater capacity for co-ordination is being developed in the department
through the establishment of a management unit that provides institutional
and policy co-ordination to the department and the DTI group. This capacity
is being extensively used to support the co-ordination of the economic
departments at national and provincial level, and to assist the Presidency
in the very exciting programme of Marp. We have also made available to hon
members the basic outline of the Marp programme in a small pamphlet which
has been included in their packs.

As a department, we have recognised the need to review our support measures
to firms in terms of their effectiveness in enhancing competitiveness. This
review has led us to introduce a number of new programmes, as well as
continuing with those that have proved their effectiveness in the past.
This review process will conclude with the consolidation of the
department's supply -side support measures and incentives, as well as the
introduction of a more innovative marketing and delivery system, to reach
out to economic citizens everywhere.

Linked to this, a new suite of investment incentives has been implemented
to promote skills development, modern production methods and investment in
critical economic infrastructure. I am pleased to announce that our
technical negotiations with the national treasury have been finalised and
we intend tabling a revenue amendment Bill next week, which is the new
strategic investment incentive.

I am pleased to announce that, in total this year, we have set aside R1
billion to stimulate domestic investment in the South African economy in
various ways. More importantly, one of the most significant functions that
the department performs is to connect people to economic opportunities by
providing information, guidance and direct assistance, and by connecting
firms to markets, finance and other firms to promote learning. One step is
that a cyber cafÃ© and resource centre has been opened in the lobby of the
department in Pretoria. We are planning a similar one for Cape Town. We are
planning to introduce similar initiatives at the provincial level fairly
soon.

When I addressed this House last year, I spoke about the changes we were
introducing in the department. One year is a very short time in the
lifespan of a large institution such as the department. However, we have
had great success in this process. We are transforming the department into
a thinking institution that keeps its fingers on our economic pulse, and
should be able to respond to the diverse needs of stakeholders, workers,
consumers, investors and entrepreneurs.

I am personally pleased and congratulate the Deputy Minister and the
Director-General on the changes that we have introduced in the department.
I sincerely hope that this is becoming increasingly visible as we improve
the management of the department. The improvements are evident, especially
in the physical environment, the reform of our procurement system, more
effective budgeting and the monitoring of expenditure. I hope too that the
information and documentation that we have made available to all members
will be of assistance.

Finally, we as Government need to ensure that we know how well we are doing
as quickly as possible, in order to respond timeously to changing
circumstances. We need a more effective monitoring and evaluation system. A
chief economist's office is being established to develop key performance
indicators for the department's impact on the economy. It is in this way
that the department will itself become a more competitive organisation
capable of competing with the best institutions around the world.

I hope that the quality and range of information available in the documents
I mentioned a moment ago, will be of interest to hon members. I hope that
this information will also allow hon members to access the work and plans
of our department, so that hon members of this House can more effectively
interact with constituents to support the work of the department and the
growth of this economy.

I would encourage hon members to interact with the department and
constituents in a more structured way. I would like to invite hon members
to look at our exhibit in the passages. Some of the very interesting and
exciting work done by the very wide range of the department's institutions,
is visible there. The department's home page has been improved considerably
and I would like to refer hon members to the Department's 1999-2000 report,
which we tabled along with this budget presentation today.

This reflects a different department and I hope it looks different because
it certainly feels different. It acts differently and will be a very
different department. In the past year the department has embraced a very
simple lesson, which is that its success depends on our ability to manage
change effectively. It should be a changing department, a changing economy
and an always changing world. We certainly are no longer afraid of change.

As an institution we are building our capacities, forging a common set of
values for the department's group and reaching out to our stakeholders, be
they in this House, in the provinces or in the deepest of rural areas. It
is precisely this approach that has given us confidence, and the more we
share this confidence, the more we in this House will infuse others with
confidence. A confident economy is a growing economy.

I would urge this House to support this very important Vote.

Mr N S BRUCE: Madam Speaker, preoccupation with the realities of a global
economy and the adjustments needed to prosper from it, are likely to
dominate diplomatic relations between trading nations in the first half of
this century. They will not be as intense as the national concerns which
dominated the first half of the last century culminating in two world wars
and finally the cold war, but they will be important.

The conflict will not be in the trenches, but within the structures of
international institutions, of which the World Trade Organisation is the
most prominent. In the face of this, national trade policies need to be
clear, unambiguous and backed by an appropriate industrial strategy.

The Government's new industrial strategy proposals, in the main, have the
potential to facilitate the adjustments this country will constantly be
making to globalisation. They are aim at enhancing existing industrial
strength and opening new opportunities that will add to manufacturing
activities.

They recognise the superior efficiencies of a market economy and the need
for rising productivity through increased competition, lower tariffs, more
effective but less regulation and the importance of job creation in the
service sector; they correctly emphasise the importance and centrality of
the consumer and recognise the critical need for education and skills; and
they provide - in theory, at least - a comprehensive and focused front when
Government negotiates with other major trade blocs.

Critical to their success is how Government intends to intervene when
markets are identified as having failed. If the interests of the consumer
are paramount, then they are likely to clash with the social and political
imposts, as well as with the continuation of Government monopolies.

If what is considered to be ``market failure'' is addressed by removing
impediments to entrepreneurial endeavour rather than pandering to
politicians who believe they know better than the markets as to how to
allocate resources, there will be adequate growth and robust job creation.
If that is accompanied by labour law reforms and fewer race and gender
equality imposts, the chances of sustainable growth and a rising number of
jobs will improve. But they will have to be backed by a macroeconomic
policy that keeps prices stable, gets capital costs down and improves the
prospects for the currency.

The hon the Minister says that to achieve his ends, there needs to be
greater co-operation among Government departments. That could prove to be
his Archilles heel. Should his Cabinet colleagues prove to be as
recalcitrant and recidivist over trade and industrial policy as they were
over the implementation of Gear, his policy will be tickets. Had Gear
proved to be of more substance, and had growth approximated its forecasts,
there would be less anxiety among trade unionists now about the robust way
in which the hon the Minister has reduced protective tariffs and forced
productivity adjustments.

The reduction in this protection must keep pace with trends in the global
market if this country's fragile improvement in productivity is to be
continued, and if domestic prices are to remain relatively stable. Our
competitiveness must not continue to depend on a plunging rand. That is a
route to Zimbabwean disaster.

An important part of the function of the DTI is to provide efficient
regulation, to ensure fair competition and equal justice. There are no
signs of a robust deregulation or increased departmental efficiencies,
despite almost constant administrative reorganisation.

There is the vexatious situation of the state lottery monopoly. It is
effectively taxing the poor, enriching the operating company, its foreign
shareholders and empowerment rentiers, and failing to disburse funds in any
reasonable quantity after a year of trading to the very charities it
deprived of the ability to fund themselves. The hon Alec Erwin will go down
in history as the Minister who robbed the poor to enrich the party
favourites, a sort of Hood Robin. Mind you, he is not alone among the Hoods
Robin in the Cabinet. That is, of course, what socialists do naturally. I
suppose if he did not, the pigs from Animal Farm would get him - not the
little, gentle, potbellied ones like our new ambassador to Greece, but the
big, ugly ones with snouts like the hon Jeremy Cronin and the hon Tony
``4x4''. [Laughter.]

The hon the Minister is one of those involved in the arms scandal, the cost
of which, in dollars, appears to have doubled within a year. He is
supporting, as an offset, the building of a steel plant at Coega, despite
worldwide steel manufacturing overcapacity and against the advice of his
expensive American consultants. Yet his portfolio committee has recommended
cutting back estimates of jobs likely to be created by the industrial
offset programme which forms part of the arms deal, from a fanciful 65 000
to less than 10 000.
This department too needs to come to terms with its policies on black
empowerment, which to the foreign investor appears to offer rents to a
rapacious, unskilled and uncommitted shareholder constituency which is
cavalier about corporate governance.

The chief executive officer of the Industrial Development Corporation,
which is our largest industrial undertaking with a high profile abroad, has
forgotten to pay a substantial personal debt to a client company. Well,
really! But worse than that, he has an interest in Worldwide African
Investment Holdings, which in turn has holdings in other companies that
have received funding in some form or other from the IDC or manage
investments for it. The fact that he disclosed these investments and
recused himself from these funding decisions is neither here nor there.

I hope that if he is sitting in this House today, he is blushing. But I
suspect, like all good ANC members, he will not be able to see it. The
conflict of interest is real, and when the chips are down, in whose
interest is he going to act? This situation, in a public utility, is
untenable. The hon the Minister has seen fit to give the errant chief
executive officer a limp slap on the wrist. He himself was tutored by Derek
Keys. Has he, to misquote Talleyrand, ``learned nothing and forgotten
everything?''

I just want to reflect on one other matter. It is a great pity that the
President, in choosing a Minister of Trade and Industry, did not choose Mr
Tony Yengeni, who has a remarkable ability to be able to acquire capital
goods at far below the market price. What is more, he can acquire them for
his wife and his girlfriend as well. Just think: If the hon Mr Tony Yengeni
could be persuaded ... [Interjections.]

Mr A C NEL: Madam Speaker, I wish to rise on a point of order: I have been
listening to Mr Bruce, and there are a number of issues which he has raised
in his speech which I would like to raise points of order on. The first is
his likening Mr Jannie Momberg to a pig, and the second is the reference
that he has just made to the Chief Whip of the Majority Party. I think he
should withdraw that.

HON MEMBERS: Shame!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Bruce, could you please withdraw those
remarks of likening the hon Jannie Momberg to a pig, and also the reference
to the hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party.

Mr N S BRUCE: Madam Speaker, may I carry on? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Please withdraw the remarks.

Mr N S BRUCE: Madam Speaker, a literacy illusion to being a communist
upsets the hon member, then I withdraw unreservedly. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Bruce, did you refer to the hon Momberg as a
pig?

Mr N S BRUCE: Yes, Madam Speaker, I have referred to him as a gentle,
potbellied Vietnamese pig. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Bruce, could you please withdraw that?

Mr N S BRUCE: I withdraw that, Madam Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you also please withdraw the remarks about the
hon Yengeni and his girlfriend.

Mr N S BRUCE: I withdraw the remarks about the hon Yengeni and his
girlfriend. [Interjections.]

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Could he also withdraw
the remark about the hon Cronin and his snout. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Bruce, please withdraw that.

Mr N S BRUCE: If the hon Cronin does not want to be characterised as a
communist - which is the reference from Animal Farm - and is ashamed of
being a communist, then I will withdraw that, Madam Speaker.
[Interjections.]

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Could you ask the speaker
to sit down while I raise my point of order. I think the hon Bruce's
defiance of yourself is the real offence to the dignity of the House, and I
ask you to reprimand him for his disobedience and for his cynical comments
in this House.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, the hon member has withdrawn the
remarks. Hon Bruce, of course, you will reflect on yourself with yourself
when you are at home. Your time has expired. [Applause.]

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, I think what we have just heard is the latest
in the series of ideologically motivated and driven attacks on the
Department of Trade and Industry, and interventions on trade and industry,
issued by the spokesperson of the Official Opposition. [Interjections.]

I would like to remind hon members of some of the other ideologically
driven interventions that Mr Bruce has made in recent weeks. A while ago,
we heard him opposing a proposal to establish an export credit agency by
giving the ANC a lecture on Trotsky and the perils of Soviet communism. We
have just heard Mr Bruce speaking, as he has often done, on the National
Lottery where he has taken a position, not just out of concern about
administrative issues, but expressing reservations about whether there
should be a national lottery at all.

Last September, we heard the hon Bruce arguing, during a debate in this
House on the portfolio committee report on hearings on banks and SMME
finance, that the problem did not lie with the banks but with rent-seeking
demands by SMMEs to secure privileged access to capital. Just now, we have
heard warnings about dire consequences of interventions in favour of the
poor around what he called ``so-called market failures''.

I think it is important that we must try to understand the ideology which
is underpinning and driving these interventions. The line of thought, I
would contend, that underlies all these interventions is clearly one that
holds that the market will always deliver. And, it is a line of thought
which tends to assume that on any particular issue the position of the
powerful market player, rather than representing a particular vested
interest, stands for the common good.

I believe that many of the positions that have been taken by the
spokesperson for the Official Opposition are adopted against the weight of
evidence and therefore, as I contend, they are ideologically driven. I
think we can recognise this kind of ideology which has been espoused, just
now and on other occasions, as a form of free-market fundamentalism of the
type which emerged in various right-wing think tanks that sprang up during
Margaret Thatcher's rule in Britain.

I think we should understand that, clearly, there is nothing moderate about
this. This is hard right conservatism with a definite colonial tinge.
[Applause.] I want to ask the leadership of the DA whether what we have
heard just now and on previous occasions, is what the DA stands for. The DA
has cobbled together a somewhat disparate group of people ideologically on
the basic of ethnic mobilisation. They have not resolved a number of
ideological and policy contradictions.

I think that it is high time that we actually heard from the DA whether
this is their economic philosophy. Is this kind of free-market
fundamentalism what the DA stands for? If it is, then I think the
inescapable conclusion that follows, as the President said in the debate
last year, is that whether they know it or not, they are our own home-grown
Tories. And as such, the inescapable conclusion is that they stand for the
interests of the rich and the empowered against the interests of the poor
and disempowered. [Applause.]

I want to address the issue that we should be discussing today, the Vote of
the Department of Trade and Industry. The shift in the focus of Government
economic policy beyond microeconomic stability to microeconomic reform has,
in fact, placed the DTI even more firmly at the centre of efforts to
promote economic growth and development in our country. There are very few
former colonial and semicolonial countries that have achieved success in
breaking out of underdevelopment and promoting industrialisation. Those few
that have done so all have in common highly effective government
departments performing the kind of tasks entrusted to the DTI.

The experience that stands out most clearly in this regard is that of the
Southeast Asian, so-called, NICS. Intrinsic to this model, in the words of
economist Ajit Singh, was a ``vigorous industrial policy, the basic purpose
of which was to change the matrix of prices and incentives facing private
enterprise in the direction preferred by planners''.
Of course, our own challenge is not, mindlessly, to imitate or import
practices from other contexts, but rather to learn the fundamental lesson
of the East Asian experience, that is, that central to efforts of promoting
economic growth and development, must be the formulation and implementation
of an industrial strategy tailored, of course, to our own circumstances and
conscious of the context in which we find ourselves.

The context within which we have to formulate our industrial strategy is,
of course, that of the process known as globalisation. In my view we need
to recognise this as simultaneously a process that has significantly
altered the mode of operation of global capitalism in ways that no single
country can afford to ignore and, at the same time, a process that tends to
maintain and even widen huge inequalities and unevennesses between and
within countries.

I believe that the dialectic both/and is critical in this respect. The
development of productive forces in particular ways and the tendency
towards inequality and marginalisation are intrinsic features of what
Manuel Castells has called the creation of ``Globaly networked
capitalism''. What this means is that one cannot have policies to adapt
production structures to the new realities of globalisation, unless there
are simultaneously in place strategies to counter the tendency towards
inequality and marginalisation inherent in the process.

Two years ago, the DTI embarked on a major restructuring exercise. This was
a far-sighted, courageous and, to some extent, a risky decision. Between
1994 and 2000, the DTI had undergone moderate transformation and had a
number of achievements to its credit. It could have continued along the
same path without any major crisis. The decision to undertake the
restructuring exercise was taken because the Minister and the leadership of
the department recognised that moderate transformation and some progress
would not deliver the kind of growth and development that we needed to
achieve.

I am pleased to be able to report that, in the opinion of most of the
committee, at least, that decision is beginning to pay off. The committee's
report on Vote No 31, which was published in the ATC's some weeks ago,
notes that the DTI, which previously had problems of underspending roll-
overs, has now largely overcome these problems. In the last financial year,
the department spent almost all its budget.

Our report notes that there is a greater alignment between activities and
the budget and a noticeable improvement in financial management and
control. Many of the new divisions, as the Minister indicated, are now up
and running, and beginning to achieve results. There is now a young vibrant
leadership in the hands of an energetic team of highly skilled people who
are also highly committed. Most of them come from previously disadvantaged
communities who would not even have been able to contribute in this way in
the past.

The committee played an active role in monitoring the process and gave
strong support to the objectives and the restructuring exercise. We will
now want to continue to monitor the results. We have been engaged in
regular quality time interactions with the department for some time. Our
report notes that we now have a set of quantified indicators against which
we can measure progress in this regard.

The Minister indicated that the DTI has recently released a discussion
document on integrated industrial policy. The document seeks to
conceptualise major new challenges facing us in developing an integrated
industrial strategy and reviews previous industrial policy measures.

A number of other documents on aspects related to industrial policy will be
released shortly and the portfolio committee, together with our colleagues
in the NCOP, have indicated that we will be holding hearings on industrial
policy after the winter recess. The Driving Competitiveness document points
out that old ways and means of promoting competitiveness are no longer
sufficient, and calls for new efforts to raise knowledge intensity, promote
innovation, research and development, customisation, and move beyond
existing departmental boundaries, and promote joined up government.

We hope that the public hearings will help contribute towards concretising
what needs to be done in this regard and also to reflect on existing and
other possible measures to promote industrial development and economic
activities that can contribute to economic growth development and job
creation.
My own view is that there are, in our own experience, a number of lessons
we need to build on in developing more effective industrial strategies. For
example, the Motor Industry Development Programme highlights the importance
of sectoral or value chain strategies formulated with the involvement of
stakeholders. The strategic development initiatives show the importance of
Government-led infrastructure development programmes.

Some of the bigger investments of recent years, that have drawn in foreign
investors, show the vital role that a body like the Industrial Development
Corporation can play. The IDC's mission statement commits it to
``identifying and supporting opportunities not yet addressed by the
market''. We hope that our hearings will be able to address ways in which
we can enhance these experiences and generalise them to other sectors.

While we welcome the progress that has been made in restructuring, the
majority on the committee continue to be impatient - and rightly so in my
view - to see faster progress in SMME promotion, black economic empowerment
and employment creation. These are all stated priorities both of Government
in general and of the DTI in particular. My colleagues will speak in more
detail on these issues later.

I just want to say that, as a committee, we will continue to press for the
earliest possible release of the promised new strategy documents on SMME
and BEE. We will also request a comprehensive report on how the
departmental restructuring will improve capacity to deliver services to
SMMEs and promote BEE and employment.

The department has said that its efforts to promote SMMEs and black
economic empowerment will no longer be confined to particular agencies, but
will be priorities of the department as a whole. We welcome this, but we
will need to engage further on how the different divisions in the DTI are
contributing to promoting these objectives and how these efforts are being
co-ordinated within the department.

Let me, finally, briefly comment on an issue which was raised earlier in a
notice of motion by Ms Malumise. Clearly, there is now a growing public
interest and concern in the operation of credit bureau. Individuals,
particularly from poorer communities, who have their names placed on lists
by these bodies have their life chances considerably affected. There is
grave concern about the power which is exercised by these credit bureau.
The activities of some of these credit bureau have been referred to the
Consumer Affairs committee, and the DTI has indicated that it wants to
engage with the public on this issue.

Let me express the hope that this issue will receive serious attention by
the department and that there will be sufficient opportunities for members
of the public to express their concerns. The committee will have to find
time in its busy programme also to take up this issue and to receive a
report, perhaps hold public hearings on this matter.

The ANC will support this Vote. [Applause.]

Mr M D MSOMI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and colleagues, clearly, the
combination of the previous experiences of the hon the Minister, who is a
former lecturer in economics, the former Minister of Finance in the first
democratically elected Government and now the Minister of Trade and
Industry, have all rubbed off on this well-resourced department in a very
positive way.
As a shareholder Minister in the state financing institutions, I would like
to make a very passionate and special appeal to the hon the Minister that
something extraordinary has to happen to stimulate the microeconomy,
especially the small and medium enterprises, and that is the immediate,
swift removal of the entry barriers confronting emerging entrepreneurs. It
is becoming far more urgent than we realise that we should avoid, by taking
such an extraordinary measure, a situation similar to the one in emerging
economies like the Far East, where there was a social upheaval before
certain things could be corrected.

Knowing the Minister to be a caring person - I am saying this from personal
experience - who has spent hours and hours with the black business
gatherings, the honest identification of and the empathy with which the
black business sector has been received, clearly indicates that the
Ministry will be far more serious in removing those entry barriers.

Key aspects of the industrial policy need to be reviewed. The financing and
the mentoring - I repeat, the mentoring - of the small and medium
enterprises are critical. It is one thing to just resource them, but
another thing to really take them by the hand and ensure that they succeed.
With the greatest of respect to the hon the Minister, my research differs
with the Minister's statistics. But I agree that a lot has happened in the
three years since 1998.

The IFP's approach to the trade and industry budget is guided by five basic
principles based on the big five drivers of our economy in terms of their
contribution to the South African GDP, ie manufacturing, which is 18,9%,
financial and business services, 18,4%, direct Government services, 17,3%,
mining, 6,6%, and agriculture at 4%.

In total the big five comprise 65,2% of the entire South African economy
and the remaining 34,8% is made up of wholesale, retail, motor trade,
transport, communication and other industries as at the end of 1998. That
is why I say, with the greatest of respect, that a lot must have happened
in three years.

Our principles are that the economy of South Africa will, for a long time,
survive on, firstly, harnessing creative talent of manufacturing, skills
development and direct investment by the Government in the community's
ability to become self-reliant.

Secondly, the exploitation of our natural resources should be our primary
goal of stimulating growth in a market-driven economy by creating capacity
amongst all the people of our land, especially those in the rural areas, to
explore to the maximum their natural resources as a means of waging a fight
against abject poverty. I cannot overemphasise this more.

Thirdly, our financial services sector should be deregulated to create
private-public partnerships which distribute economic opportunities and
create linkages that allow a transfer of skills to the historically
disadvantaged, to stimulate economic activity across the spectrum of our
society, to spread wealth equitably. Fourthly, the buying powers of the
Government - and this is critical - should be harnessed as a building block
for regional economic development strategies through the mechanism of the
private-public partnership principle as evidenced in the industrial
developmemt zones, the spatial development zones and the development of
airports and sea ports.
The Minister should create a budget allocation to build capacity in the
communities' ability to engage the development zones as stakeholders, to
secure their sustainable economic benefits. We should reverse the situation
where communities become mere recipients of job creation and enable them to
bargain for a piece of the economic cake in such spatial and industrial
development zones. Fifthly, it should create globally competitive
legislative, administrative and financial conditions to attract inward
investment in the form of foreign exchange, human talent, information
technology and technological transfers.

An amount of R2,214 billion is to be voted for the Department of Trade and
Industry in the budget for 2001-02. This amount is R98 million or 4,6% more
than the R2,116 billion in the 2000-01 budget. The Trade and Industry
budget is divided into five programmes, which are administration,
international trade and economic development, enterprise and industry
development, enterprise organisation, and trade and investments in South
Africa.

The IFP policy framework for the Trade and Industry portfolio is not at
variance with the department's strategic objectives, which are to provide
an environment conducive to promoting higher investment levels for foreign
direct and domestic investment, to increase access to international markets
for South African products and to create a marketplace in South Africa for
domestic and foreign business consumers.

The IFP has evaluated this budget's medium to long-term impact on our
economy and whether it meets the criteria of achieving each of these stated
objectives. The budget allocation to Trade and Investment South Africa
decreases by R74,71 million or  22,3%, and it does not create the
environment which the department aims to create. The 11% decrease in the
investment promotion and international marketing subprogramme, as well as
the 40,5% decrease in the trade facilitation subprogramme are not in line
with the objectives of attracting more foreign direct investment. It is a
serious weakness in the chain.

The department's objective to increase access to international markets for
South African products and to maintain trade relations and agreements with
other countries has been met by the increased allocation of R13,67 million,
from R14,37 million to R28,04 million, which is an increase of 95,1% and
this is welcomed.

The third objective of the Department Trade and Industry has been met by
the increase of 20%, mostly as a result of a 11% increase in investment
support and a 34% increase in export incentives. Again, this is a positive
sign. South Africa's manufacturing industry, being the largest contributor
to our gross domestic product, has declined - and that is where the hon the
Minister's and my research differ - from 21,1% in 1993 to 18,9% in 1998.

The IFP observes, with great concern, that the Trade and Industry budget
allocation to assist the competitiveness of the manufacturing industry
actually decreased by 5,5% in the current financial year. We would request
the hon the Minister to explain the probable impact of this decrease in the
budget on our economy.

The IFP feels that two of the three departmental objectives have been met
and that the 2001-02 budget is deserving of our support. We, therefore,
will support this budget.

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, friends and colleagues, I would
like to express my appreciation for being afforded the opportunity to
present my speech during this year's budget debate. Let me start by
complimenting the Department of Trade and Industry and its Ministry for all
their hard work under tremendously difficult conditions during the
restructuring process.

In my speech I will be looking at the Trade and Industry Vote within the
context of the South African society that is currently unfolding. The newly
democratically elected Government of South Africa, which is based on the
ideals stipulated in our Constitution, realised that true political
emancipation cannot be achieved if genuine economic transformation has not
taken place. The transformation process should add value to the economy and
also empower those people who had previously been in a disadvantaged
position.

I want to quote the Minister of Finance from his Budget Speech this year
when he truly said that ``South Africa is a growing tree bearing fruit''.
He said that when we enjoy eating the sweet fruit of liberty, we are
removing the thorns of neglect and inhumanity and we are restoring the
pride and dignity to our country and to our people.

I fully endorse these sentiments, because they are things that I believe in
and which we fought for. These sentiments constitute the moral underpinning
of a budget. They reflect the choices and decisions, and sometimes hard
decisions, that Ministers have to make.

Our ultimate objective is and will continue to be the restoration of
humanity and the creation of a caring country. This is the core of what we
believe in. This is at the core of this Government's policies and
programmes. This is at the epicentre of our Government's focus: a nation at
work for a better life for all. This message is simple and readily
understood.

We, as elected representatives, need to make this budget a living reality
for our people. It is not just about checks and balances, trade surpluses
or growing GDPs, etc. We should not only see numbers in the budget. We
should see people, people like farm dwellers, the unemployed, the rural
masses, eSiyabuswa, KwaNongoma, people in Gugulethu and kwaLanga, people
like women and the youth. It is for those people that this budget must
become a living reality.

The budget is especially about people like farmworkers who are treated
without any dignity. It is for them that this budget must become a reality.
The budget is about people; it is the nuts and bolts of a vision; a path to
the true future of a better life for all; a more humane life. The budget is
our ammunition; let us arm ourselves.

Our President, in his state of the nation address, captured the spirit,
vision and aspirations of our country. He also highlighted the
achievements, constraints and strategic priorities facing us as a nation.
It is now our responsibility as South Africans to unpack and give meaning
to this vision. This budget becomes the instrument through which our vision
is made a living reality. The state must not only develop policies, but
also ensure that those policies are implemented. Institutions aimed at
black economic empowerment must be revamped. The state must ensure that the
previously disadvantaged people benefit from state procurement.

In last year's budget, the year 2000 budget, the department stated that
their vision was to facilitate access to sustainable economic activity and
employment for all South Africans. In order to achieve this vision, the
department must attract higher level of domestic and foreign investment,
increase market access for South African products domestically and
internationally, and achieve a fair, efficient and competitive marketplace
for domestic and foreign business and consumers.

The DTI identified new ways of growing the economy by growing industries,
growing exports and investments, building jobs through investment, and
empowering SMME development. The Department of Trade and Industry mentioned
three areas of priority in the SMME programmes. They are going to embark on
a quality development programme for SMMEs. This is also going to be a model
that will follow a holistic approach to quality focus on critical factors,
such as successful businesses, and assist SMMEs in the manufacturing
sector.

Yes, there are successful stories in the urban areas, particularly in
towns. But I am afraid that the rural people have not yet tasted the sweet
fruits of liberty. I want to urge the Minister to look more seriously into
SMMEs, especially at the review process. At a presentation in January 2000
Mr Rafiq said the department's aim was to have offices in all provinces to
dramatically increase the direct delivery of services to entrepreneurs of
all sizes, at all stages of development, and in all sectors, and to give
advice to start-up entrepreneurs.

Sicela ukuthi lokhu kwenziwe masinyane. Bayahlupheka abantu emakhaya.
Kungenzeki emadolobheni kuphela, abantu bebe bengalutholi usizo emakhaya.
[We ask if this could be done urgently. People in the rural areas are
experiencing hardships. This should not be done in the urban areas only,
while the rural people are not getting any assistance.]

Is the neglect of rural areas the result of the falling of fixed
investments from 24% in 1984 to 15% in 1999, while the rate for successful,
newly industrialised countries is more than 30%? It is always the very poor
that still suffer, and we need to ask ourselves the following questions:
What is it that we must focus on? What are the priorities in the Trade and
Industry portfolio committee?

I believe that we can answer these questions if we concentrate on the basic
needs that exist in this country. For example, we need to raise the wealth
and living standards of the very poor; we need to create a lot of jobs; we
need to reduce the inequalities that still exist in gender, in race and in
the rural areas; and we need to contribute to the process of integrated
development. Both the President's state of the nation address and the
Finance Minister's Budget Speech indicated that these are the types of
issues that we need to address during the course of this year, and it is
important that our activities involve public participation.

There are a few priority areas in the department's programmes, namely
growth in the GDP, an increase in the provision of basic infrastructure,
the trade surplus, the declining inflation rate and the increase of
business confidence, linked to higher private-sector capital investment,
microeconomic stability, international competitiveness, energy, transport,
communication and, finally, financial aid to SMMEs. There are still
challenges facing us as a country, amongst other things, low savings and
investment rates, high levels of poverty, lack of access to finance for
SMMEs, high levels of unemployment, and the underdevelopment of rural
areas, especially amongst women, youth and the disabled people of this
country.

The department has done little in terms of promoting black economic
empowerment. The institutions that were established to drive this concept
are nonfunctional, eg Khula, Ntsika and LBSCs. They are not visible. As a
member of the Trade and Industry committee, what is it that I want to see
that will guide my action in the work, as laid out for me? As a member of
the ANC, I am guided by what the President said. As a woman I want to say
that approximately 33% of the 2,8 million people of Mpumalanga are
unemployed, of which the highest percentage is  women.

Omama eMatsulu, eKwagga, eVezubuhle, eNkomazi. [Women in Matsulu, Kwagga,
Vezubuhle and Nkomazi.]

Our objective is to move the country onto a higher growth path, increase
competitiveness, raise employment level and reduce poverty and persistent
inequality. My action, like yours, should be guided by our conviction to
make these objectives a living reality for those voices that continue to be
stifled, the vulnerable and the down-trodden in our society.
Abantu bakithi baphume ebugqilini benhlupheko. [Our people should be
liberated from the tyranny of poverty.]

I strongly believe that if any development can be taken seriously, jobs
will be created and poverty will be a thing of the past.

I would like to say that there are three types of people in this country:
clever people who discuss ideas, average-minded people who discuss events
and simple and foolish-minded people who discuss people. There are
political people and there are political buffoons. So hon members should
judge for themselves, who those people are.

We, in the ANC, have ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnr F J VAN DEVENTER: Mevrou die Speaker, ek kry soms die indruk dat
wanneer ons na die begrotingsposte in hierdie Huis kyk, ons eintlik die
geleentheid gebruik om so 'n bietjie ``pro/bragging'' te doen in plaas van
om regtig na die situasie en die omstandighede te kyk waarmee ons te kampe
het. Dit is vir my besonder interessant om te sien hoe elke departement
optree, en ook die agb Minister van Handel en Nywerheid, vir wie ek
persoonlik groot agting en respek het oor die manier waarop hy sy
departement hanteer.

Wanneer dit kom by die aankope van wapens, dan is die verskoning vir die
verhoogde besteding die verswakking van die rand teenoor die internasionale
geldeenhede. Wanneer ons hier kom praat van verhoogde uitvoere, word dit
gerieflikheidshalwe verswyg dat 'n groot deel van die groter inkomste die
gevolg is van die rand se verswakking teen buitelandse eenhede.

In die tweede plek is dit ewe geldig om te vra, as daar so 'n fenomenale
groei in die ekonomie van Suid-Afrika is, waarom daar dan so 'n skerp
afname oor die afgelope aantal jare in bestaande werkgeleenthede was? Is
dit as gevolg van meganisering of is dit as gevolg daarvan dat die
kapasiteit van entrepreneurskap wat werkgeleenthede geskep het, eenvoudig
in Suid-Afrika gekrimp het? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek rig nie 'n beskuldiging nie, ek vra die vraag, want ek dink dit is
belangrik, wanneer ons wil kyk na die heropbou van Suid-Afrika en die skep
van geleenthede, dat ons oor hierdie aangeleenthede baie, baie eerlik met
mekaar moet wees en mekaar en die wÃªreld nie moet probeer bluf nie.
Ek wil my tot 'n ander situasie wend, en dit is die rol wat hierdie
departement het om te speel in die ontluiking, nie alleen van Suid-Afrika
as 'n land wat werkgeleenthede en ontwikkelingsgeleenthede aan sy mense
bied nie, maar ook ten opsigte van Suider-Afrika en Afrika in die algemeen.
Hier kan ek aansluit by die President se siening van 'n Afrika-renaissance.

Ek dink ons moet dit in die een of ander stadium vir mekaar sÃª, en miskien
is vanoggend die geleentheid om dit te doen: daar is 'n geneigdheid in
Afrika, en ook by ons in Suid-Afrika, dat wanneer ons nie werklik die
simpatie kry in die hoeveelhede wat ons dit graag van die wÃªreld wil hÃª
nie, ons ons vingers begin rondswaai oor kolonialisme, apartheid,
onderdrukking, die wegneem van ons bates, ens.

Feit is, baie van hierdie dinge het tot 'n einde gekom in Afrika, maar daar
is 'n paar dinge wat in Afrika agtergebly het wat eie is aan Afrika. En as
ons dit nie wil aanpak en dit nie wil teenstaan nie, gaan ons nie slaag in
die Afrika-eeu wat die President in die vooruitsig stel nie. Afrika is
steeds die slagveld van magsbehepte mense wat nie omgee om oorlog te maak,
mense uit te moor, ens nie. Afrika is oor die algemeen bekend as 'n
vasteland waar korrupsie hoogty vier. Afrika is oor die algemeen bekend as
'n vasteland wat nie baie vriendelik is teenoor beleggers van buite nie.

Dit het niks met kolonialisme te doen nie. Dit het niks met apartheid te
doen nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit is 'n kultuur wat in Afrika ingebed is wat
ons as Afrikane eenvoudig sal moet verander. As ons nie bereid is om dit te
doen nie, sal ons aan die agterspeen van die wÃªreldekonomie bly drink tot
nadeel van daardie mense na wie die vorige spreker verwys het as ``the
poorest of the poor'', en dan sal ons die probleem van armoede,
werkloosheid en agteruitgang in Afrika nie stuit nie. Ek wil 'n beroep doen
dat ons in Suid-Afrika die suksesstorie en katalisator word van 'n
suksesvolle Afrika in 2001. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Madam Speaker, I sometimes get the impression, when
we look at the Votes in this House, that we actually take the opportunity
to do a little ``pro/bragging'' instead of really looking at the situation
and conditions with which we are struggling. I find it exceptionally
interesting to note how each department conducts itself, including the
Minister of Trade and Industry, for whom I personally have great respect
because of the manner in which he handles his department.

When it comes to the purchase of weapons, the excuse for the increased
expenditure is the weakening of the rand against international currencies.
When we talk here about increased exports, it is conveniently suppressed
that a large proportion of the higher revenue was owing to the weakening of
the rand in contrast with foreign currencies.

Secondly it is valid to ask, if there is such phenomenal growth in South
Africa's economy, why there has been such a sharp decline in existing job
opportunities during the past few years. Is this owing to mechanisation or
a consequence of the fact that capacity of entrepreneurship that created
job opportunities, has simply shrunk in South Africa? [Interjections.]

I am not levelling accusations, I am asking a question, because I think it
is important, when we want to look at the reconstruction of South Africa
and the creation of opportunities, that we should be very, very honest with
one another about these issues and that we should not try to bluff one
another and the world.
I want to address another issue, and that is the role that this department
has to play in development, not only of South Africa as a country with job
and development opportunities for its people, but also in respect of
Southern Africa and Africa in general. Here I can associate myself with the
President's vision of an African Renaissance.

I think that we should say this to one another at some stage or other, and
perhaps this morning is the time to do so: There is a tendency in Africa
and also among us in South Africa, when we do not really get the sympathy
from the world that we would like to get to start pointing fingers about
colonialism, apartheid, oppression, the seizure of our assets, etc.

The fact of the matter is that many of these things have come to an end in
Africa, but there are things that remained in Africa, things that are
unique to Africa. And if we do not want to tackle that and oppose it, we
will not succeed in achieving the African century that the President
envisages. Africa is still the battlefield of people obsessed with power,
people who do not mind making war, massacring people, etc. In general
Africa is known as a continent where corruption is rampant. Africa is
generally known as the continent that is not very friendly to investors
from outside.

This has nothing to do with colonialism. This has nothing to do with
apartheid. [Interjections.] This is a culture that is embedded in Africa
that we as Africans will simply have to change. If we are not prepared to
do this we will always draw the short straw as regards the world economy,
to the detriment of those people to whom the previous speaker referred as
``the poorest of the poor'', and then we will be unable to halt the problem
of poverty, unemployment and degeneration in Africa. My plea is that we in
South Africa should become the success story and catalyst of a successful
Africa in 2001. [Interjections.]]

Mr D LOCKEY: Madam Speaker, I wish to address issues regarding black
economic empowerment, employment and, finally, dwell on an instance where
the Competitions Act is violated.

One of the most striking features of our continent is that it is well
endowed with so many natural resources, and yet it is the poorest continent
in the world. Many reasons can be advanced for the sad state of affairs in
which we find ourselves, and the previous speaker has endeavoured to do so.
However, I would submit this morning that one of the most compelling
reasons why we are in the state that we find ourselves in, is that the
wealth on the African continent does not belong to and is not controlled by
Africans.

Despite political freedom on this continent, we have largely remained
economically dependent on former colonial entities. The economic
exploitation of Africans, therefore, did not cease after liberation. We can
never allow such a state of affairs to be repeated in South Africa. We, in
the ANC, believe that economic liberation should be an integral part of our
transformation, and it is against this background that I wish to approach
this debate today.

It is an irrefutable fact that South Africa has achieved the most stable
macroeconomic conditions over the last seven years, under the leadership of
the ANC-led Government. We have laid the foundation to now proceed to
address the microeconomic challenges that face our country.

The empowerment of the majority of our people, to become part of the
mainstream of the South African economy, is vital in the process of
achieving high levels of economic growth and addressing the legacy of the
past. The Black Economic Empowerment Commission has made many useful
proposals to achieve this objective.

According to Business Map 2001, empowerment companies' share of the market
capitalisation of the JSE fell from 6% in August 2000, to 4,8% in February
2001. Experience, with regard to black economic empowerment over the last
few years, has shown that this cannot simply be left to the market forces.
It requires targets to be set by Government. Furthermore, it requires
certain control measures, to ensure that these targets are met.

Some of these measures must include the following: We must set certain
procurement targets for BEE companies, both in the public and in the
private sector. An example is the 25% that was set by the Department of
Minerals and Energy for oil companies, over the next 10 years. We need to
see more of these examples in other sectors of the economy.

We must strive towards greater ownership by blacks in the mainstream of the
economy. We need to strive for greater representation of black people in
the management of the economy. We need to see greater landownership by
black people and we need to assist black entrepreneurs to obtain venture
capital. As part of the overall black economic empowerment strategy, we
must also focus on trends in the formal sector of the economy, particularly
as it relates to employment.

If we look at the signs in the economy since 1994, the output of the
manufacturing sector that was exported increased from 15% to 28%. This is a
remarkable achievement. Labour productivity increased by 30% since 1994,
but enumerated employment in the formal sector declined by more than 500
000 jobs in 1994. In the manufacturing sector, employment declined by
11,5%.

I would like to tell the hon Mr Van Deventer that the most compelling
reason for this decline is as follows: There are higher levels of capital
investment in order to compete on a global scale. Furthermore, there is the
incorporation of information technologies in the production processes, and
this has accounted for many of the problems with regard to employment. But
there are also low economic growth rates, and this aspect needs to be
addressed by both the Minister and the Department of Finance. We need to
increase economic growth far higher than the levels that we currently have,
and we need about a 6% to 9% economic growth rate.

Unless we are able to do this, we will see a continued decline in the
labour absorption capacity of our economy. An estimated 57% of our
population lives below the poverty line. Inequality and poverty are
primarily caused by a lack of wage income. The only real solution is to
create conditions that are conducive to the creation of jobs in the formal
sector. The Government must take the initiative to invest in new strategic
industries that will create jobs, assist with the formation of a new
generation of entrepreneurs and simultaneously assist South Africa to carve
a niche in the global economy.

In a developing country such as ours, Government has an inescapable
obligation to nurture and build new growth industries. This implies
actively participating in the establishment of such industries. The Board
on Tarrifs and Trade has as one of its objectives the development of new
sources of competitive advantage in South Africa. This objective could be
achieved through a system of rebates to key industrial initiatives.

In addition to this, funds must be made available to fund new initiatives.
There are funds available: the Minister of Finance announced in this year's
Budget a R3 billion strategic investment scheme for industrial projects. We
have R2 billion available in the national empowerment fund and R1 billion
is available in the Umsobomvu Fund.

These funds should be utilised for the following: We need to create new
investment in capital infrastructure, we need to invest more in research
and development of new industries and provide seed capital for new business
ventures. We must also identify mentors amongst the country's leading
entrepreneurs that can lead initiatives that are so vital for our success.

I would like to propose one or two ventures that need to be considered by
the Minister. There is a worldwide demand for platinum jewellery. South
Africa is the number one producer of platinum. Such a new industry can
involve a wide variety of our people, including rural women and the youth.
This project can be tackled as a joint venture between Government and the
platinum mining industry.

According to the Financial Times, the three platinum mining houses in South
Africa are churning out cash so fast that they are forced to embark on a
special dividend to shareholders, unless they can find new acquisitions. To
give the House an idea of the kind of money that is generated by these
mining houses, the smallest of these three has made a R2 billion profit in
the last six months. These are very lucrative businesses. They have an
obligation to assist Government to address the issues of mass unemployment.
This should be part of the social responsibility initiative to create a
safer and more prosperous South Africa.

It is not good enough simply to co-opt a handful of black people under the
guise of empowerment. Throughout the world, corporate businesses are
getting more involved in social, economic and environmental challenges that
face those countries. Another area that requires serious consideration is
the biotechnology industry. South Africa is home to one of the largest
biodiversities in the world. We are well-endowed with many indigenous
technologies. There is a fast-growing industry in the world for herbal
remedies. What is required is to further develop and refine these
indigenous technologies into mass products. This process should carve a
niche in the global market.

These are just a few ideas. I am sure there are hundreds of ideas that
exist amongst our people. In the absence of these investments, we must
calculate the opportunity cost to the country. The alternative to these is
high levels of crime, violence, poverty and degradation, which in turn
would require greater spending on health, welfare, safety and security and
correctional services.

In conclusion, I wish to bring to the Minister's attention a violation of
the Competitions Act. In terms of section 8(d)(3) of this Act, a business
may not engage in an exclusionary act, unless it can show technological
efficiency and competitive gains that outweigh such uncompetitive act. A
business may not sell goods or services on condition that the buyer
purchases separate goods or services unrelated to the object of the
contract. Ster-Kinekor compels its patrons to only consume refreshments
that are purchased on their premises. The prices of these refreshments are
at least 100% higher than normal retail prices. [Time expired.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, hon members, there is general agreement that
the Government has achieved a stable, predictable macroeconomic policy. The
Minister of Trade and Industry, as leader of the Cabinet cluster for
investment and employment, is the steward of a growth programme to
jumpstart growth rates. The hon the Minister, in a briefing earlier this
year, stated that his Cabinet cluster's success will be measured by
increased growth rates, jobs, strides in local economic empowerment and
boosting the small and medium enterprise sectors.

The Department of Trade and Industry's role in realising these objectives
is crucial. The importance of the department's activities and
responsibilities must never be underestimated. Neither must we
underestimate the magnitude of the department's objectives, such as
creating an environment conducive to investment and increasing access to
international markets, as well as creating a fair, competitive and
efficient marketplace.

One of the key policy developments in the department is the need for the
department to review its interface with the public and the opening of
offices in strategically placed centres. Although the department perceives
this to apply especially to its foreign offices, in order to render a
better service to potential investors and exporters, it should not be
restricted to these areas only. Of critical importance is to increase the
interface of the department with ordinary citizens in South Africa who have
previously been denied access to operating businesses.

To achieve this, the department has been restructured to increase
productivity. Higher-growth economic sectors to promote exports in
agriprocessing, mineral beneficiation, automobiles and components, as well
as clothing and textiles, have been identified.

We must ask ourselves whether this department, and this budget, succeeds in
attaining these ambitious goals. The truth is that, despite commendable
work in many areas, a lot of hard work still needs to be done. It is of
particular concern to us that unemployment remains a harsh reality for
millions of South Africans. The solution remains enterprise development as
confirmed by most economists, business leaders and policy analysts. The
success of the department in the past few years with regard to SMMEs has
not been that effective.

Black economic empowerment, which will only grow significantly and
sustainably through SMMEs, lags behind our expectations. Many of the
biggest and most recognisable names in BEE today cut their teeth in SMMEs.
The talent and the will are out there, but this department must accelerate
efforts to create an environment conducive to SMMEs. Measured against the
potential out there, Khula and Ntsika have been failures. Let us take note
of Leslie Boyd's comments along the lines that long-term solutions to
unemployment will not happen through the Anglos of South Africa.

We note that the department has undergone - and is still undergoing -
significant and far-reaching restructuring internally. We commend these
efforts in as much as they begin to address some of the above concerns.

In the regulatory environment we note a disturbing trend that continues
unchecked. I am referring to the unacceptable practice of using black
people and companies as fronts to channel contracts towards a small group
of companies who refuse to transform, who reject the right of all South
Africans to do business. This practice undermines all serious efforts of
BEE and must be eradicated.

In conclusion, we must note that nothing in this world is perfect. We note
that the department operates in difficult environments and has nonetheless
begun to move in the right direction with most of its activities. As long
as this remains the case, we will support the Minister and his department.

The UDM supports the Vote. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon
members, a warm welcome to the DG and his staff from the EMU, and to the
CEOs and chairpersons of our DTI family of institutions. Allow me to
express my sincere thanks and appreciation to the parliamentary committees
responsible for Trade and Industry, for their support, vigilance, frankness
and preparedness to engage the Minister and I. Their contributions have
significantly improved the quality and quantity of the work generated by
the DTI.
Today the Minister and I make these presentations on our budget to this
House against the backdrop of a rapidly changing world. Indeed, the central
question is no longer if and when we should respond to these changes, but
rather the tactics and strategies that we as a nation adopt to engage
constructively with what we have come to know as globalisation.

Globalisation is not fundamentally new. Economic, social and political
interaction within the world economy has intensified over the course of
human history. But for most of that history, the pace of interaction was so
glacial that is was not easily recognisable as a phenomenon that we now
recognise as globalisation. Moreover, it was cyclical in nature. What makes
this particular cycle different is its rate of acceleration and degree of
integration.

The integration of global financial, technological, service and commodity
markets has intensified and changed the nature of international
competition. On the other hand many countries, particularly those in sub-
Saharan Africa, are being increasingly marginalised from these processes
that are integrating the global economy. Consequently, promoting
development and reversing marginalisation must be at the centre of our
approach. Our destiny is deeply intertwined with that of our regional
neighbours and the African continent. We cannot act alone.

The Department of Trade and Industry has identified a number of instruments
to engage this process of globalisation. We represent only one of many
governments that have recognised the need to strengthen and reform
mechanisms of global economic governance, through multilateral policy
making. Multilateralism represents the institutional response to
globalisation. In particular, the establishment of the World Trade
Organisation, despite its imbalances and deficiencies, reduces the scope
for unilateral trade measures and aims to ensure that economic
interactions, including the resolution of trade disputes, are governed by a
system of rules and not solely by economic power. Developing countries
clearly have an interest in strengthening this system in a manner that
promotes their development.

The need to build alliances with other developing countries that comprise
the G-South, such as India, Brazil and Nigeria, is a key element of South
Africa's preparations for the forthcoming ministerials of the WTO. As a
department, it is important to work with our social partners through
Nedlac, in order to develop a common position that recognises our diverse
interests. As before, we will again be relying extensively on the
participation of members of the committees of Parliament to support us in
formulating our position when we participate in the forthcoming WTO
ministerials. In this regard we would like to congratulate the committees
on taking the initiative of travelling to the WTO headquarters in Geneva to
acquaint themselves with the WTO processes.

In recognition of the need to co-operate and strengthen the position of
developing economies in engaging issues of market access, South Africa has
been working extensively to assist with technical expertise for the
African, Carribean and Pacific countries as they prepare for their
forthcoming negotiations with the European Union. In April this year, we
hosted an ACP ministerial trade committee. It was the first time that this
committee ever sat in South Africa. During this workshop, we assisted and
took them through our own experiences, knowledge and pitfalls. They found
this interaction very valuable. They have requested that we provide them
with a permanent expert to assist them with this function.
This support is critical as 31 of the least developed countries in Africa
are members of the ACP, including five countries that are also members of
SADC. In this era of globalisation, SADC takes on a new significance. We
must strengthen interregional trade through harnessing regional synergies
to reduce costs, build infrastructure, promote economies of scale and build
a regionally integrated production platform. In this regard the department
has worked and will continue to work with our Southern African partners to
develop SADC as an effective instrument for mitigating the marginalising
effects of globalisation.

Through our participation in various fora, we have worked towards the
development and adoption of the Millennium African Recovery Programme. The
department has worked closely with other national departments and the
Presidency in establishing technical working groups to deal with the
implementation of Marp. The department will, in particular, over the next
year, work with its counterparts in Africa in two areas of Marp. The first
will be the diversification of Africa's production and the exports and the
second will be market access issues.

Allow me to express my sincere appreciation to the President of this
country for his vision, together with Presidents Bouteflika of Algeria and
Obasanjo of Nigeria, in this initiative. Through participation in these
processes, the department has gained valuable insight into the workings of
and challenges facing economies of other African countries.

Is the department ready to respond to the challenges of globalisation? The
ability of the state to counter the tendencies towards uneven development,
inequality and marginalisation, depends on its capacity to analyse and
understand these tendencies and implement effective responses. We believe
that these responses must include enterprise development support and
targeted programmes directed at    socio-economic empowerment. South Africa
is faced with a dual challenge. Not only must we overcome the inequalities
generated by apartheid, but we must also do so in the context of global
trends that tend to further entrench such disparities.

In recognition of this the department has initiated a number of
interventions that specifically seek to address issues of marginalisation
and promote development and equity in the South African economy. These
responses include the establishment of the SA Entrepreneurs Network, which
we hope to launch later this year. We believe that it is important to
create a platform for women to exchange views on how to strengthen the role
of women in the South African economy, not just as consumers and low-
skilled labourers, but as entrepreneurs, business owners, investors and
exporters.

In the past year the highlight of our work in this regard has been the
hosting of the global economic summit of women in 2000, and in March this
year we also hosted a workshop for Ministers and officials from the LDCs on
mainstreaming gender issues. The outcome of the workshop was the Cape Town
declaration, which constituted one of the core inputs into the LDC
submission to the EU in support of the efforts to tear down not only trade
barriers, but also gender barriers.

The other intervention that I wish to mention here is the allocation of R30
million to Technology for Women in Business, to support women using
technology to grow their enterprises. [Applause.] Khula, a member of the
department's group of agencies, has increased its support for women from
50% last year to 88,1% this year.

As part of the department's work on consumer protection, the regulations
governing microlending have been tightened up to better safeguard
borrowers. We all know that it is often poor women who make use of these
microlenders to feed, clothe and house their families. I can proudly say
that on 17 May this year, we initiated an investigation, as other hon
members have already stated, into the practices of credit bureau. We have
taken note of the hon member who said that the process should be open to
the public and that there should be a public debate on these credit bureau.
[Applause.]

Our objective is to create greater transparency in markets and balance the
interests of workers and owners, as well as the consumers of their
products. With regard to the SMMEs, this issue has been raised time and
again. I would contend that much more needs to be done in this regard. As a
department, we are looking honestly at the lessons learnt since 1994 in
small enterprise development, and we will be releasing a small business
policy document that updates the White Paper on National Small Business
Development in the second half of this year.

At an institutional level, the DTI has taken the necessary steps to ensure
its accessibility and responsiveness to the needs of marginalised groups.
We have established, in response to this, a new chief directorate for
economic empowerment, which will be responsible for developing strategies
and implementing action plans to empower black people and women
entrepreneurs in particular.

We have initiated a fundamental transformation of the DTI, in order to
boost the accessibility of the department and its services to economic
citizens, especially those that have been kept at arm's length from
institutions of Government. As hon members said here, we did promise these
and, indeed, we are going to open offices in each province which will help
us to deliver our services, reach out and interface with the public. This
will help us to be more accessible and have a presence.

As the Minister has said, it is not that we have no product. We have a lot
of projects and programmes. What is lacking is that they have not been
reaching the people that they were designed for. We have significantly
increased the financial resources to support black economic empowerment,
small enterprise development and other programmes, to address the
challenges posed by globalisation.

For the current financial year, we have shifted funds to make available
R557 million for the above-mentioned programmes. Of this, 58% is
specifically allocated for small business development. As hon members
heard, we no longer consider small business as an area for the small
business centre. Each directorate in the DTI is aiming and engaging, in the
core function in its everyday work, to identify those areas that grow small
business.

This is the path we have chosen. It is a path we are all committed to. I
know it is a course we all believe in. By supporting Vote No 31, this House
is supporting the efforts of a department that is determined to compromise
neither competitiveness nor equity in the development of South Africa.

The issue that was raised by the speaker before me is that in regulating
the environment, whilst we are promoting black economic empowerment, we
should also ensure that blacks are the real people that get empowered. I
think the Minister will deal with the issue of fronting, because we are
seriously considering measures to actually prevent this or to punish both
those who are fronting and those whom they are fronting for. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Mr Chairperson, the ACDP is on record as having opposed the
National Lottery and Gambling Act. We believe that gambling is destructive
and cannot contribute to building this nation, and this is becoming more
evident daily. Even the hon the Minister of Welfare has had to admit that
it is his budget that is funding the gambling culture in South Africa as
the poor get poorer, and the desperate are continuously enticed by
illusions.

The idea that gambling creates jobs is false. The lottery does not create
wealth, rather it consumes it. If people do not spend money on gambling,
they would spend it on something else, creating more useful jobs in other
sectors. The ACDP calls for a radical clamping down on licences. Where
there is a will, there is a way.

As the Liquor Bill will soon be on the agenda again, it is worth
considering that it is estimated that South Africans consume more than 6
million litres of alcohol beverages every year - close to 10 litres of pure
alcohol per adult per year - placing us amongst the highest alcohol-
consuming countries in the world. A large portion of the population does
not drink. Therefore, per capita consumption and risky drinking,
particularly over weekends, is very high among those who do.

Studies show that a repeated link is made by commissioners between crime
and substance abuse, particularly alcohol. And the road accident rate in
relation to drunken driving and drunken walking in South Africa is
staggering. Having said all these, it is clearly not unbiblical to drink or
even serve alcohol. However, drunkenness is seriously warned against.

The question is: What is the state's responsibility in this matter? For me,
the state does have the responsibility to protect the people from abuse.
Obviously, overliberal access to alcohol would mean enhanced capacity to
abuse alcohol. Therefore, access should be controlled. Licensing of
shebeens, bottle stores and liquor outlets has been of major concern to the
ACDP. These are mushrooming in every community. Our youth are vulnerable,
and communities have very little to say. The ACDP is therefore pleased that
Government is trying to address this issue. The ACDP would like to see
liquor kept out of residential areas altogether, and is therefore not in
favour of supermarkets supplying spirits and beer.

The ACDP acknowledges that the strategic objectives of the DTI are
commendable, and efforts to develop small, medium and macro-enterprises are
encouraging. We will vote in favour of the budget. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms F HAJAIG: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, the director-
general, other personnel and colleagues, I rise to support this Vote.

Programme 2, that is, International Trade and Economic Development,
promotes and maintains South Africa's trade relations and agreements with
other countries in order to stimulate internal growth and empowerment, as
well as maximise earnings through policy and strategy development,
programme development, monitoring and evaluation, negotiations and
relationship building. The programme consists of international economic
development, and focuses on South African economic integration and
international trade administration.

The 2001-02 budget is R28,04 million. Membership fees to international
institutions also increased from R3,1 million to R13,1 million in 2003-04.
I would like to limit my presentation to trade policy, recent national
thinking and South African repositioning.

Rapid technological development continues to establish new dynamics for
trade and investment. These present new challenges for the trading system
in developing nations in particular. The uneven consequences of
globalisation require a further strengthening of global economic
governance.

In terms of the Millennium African Recovery Programme, South Africa has a
clear interest in strengthening the international system in a manner that
promotes development. If multilateral rules need to be redesigned and
corrected, then so be it, as long as it becomes responsive to the trade and
development interests of developing countries.

We do not stand alone on this issue. There is a lot at stake for both
developed and developing countries. We need to find each other, and not
talk at cross purposes. South Africa and other developing countries
prepared themselves on a range of issues for the Seattle Round of the World
Trade Organisation - issues ranging from services, agriculture, industrial
tariffs, subsidies, protection, investments, competition, government
procurement, trade facilitation, e-commerce, and the list goes on. Our
interests will only be furthered if we present a united front at these
multilateral institutions - if we speak with one voice, each reinforcing
the interests of the other. Our strength lies in our unity and
preparedness.

What are we working towards? We want to increase the share of global
production for developing countries, thereby moving away from reliance on
the export of low-value primary commodities whose prices continue to fall.
We want to level the playing field and address any imbalances that may
exist in multilateral agreements. More thought needs to be given to
differential interaction between countries. One size does not fit all.

The Seattle Round provided us with many lessons and a number of concerns
continue to exist. These include, amongst others, the internal governance
of the World Trade Organisation - principles of democracy, effectiveness,
efficiency, and others - the strengthening of antidumping instruments, and
uneven subsidies which are utilised by the industrialised countries and are
harmful to the interests of developing countries.

I believe that an amount of US$340 billion goes to the protection of EU
agricultural products. According to the UN Commission on Trade and
Development, the export earnings of developing countries could rise by
US$700 billion a year - which is 14 times the amount of aid that developing
countries receive annually - if rich developed countries open their
markets. Furthermore, the Trips agreement must ensure that the benefits of
intellectual property are suitably shared between innovators and consumers
- the industrialised North and the developing South.

A recent criticism has been the increased introduction of nontrade-related
obstacles by developed countries onto the exports of developing countries.
Several rounds of trade negotiations over the years have seen the
liberalisation of trade, but let us remember that many distortions continue
to exist. We call for the reform of World Trade Organisation structures,
rules and decision-making procedures in order to create an institution
which is capable of preparing, taking, implementing and monitoring
decisions about the future direction of world trade.

There is an advantage in securing mutually beneficial agreements in the
negotiations on agriculture, services and even industrial tariffs. Change
is needed but we must also identify existing spaces that allow us to
further our objectives as a developing African bloc. Who are our friends?

It is important for us to promote trade between developing countries. A lot
of work needs to be done in this regard. South Africa must increase access
to developing countries' markets for other developing countries' exporters.
The department must ensure that any international interaction should be on
terms that benefit the region as a whole. We need to strengthen the
regional countervailing forces, like SADC, the African Union, Unctad, etc.

Our overall regional strategy should be to create a sustainable environment
that ensures equitable gains for all members of the regional economy. It is
not only about regional integration. Development integration goes beyond
tariff reduction and addresses infrastructure and production capacity
constraints. We, as members of this House, recognise the different levels
of development of our partners. Integration must secure mutual benefit and
interdependence.

Let us remember, and I cannot overemphasise this, that the products of
greatest export interest to the least developed countries, like
agriculture, clothing and other labour-intensive goods are among the most
heavily protected in the markets of the developed countries. This
undeniable fact was again presented in a recent WTO special study report.
No wonder the world's poorest countries have seen their share of world
trade decline by more than 40% since 1980.

The recent Unctad Trade and Development Report for 2001 calls for bolder
policies from all major economies if we are to stop the global economic
situation from deteriorating. I quote:


  Excessive financial liberalisation has created a world where
  international private financial flows have broken free from multilateral
  supervision and regulation. Systemic instability and recurrent crises
  have followed. But so far, effective answers have not been found at the
  international level.

We ask ourselves: How will developing countries manage a global slowdown?
And who will be the big losers? The Unctad report also voices its concern
about the present financial architecture and inadequacies. I believe that
this report reinforces the objectives of developing countries and provides
us with a credible and visible voice whose momentum we must not lose.

There is still work to be done. How has the DTI responded to the changing
and challenging international environment that poses presents both
opportunities and constraints for industrial policy and the local economy?
The new industrial strategy of the DTI is an integrated industrial
strategy. We must see the industrial strategy as part of the international
policy environment. The strengthening of our international position
reinforces our domestic economy.

In conclusion, we hope that the next WTO ministerial council, in Qatar in
November will, in terms of increasing globalisation of the economy, make it
necessary to further develop multilateral rules which enable all nations to
benefit from the development of trade, whilst respecting the diverse nature
and resources of the developing countries so that a balance is struck
between the interests of rich and poor countries.

We appeal to upon the WTO that a major focus of any new round of
multilateral trade negotiations must be the removal of barriers that are
blocking access to developed countries' markets for products where
developing countries either have a competitive advantage or could acquire
one, including tariff peaks and escalations and nontariff barriers.

Finally, I would like to thank the Minister and the department for their
sterling work. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, the Minister, Deputy Minister, the MF
welcomes the Trade and Industry Vote as it has a major impact on the
economy of our country. The aim of the DTI is to facilitate access to
sustainable economic activity and employment for all South Africans.

The MF is not satisfied with the reduced budget allocation of R100 million
for 2000-01. However, the MF welcomes the increase of R23,5 million for
2000-02, which allows for inflation and other external adjustments.

The MF compliments the Government for its budget allocations towards the
implementation of five programmes, namely, Administration, International
Trade and Economic Development, Enterprise, Commerce and Industry
Development, Enterprise Organisation and, Trade and Investment South
Africa.

The MF supports the DTI's industrial strategy, and we agree that a good
manufacturing strategy promotes investments and that there is a need for
the Government to strive for a balance between policy flexibility and
predictability.

Although South Africa has improved in its position on the world
competitiveness ratings, it still has among the lowest ratings as regards
human resources and skills development. However, the MF compliments the
Government on attempting to improve these ratings through leadership
programmes in an attempt to replace and broaden the older apprenticeship
system.

The introduction of the Skills Development Act is an important contribution
towards business development and adult education. The MF recommends a need
to further promote black economic empowerment as it is inherent and
coherent to the socioeconomic progress. This would assist to redress the
imbalances of the past and improve the quality of life of the poor majority
by achieving sustainable development, growth and stability.

The MF also recommends gender equality in the business sector. For far too
long women have been marginalised and discriminated against. Women have
been given stereotypical positions like being a secretary, sales assistant,
etc. They have been accused of not being intelligent enough to handle
positions reserved for men only.

The MF recommends that companies be more sensitive towards the needs of
women and acknowledge potential women leaders in the business sector. The
MF also recommends that it is pertinent to start with the education of the
youth, not only on skills development but also on HIV/Aids. The business
sector is losing far too many skilled employees to this epidemic due to
insufficient education and awareness. This in turn is creating a negative
impact on our economy.

The MF agrees that we do have many challenges to overcome before we are on
a par with the global market trends, but we can only achieve that through
empowerment towards effective leadership and delivery.

The MF support the Vote No 31 - Trade and Industry.

Mrs N R SHOPE: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, members,
distinguished guests, friends and colleagues, I am grateful for being
allowed this opportunity to give an input into this year's budget debate.

I wish to start off by complimenting the DTI and its Ministry for their
will to succeed in making this country a shining jewel of success in the
world of business both domestically and globally. I would like to thank
them for making us focus on global matters without losing cognisance of our
history and the previously disadvantaged persons of our country. For that
reason, I would like to express myself in a little bit of Xitsonga.

Emutini wa Muchacani na nsati, a ku ri na vana va nkombo. Vambirhi va vona
a va ri na matimba. Hi ku tirhisa tindlela to ka ti nga sasekangi,
lavambirhi va kumekile va dya swakudya leswi a swi ri kona, va avelana
tihomu ta tata wa vona, va tsona lavan'wana va ntlhanu. Leswi ndzi ringeta
ku endla xifaniso xa xiyimo xa rifuwo ra tiko laha Afrika Dzonga. Ku sukela
loko ku vile na ku tekiwa ka tiko, ri endliwa Kholoni ya matiko ya le
handle, ku ya fika eka malembe ya Xihlawuhlawu, lava a va ri na swibamu va
tiva no tsala, va kumeke va tiavela vona na vamakwavo hi xuma xa tiko leri
ra hina.

Maendlelo lawa hi wona ya nga vanga leswaku vakulukumba va khale, endzhaku
ka tinyimpi ta kholoniyali, va vone leswaku swa antswa vanhu va maAfrika va
hlangana va lwa kun'we nyimpi leyi. Loku hi kona ku vumbiwa ka ANC.
Nhlangano lowu wa hina wu lwile hi magenge yo hambana-hambana, hi minkarhi
yo hambana-hambana, ku fikela laha hi tikumaka hinkwerhu hi tshamile
hinkwerhu laha Endlwini leyi yo hlonopheka, ku ri hava nyangwa wa valungu
na xinyangwana xavantima hala ndzhaku.
Eku fumeni ka ANC ku sukela hi 1994, hi kume leswo ku na swilaveko swo tala
leswi faneleke ku lulamisiwa swo fana na ku tsariwa ka Vumbiwa, na ku cinca
ka milawu ya xihlawuhlawu, na ku tsala yin'wanyana milawu leyintshwa. Kambe
mhaka leyikulu leyi ndzi lavaka ku yi vula, hi leyi funghaka ku sungula ka
ANC, i mhaka ya vusiwana lebyikulu lebyi ANC yi nga kuma byi ri kona kwala
xikarhi ka vanhu vantima. ANC, tani hi Hulumende, u fanele a vona leswo
loko vana va yena va ri karhi va dya swakudya hinkwavo, ku fanele ku
engeteleriwa xixevonyana eka n'wana loyi wo ondza leswaku a ta dya swinene
a nuhela a fana ni lava ku nga khale va nuherile, hikokwalaho ka makolo ya
vona. Maendlelo lawa, hi ya vula Black Economic Empowerment. Handle ka ku
nyika vanhu vantima tixere kumbe swiave eka tikhamphani, ku languteriwa
leswaku tikhamphani ti thlela ti dyondzisa vanhu vuswikoti - swikili.
Sweswo i goza lerikulu eka Black Economic Empowerment.

Trade and Industry yi na ntirho wo tika wa ku ta na milawu na tikomiti leti
nga ta tirhisana na tin'wana Tindzawulo ku hluvukisa tiko. Loko hi lulamisa
milawu ya ku lawula mabindzu, vanhu va swi kota ku sungula mabindzu ya
tinxaka-nxaka ku kota vurimi, switolo, tifoni, tourism na swin'wana ni
swin'wana. Pulani leyi nga ta hi pfuna hi ku hatlisa, ku ri hi hatla hi
vona mbuyelo wa leswi hi swi endlaka, i ku languta leswi, xosungula, hi
endla yini hi mabindzu lamakulu ku pfuneta Black Economic Empowerment?
Xavumbirhi, hi endla yini hi mabindlu lamakulunyana? Xavunharhu, hi endla
yini hi mabindzu lamantsongo? Hinkwaswo leswi, hi swi hlanganisa njhani na
ntirho wa ku hluvukisa tindhawu ta le makaya Sustainable Rural Development
Strategy? Naswona, hi kambela njhani leswaku swilo leswi hi swi lavaka swa
endleka?

Mpimanyeto lowu wu seketeriwa hi ANC hikuva wu sungula ku komba ndlela leyi
a hi lava yona leyi nga ta lwa na vusiwana lebyi nga kula lero byi hi
vangela ni mavabyi. Maendlelo lama nga kona eka Ndzawulo ya penda xifaniso
xo saseka xo komba leswo swilo swi nga tirheka. (Translation of Tsonga
paragraphs follows.)

[Mukhachani and his wife had seven children. Two of his children were very
powerful. These two children took all the inheritance by making use of bad
tricks; they shared their father's cattle and deprived the other five
children of the privilege of sharing in their father's wealth. I am trying
to illustrate the economic situation of South Africa. From the time our
country was taken over to be colonised by foreign countries, up to the
period of apartheid, those who were in possession of guns and were able to
write, shared our country's wealth among themselves.

This type of practice caused our forefathers to decide to unite Africans
after the Colonial Wars in order to fight against colonialism. That gave
rise to the establishment of the ANC. Our organisation fought by using
different strategies at different times, until we all found ourselves
seated in this hon House, without any separate doors for whites only and
inferior back entrances for blacks.

Since the ANC came into power in 1994, we realised that there were a lot of
needs which needed to be redressed, such as the drafting of the
Constitution, and the amending of apartheid laws, and the writing down of
new laws. However, the most important issue which I would like to point out
is the one in regard to the significance of the establishment of the ANC,
and it concerns the great poverty that the ANC was faced with among the
blacks. The ANC as the government, should see to it that all people should
receive an equal share, those who have very little to live on should be
assisted in order to get the same share as those who had enough in the past
and managed to succeed through treacherous means. This kind of practice is
called black economic empowerment. Apart from giving blacks a share in
companies, companies are also expected to train people in skills. That is a
giant step in black economic empowerment.

Trade and Industry has a very great responsibility in the applying of laws
and committees that are working hand in hand with the departments in order
to enable our country to develop. If we improve laws that are used to
govern our businesses, people would be able to start different kinds of
businesses, such as farming, shops, telephones, tourism, etc. The most
convenient plan, which could enable us to achieve results fast in what we
are doing, is to look into the following: Firstly, what do we do with the
big businesses in order to assist black economic empowerment? Secondly,
what do we do with our medium-size businesses? Thirdly, what do we do with
our small businesses? How do we integrate all these with the Sustainable
Rural Development Strategy? And how do we assess all these in order to
ascertain whether what we want could be achieved?

The ANC supports this budget because it has started to show the way which
we always anticipated in order to fight poverty which is a leading cause of
diseases. Methods applied by the department show a fine picture of how
things can be achieved.]

The restructuring process is aimed at analysing its core competencies in
order to create a leaner, more focused, competitive organisation. The
process resulted in the implementation of a new structure to ensure a cut
in overhead costs, improvement of efficiency and achievement of future
value-added benefits for the South African economy and the region in
general.

In addition to this, other significant changes introduced were a complete
restructuring of the leadership, rightsizing of the corporate office,
focusing on the regrouping of operating divisions in line with core
competencies and capabilities. The strategy fosters and cultivates a
culture of shared value that will enhance the transformation process of our
country and position the Department of Trade and Industry as a respected
institution in both national and international spheres of the economy.

The results of the implementation of the transformation process have
already become tangible. The demographics of the department, especially at
the level of management, are increasingly reflective of the demographics of
the country. But these aspect must be speeded up. In order to accelerate
change, the department has called for numerous amendments to legislation
consistent with the Constitution and international protocols and
conventions to which South Africa is a signatory. As a member of
Parliament, I am bound by the Constitution to sell my country to the best
of my ability. The Constitution is very clear and makes it imperative to
ensure transparency and accountable governance at all times.

My speech is focused on looking at the Vote of the Department of Trade and
Industry within the framework of our commitment to a truly nonracial,
nonsexist, democratic South Africa where our people can take their rightful
place in the mainstream of the economy of the world. We need an integrated
strategy to avoid an explosion that can be detrimental to the development
of the ideals that we envisaged when we democratised the country.

Transformation and progress are taking place within the very complex
environment of our political and economic circumstances. The transformation
process is aimed at the empowerment of our people who were not part of the
mainstream economy at large. The objectives of transformation processes are
focused on job creation, managing the resources of the department more
objectively and efficiently, developing and strengthening partnerships with
business, labour, civil society and communities and encouraging co-
operative governance.

The initiatives taken by the Government may not necessarily be sufficient
to address all the issues, but remain vital to the development of this
country. We must ensure that these initiatives focus on the most critical
areas that we envisaged, namely the development of small, medium and micro
enterprises, the implementation of a successful black economic empowerment
programme, job creation and a spacial development initiative corridors.

Small business development is an important component of the economic
empowerment of economically excluded groups. However, organisations
representing black-owned business have an extremely weak financial base.
They are hardly able to attract and keep any meaningful number of small
businesses as members. Black businesses are still at the periphery of the
economy.

Opportunities to enhance black economic empowerment have been created and
support has been provided for black entrepreneurs and workers through
strategies aimed at promoting small, medium and micro enterprises,
workplace equity and labour standards. Since 1990 the private sector has
embarked on a range of BEE initiatives, including ownership strategies and
proposals to stimulate economic growth. In 1993 Sanlam sold 10% of its
stake in Metropolitan Life to Methold, a black empowerment consortium.
However, in 2000 black controlled companies accounted for only 1,7% of the
JSC market capitalisation. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs B N SONO: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister and hon
members, the development of SMMEs has been generally, recognised as crucial
to job creation. If successfully implemented, it can lead to sustainable
employment, black economic empowerment, growth and expansion of the
economy, whilst the RDP remains the basic policy framework to achieve black
empowerment and a better life for all.

With regard to Gear as the associated macroeconomic strategy, there has
been a disturbing relationship, ie that of massive job losses, less inflows
of foreign direct investment and low levels of economic performance. In
response to the weak performance of the economy, Trade and Industry
released a draft copy of their industrial strategy to provide a specific
operational policy framework, as well as insight into the overall approach
to economic policy. A wide selection of supply-side policies remain,
covering major areas of the economy. Examples are manufacturing,
restructuring of state agencies within the DTI, and agriculture.

The DA would seriously advocate that DTI give equal attention to the role
of demand pressures in the economy. At a wider economic level, strong
demands would fuel growth. Manufacturing output performance, for example,
is reliant on demand for its output. The DP advocates that the DTI combine
some of their supply-side measures with direct and indirect demand
stimulation. A case in point is the motor industry development programme -
its vehicle and component manufacturers must produce productively and more
efficiently. Though lower tariffs did help to boost vehicle demands,
policies like the motor industry development programme force a double
adjustment to programmes and economic decline.

It should be remembered that vehicles are basically only assembled in South
Africa, not manufactured. Components and original equipment are imported.
In terms of the MIDP, these locally assembled vehicles are regarded as
locally manufactured goods, allowing the firms to claim duty-free allowance
benefits. Because the duty-free allowance serves as a subsidy, it tends to
spare the supply of vehicles, profits and exports, without innovative
development of the related component manufacturing industries, along the
very belt of the assembly plants. This area could prove to be a niche for
SMME manufacturer development.

Agriculture issued a new policy document. Its emphasis is on the need to
launch small-scale farming along a more output-orientated and productive
path. However, the policy focuses on efficiency and international
competitiveness, trade and trust in the purported ability of the private
market to allocate resources efficiently. This holds serious implications
for the development of small-scale farming ventures. With globalisation, IT
and financial trading systems become critical. Again, SMME traders can help
bridge the gap.

In conclusion, massive infrastructure development holds the key to
spreading economic growth. Policy shifts towards SMME development will go a
long way in solving the economic woes of our country. [Applause.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, I do not think it would be wise to dwell
much on the doom and gloom that we have heard here from the hon Bruce. I
think we must understand that the doom and gloom he projects at this podium
all the time is testimony to the fact that for three quarters of the time
at our meetings in Trade and Industry he was fast asleep, and only listened
a quarter of the time. [Laughter.] [Applause.] I would rather ask the
Chairperson to listen to the voice of reason here today.

One of the major challenges that we face in South Africa to overcome the
legacy of apartheid is, indeed, to overcome the levels of poverty and
inequality in our economy. One such innovative initiative that was taken at
the 1998 Presidential Jobs Summit was the agreement and commitment by the
constituency partners of Nedlac, labour, business, Government and the
community organisations on the establishment of the Proudly South African
campaign.

The Proudly South African campaign seeks to raise awareness of our high
quality in South Africa and, more than that, the diverse nature of our
South African products, brands that proudly speak of the significance of
our local content, our fair labour standards and our environment. The
Proudly South African campaign draws our attention towards placing our
country's potential and its achievements first. It focuses on building our
pride, on raising and protecting our brands, from our flowers and our
clothing to our agriculture, and, more importantly, on our music and our
artists in this country.

South Africa hails its unique political settlement, so too this campaign
has the potential to awaken us to celebrate our uniqueness, from our art
and artists, the marula tree, the protea flower and, of course, to our
African attire. There are many more examples I can give. The difficult
negotiations that we have seen at the EU are testimony to the fact that
many of the goods and services we have in South Africa are quite important.

A survey conducted by Nedlac reveals that 75% of the respondents felt that
they would rather favour a South African product if it would create more
jobs. This indicates the potential of the campaign to contribute to our
much-needed nation-building - a common agenda.

Indeed, consumers are always looking for the cheapest garment, quality
food, affordable furniture, the best jewellery and the best shoes. However,
we cannot confine ourselves to these narrow ideas only. As individuals and
collectively we can turn our attention towards our own intervention into
the economy through the concept of the Proudly South African campaign.

In this House the process of the Proudly South African campaign started in
1994, in particular, when the ANC came to this Parliament. Every year one
can see the beauty of Africa and the beautiful African outfits that are
shown at the opening of Parliament in February. We ask that this proudness
be extended to an every day basis.

I must commend the Department of Trade and Industry for starting their own
proudness of South Africa and South African workers by having a T-shirt
made by Comfort Clothing and called ``DTI connecting'', showing what the
Proudly South African campaign is about. [Applause.] The meaning,
obviously, is that of connecting to the rest of the country and to the
world with our beautiful new logo, not that old one that we used to have
that meant apartheid.

As our economy has globalised and goods are moving faster, we should act
consciously in a manner that enhances our industries, our potential and our
businesses in order to have a very regional bias towards development. When
we launched the peace campaign a couple of years ago, there was a clear
choice that our people made. They made a choice in favour of peace, and
many of them bought the beautiful blue and white T-shirts. That was their
way of asking that there be peace in South Africa and demonstrating that
they were very proud of that T-shirt being made in South Africa by South
African workers. That choice, as a collective effort, is still being felt
today by the peace that we have in South Africa and the song that was then
sung: ``South Africa, we love you.''

So, too, as we roll out this campaign, we do so to close the gap between
the North and South on our globe, the developed and the developing
countries. Again, research was commissioned by Nedlac constitituencies
through the Fund for Research into Industrial Development, Growth and
Equity, and conducted by international strategy consultants Kaiser
Associates. The benchmarking aspect of the study considered that lessons
could be learned from the ``Australian Made'', ``Made in USA'', ``Butan,
Malaysia'', ``Buy Thai'', ``Buy New Zealand-Made'', ``Indian Brand Equity
Fund'' and ``Made in Italy'' campaigns.

In Australia, research found that there was a 90% recognition rate of an
Australian-made logo, with the brand having been built since 1980. The
campaign was revived by a relaunch as a nonprofit organisation in September
1999, and products carrying the campaign logo now represent the equivalent
of over R25,6 billion in turnover. Its success is underpinned by a binding
code of practice, effective complaints and enforcement measures. The
campaign makes use of a single logo with a range of messages, including
``You have made it in Australia'', ``Made by Australians for Australians''
and ``Buy your Kids a Job''. The Buy New Zealand campaign also had some
innovative ideas, such as the kiwi-pride festivals and celebrity
endorsements.

The success that these countries have had can also be enjoyed in South
Africa. Our Proudly South African campaign can also be successful and, of
course, have that impact on the economy, both for individuals and
collectively for ourselves. Very notably, both labour and business created
their own funds for job creation, and I am very happy to say, particularly
to the members on my right-hand side - but not politically - that the fund
they have created from their day's salary now stands at R83 million. They
have made a difference towards the youth in this country, the projects in
the rural areas, the HIV campaign and, of course, our women.

I can but make a call that the campaign take a Proudly South African form,
starting with parliamentarians. We should maybe ask comrade ... Sorry, that
was terrible - he is not a comrade! We should maybe ask the hon Bruce, when
Parliament opens next time, to put on African attire. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Mr Chairperson, as I understand it, the
hon Bruce regards communists as pigs. So if he wanted to be a comrade in
that sense, I might be supportive.

I think, generally speaking, there has been support for our budget, and I
would like to thank the speakers for that. I would like to comment on some
of the matters raised, because I think they are important. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER: Firstly, I think the hon member Ntuli and the hon member
Shope both raised a very fundamental issue and that is the ability to help
develop the rural areas. I think this is a very crucial challenge. The
issue is, what role can we play, as the Department of Trade and Industry,
in doing that?

Well, I think there is a lot that we can and are doing, in many ways.
However, I think we would have to accept that our abilities can only be
effective, at this point, in fairly limited areas. In the main, what we
focused on is the development of the SDIs in particular rural areas, and
here the hon member Msomi asked whether we have capacity funds for
assisting people to get involved in these projects.

What we have realised is that this is a very important aspect. We have
begun to hold more road shows and we do have capacity funds to try and
explain to people in those areas that this is what the SDIs ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members!

The MINISTER: this is what the SDIs are doing and these are the projects
that are possible. Our target would be to support those areas with more
information technology systems, so people could do that. It is not easy,
but we must do it. We support the call to get into the rural areas.

My appeal would be that the members in this House must themselves try to
actively play a role in the rural areas. I know there are many colleagues
and comrades in this House who are trying to do that. The main problem, I
think, that exists in the rural areas is that of people getting information
and knowledge about what can be done to pull people together.

If we take tourism - and this is a project that we are working on with the
Ministry of Tourism - one sees very few bed-and-breakfast type of
facilities in many of the rural areas that are predominantly black. We need
to work to change that. I think these are possibilities. We can change
these things. We can use the rural areas for far more agricultural and
tourism activities.

A point was made by the hon Van Deventer about exchange rates. Both he and
the hon Bruce were wrong on the exchange rates: there has not been a
precipitate decline in the exchange rates. In fact, the exchange rate of
the South African rand has very much paralleled that of other emerging
markets. And over the period we are looking at, the depreciation of our
currency is in line, largely, with the inflation differentials.

So as far as we are concerned, the depreciation of the currency has never,
at any time, been used as an excuse for the erroneous facts put out by the
opposition on the cost of the arms. But it is, without any doubt, a
positive factor for our exports. This is plain economics - there is nothing
different or complex about it.

On the question that the hon Lockey raised about whether we can do many
things to benefit the situation, let me just inform the hon member that I
think, as regards platinum jewellery, that this is one of the most exciting
growth sectors in the South African economy. What is important in jewellery
- and the Deputy Minister and I stressed this - is that we have to have
excellent design. But, more than that, we have to have extremely efficient,
logistical delivery systems.

If hon members want to see what a modern jewellery manufacturer looks like,
there are some in South Africa that are emerging; but if one really wants
to go and see some of the advanced shops, there are some in Hong Kong and
elsewhere, including China. The challenge for us in using platinum in
jewellery is not to make the jewellery as such, but to develop very
sophisticated logistical and sales systems. This is what we are working on.

We are working with the jewellery cluster. Platinum jewellery already is
and will continue to be a very important export for South Africa. As hon
members know, platinum has been exported and South Africa now accounts for
somewhere close to 10% of world catalytic converter production, and that
figure is rising.

So yes, beneficiation is very important and we will be looking at it. Let
me tell the hon member - and this I would say to everybody - that one of
the problems is that we, ourselves, are not often familiar with how much we
have achieved in this country. If, as the hon member is indicating, he has
a problem with competition, people must use the competition commission. Our
commissioner, Adv Simelane, is here. We have a very advanced form of
competition law.

In terms of restrictive or anticompetitive practices, it is up to the
economic citizens to use those facilities. Most of the attention, thus far,
is focused on the merger dimensions, but we must remember that the
anticompetitive practices are there to be used. They cannot be used by
Government alone: they have to be used by the economic citizens.

Let me also thank the hon Hajaig for an excellent account of the WTO
issues. She is correct, the WTO round is fundamentally important. I know
that she is going to Geneva, but I would make an appeal to all members of
this House to interact with our colleagues in Africa. We need to win the
debate as to how important it is that we, as developing countries, do
exactly as the hon member said. We have to work together to force upon the
WTO a developmental round.

Let me say again in this House, what I said yesterday in the World Economic
Forum: Do not underestimate the dangers of not having a round. If we do not
have a round, we will have a breakup of the world trade system and get back
to ``the strong are right and the weak are weak''.

This is a very dangerous time in the world trade system. We must overcome
what, we argue is an incorrect analysis, viz that it is in the interest of
the developing countries to stay out of a round. It is not. We are going to
be isolated, we are going to be marginalised and, regrettably - I must say
this very openly and frankly - South Africa would also move immediately to
open more regional agreements.
We cannot afford to be left out of these openings of markets, precisely
because this economy is extremely competitive and our future here and in
Africa, lies in increasing the levels of trade with our neighbours. So we
really would urge the House to support this move. We must move towards
getting a round that is led by the developing countries, and not reacted to
by those developing countries.

To the DA I wish to say that they should sort out their economic policies.
The first thing they should probably do is to get a fairly respectable and
sensible spokesperson on that. Secondly, I also think they should make a
decision whether they want to support the supply side or the demand side.
They should think this through.

The hon Sono was not told by her advisers how the MIDP works. It is not
correct to say that we are merely an assembler in South Africa. She should
go and look at the plants. The fundamental change in the South African
automobile industry is that we succeeded in 1994 in transforming the
production process in this industry, precisely because we are capable of
supplying higher quality international components to these industries. That
is why, for the first time, we now export built-up units and not only
components. Members should go and have a look at these things.

I would also like to say that I find it distasteful that we make rather
absurd allegations against people. It seems to me that there is,
persistently, an underlying racial trend to this from the DA. What people
forget - and no one ever raises the point, particularly Mr Bruce - is that
on the industrial development board there are white members who also have
major interests supported by the IDC. Has that ever been raised in a
question to me in this Parliament? Never. The only question that has ever
come from Nigel Bruce, who made no contribution whatsoever to democracy in
this country, is on the black leadership of my department and the IDC.
[Applause.] In the interest of his party, I think they should adjust their
spokesperson.

Another point that I should stress, is that if one takes the programmes of
this Government that have been implemented on empowerment, one finds that
these are very considerable indeed. The taxi recapitalisation programme
which will proceed is another step in creating empowerment.

I also thank the member September for raising the Proudly South African
campaign. This is an important and interesting campaign that most of us - I
believe all of us - should take as a matter of pride for us.

Finally, I would like to thank my team. As Rob Davies and others pointed
out, it is a young team of South Africans of all races and sexes. I am
particularly proud of the fact that my department has many people in it
that worked there prior to 1994 and are still working hard. They are very
committed to this economy. I am extremely proud of the work of my team,
including my Deputy Minister. We are showing people what a real new South
Africa is. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                           PATENTS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed without debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 11:42.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Transport on 5 June 2001 submitted a draft of
         the National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill, 2001, as
         well as the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services by the
         Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with
         Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Arts,
         Culture, Science and Technology in the National Assembly on 8 June
         2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     "Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal" Act Repeal Bill [B 30
              - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
              Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 22367 of 8 June 2001.]


         The Bill has also been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts, Culture, Science and Technology of the National Assembly.


     (3)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Trade and
         Industry in the National Assembly on 8 June 2001 and referred to
         the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
         Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 31 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              22249 of 24 April 2001.]


         The Bill has also been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry of the National Assembly.


     (4)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 8 June 2001 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


         (i)     Marketing of Agricultural Products Amendment Bill [B 26 -
              2001] (National Assembly - sec 76).


         [NOTE: The Bill was introduced as a section 75 Bill.]



National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


     Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council of
     Provinces on 8 June 2001 and transmitted for consideration of Council's
     proposed amendments:


     (i)    South African Boxing Bill [B 13B - 2001] (National Assembly -
         sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings,
         Committee Reports p 479).


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
         Recreation for a report on the amendments proposed by the Council.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

      Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote No
     26 - Public Service Commission for 1999-2000 [RP 135-2000].


     Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration
     and report. Referred also to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service
     and Administration and to the Select Committee on Local Government and
     Administration.

2.    The Minister of Education:


     (1)    Government Notice No 50 published in Government Gazette No 21996
         dated 2 February 2001, Regulations relating to the provisioning of
         educator posts within a provincial department of education and its
         institutions and departments' offices, made in terms of the
         Employment of Educators Act, 1998 (Act No 76 of 1998).


     (2)    Government Notice No 106 published in Government Gazette No
         22001 dated 2 February 2001, Approval for the extension of the
         experimental status of the pilot programme, health and community
         care in technical colleges, made in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (3)    Government Notice No 107 published in Government Gazette No
         22001 dated 2 February 2001, Approval for the extension of the
         experimental status of the pilot programme, hospitality studies in
         schools and technical colleges, made in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (4)    Government Notice No 259 published in Government Gazette No
         22154 dated 20 March 2001, Call for nomination to fill two
         vacancies, made in terms of the South African Qualifications
         Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of 1995).


     (5)    Government Notice No 415 published in Government Gazette No
         22154 dated 20 March 2001, National Policy regarding Further
         Education and Training Programme: Approval of adjustments to the
         Economic Higher and Standard Grade Core Syllabi for Grade 12, made
         in terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of
         1996).


     (6)    Government Notice No 416 published in Government Gazette No
         22154 dated 20 March 2001, Approval of an amendment to the
         aggregate for Senior Certificate candidates offering technical
         college instructional offerings as part of the programmes, made in
         terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of
         1996).


     (7)    Government Notice No 417 published in Government Gazette No
         22154 dated 20 March 2001, National Policy regarding Further
         Education and Training Programmes: Approval of the drafting and
         documentation of the National Education Policy regarding the
         Gauteng Youth College Programme, made in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

3.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.127 published in Government Gazette No
         22052 dated 12 February 2001, Regulations in terms of the Allied
         Health Professions Act, 1982, made in terms of section 38 of the
         Allied Health Professions Act, 1982 (Act No 63 of 1982).


     (2)    Government Notice No R.266 published in Government Gazette No
         22157 dated 26 March 2001, Correction to the Government Notice No
         R.127 of 12 February 2001, made in terms of the Allied Health
         Professions Act, 1982 (Act No 63 of 1982).


     (3)    Government Notice No R.44 published in Government Gazette No
         21983 dated 19 January 2001, Regulations relating to registration
         as a dental technician and related matters: Amendment, made in
         terms of section 50 of the Dental Technicians Act, 1979 (Act No 19
         of 1979).


     (4)    Government Notice No R.156 published in Government Gazette No
         22076 dated 23 February 2001, Regulations regarding the
         registration and training of Student Dental Technicians and
         Student Dental Technologists, made in terms of section 50 of the
         Dental Technicians Act, 1979 (Act No 19 of 1979).


     (5)    Government Notice No R.253 published in Government Gazette No
         22148 dated 23 March 2001, Regulations relating to registration as
         a Dental Technician and related matters: Amendment, made in terms
         of section 50 of the Dental Technicians Act, 1979 (Act No 19 of
         1979).


     (6)    Government Notice No R.43 published in Government Gazette No
         21983 dated 19 January 2001, Regulations regarding processed
         foodstuffs, made in terms of section 15(1) of the Foodstuffs,
         Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of 1972).


     (7)    Government Notice No R.239 published in Government Gazette No
         22133 dated 19 January 2001, Regulations relating to salt, made in
         terms of section 15(1) of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and
         Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of 1972).


     (8)    Government Notice No R.366 published in Government Gazette No
         22258 dated 4 May 2001, Regulations governing the labelling of
         foodstuffs obtained through certain techniques of genetic
         modification, made in terms of section 15(1) of the Foodstuffs,
         Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of 1972).


     (9)    Government Notice No R.228 published in Government Gazette No
         22133 dated 16 March 2001, Regulations defining the scope of the
         Profession of Optometry, made in terms of section 33(1) of the
         Health Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (10)Government Notice No R.229 published in Government Gazette No 22133
         dated 16 March 2001, List of approved health facilities for the
         purposes of performing community service by dentists in the year
         2001-2002, made in terms of Regulation 5.1 of the Regulations
         relating to Performance of Community Service by the profession of
         dentists.


     (11)Government Notice No R.237 published in Government Gazette No 22133
         dated 16 March 2001, Regulations relating to qualifications for
         registration of assistant clinical technologists and registration
         of persons qualified outside the Republic, made in terms of
         section 61(1), read with sections 24 and 25 of the Health
         Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (12)Government Notice No R.251 published in Government Gazette No 22148
         dated 23 March 2001, Regulations relating to qualifications for
         registration of clinical technologists and registration of persons
         qualified outside the Republic, made in terms of section 61(1),
         read with sections 24 and 25 of the Health Professions Act, 1974
         (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (13)Government Notice No R.394 published in Government Gazette No 22284
         dated 18 May 2001, List of approved facilities for the purposes of
         performing community service by medical practitioners in the year
         2002, made in terms of Regulation 5.1 of the Regulations relating
         to Performance of Community Service by persons registering in
         terms of the Health Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (14)Government Notice No 407 published in Government Gazette No 22291
         dated 14 May 2001, Nominations for representatives to serve on the
         Board of the National Health Laboratory Service (NHLS), made in
         terms of section 8(2) of the National Health Laboratory Service
         Act, 2000 (Act No 37 of 2000).


     (15)Government Notice No R.395 published in Government Gazette No 22284
         dated 18 May 2001, List of approved facilities for the purposes of
         performing community service by pharmacists in the year 2002, made
         in terms of Regulation 3 of the Regulations relating to
         Performance of Pharmaceutical Community Services.


     (16)Proclamation No R.16 published in Government Gazette No 22052 dated
         12 February 2001, Commencement of the Chiropractors, Homeopaths
         and Allied Health Service Professions Second Amendment Act, 2000
         (Act No 50 of 2000) from 12 February 2001.


     (17)Proclamation No 30 published in Government Gazette No 22287 dated
         11 May 2001, Commencement of certain sections of the National
         Health Laboratory Service Act, 2000 (Act No 37 of 2000) from 10
         May 2001.


     (18)Government Notice No 414 published in Government Gazette No 22293
         dated 14 May 2001, Publication of Explanatory Summary of the
         National Laboratory Service Amendment Bill, 2001.


