---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 June 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-06-14
---

THURSDAY 14 JUNE 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms A N LUTHULI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Deputy President officially opened the UWC-Robben Island
           Mayibuye Archives yesterday; and


       (b)  this centre houses the history of the struggle against
           apartheid;


     (2)    believes that this centre will play an important role in
         educating future generations about our painful past and encourage
         them to work for a united nonracial, nonsexist and democratic
         South Africa; and


     (3)    welcomes this most important project which is documenting the
         rich heritage of our revolutionary traditions.

[Applause.]

Mr R J HEINE: Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the SAA scandal will cost taxpayers hundreds of millions
       of rands and that it is the duty of the Minister of Public
       Enterprises to oversee the SAA;


  (2) resolves to request the Government to take the necessary political
       and legal responsibility and, specifically to remove Minister Stella
       Sigcau from Cabinet for her failure to exercise her responsibilities
       properly at the relevant time;


  (3) calls on the chairperson of Transnet, Louise Tager, to resign, as a
       matter of honour, for her dismal discharge of her duties and to
       remove the Board of Transnet for their serious lapses in corporate
       governance and their failure to perform their fiduciary duties; and


  (4) enquires from Minister Radebe why he has taken so long to become
       aware of the extent of the disaster and seeks his assurance that
       similar expensive shocks do not await taxpayers in other public
       enterprises.

[Interjections.]
Mr M F CASSIM: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises that reconciliation among the racial and ethnic groups of
       South Africa was never expected to be easy, given our long history of
       repression on the one side and oppression on the other;


  (2) notes that, whereas some of our country's pre-eminent leaders have
       sought valiantly and heroically to get our fellow citizens to reach
       out to one another and to respect and honour one another's humanity
       in a spirit of genuine Ubuntu, racial polarisation is neither
       diminishing nor narrowing; and


  (3) calls on all leaders -


       (a)  at all levels to work steadfastly and resolutely towards
           bringing people together in order that there is a common
           understanding of one another's languages, beliefs, customs,
           hopes, fears and aspirations; and


       (b)  in the political arena to support a wide-scale revolution of
           goodwill ...

[Time expired.]

Mr R P ZONDO: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that over 200 minibus taxis were impounded in and around Umtata
           for various traffic offences; and


       (b)  a statement by the MEC for Transport in the Eastern Cape, Dennis
           Meer, that the operation also dealt a heavy blow to perpetrators
           of taxi violence; and


  (2) commends the Eastern Cape government for embarking on actions that
       will ensure that traffic laws are obeyed and the safety and security
       of commuters and the public using this mode of transport are
       guaranteed.

[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  today four members of the Democratic Alliance's parliamentary
           caucus are absent to attend the funerals of murder victims in
           their constituencies;


       (b)  farm killings have increased again with seven farmers murdered
           in the past two weeks;


       (c)  vigilante necklacing of crime suspects has restarted in
           townships; and
       (d)  two days after Timothy McVeigh was publicly executed in the USA
           this week a TV2 phone-in programme showed that a shocking 70% of
           their viewers were in favour of public executions;


  (2) is of the opinion that this is evidence of the desperation of the
       South African public about our out-of-control serious violent crime;
       and


  (3) calls on the Ministers of Safety and Security and for Justice and
       Constitutional Development to come down from their secure ivory
       towers, protected at taxpayers' expense, and do something about the
       problem.

[Interjections.]

Mr J T MASEKA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next  sitting  day  of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the approval of the resignation of Judge Willem Heath, thanks
       him for his valuable contribution to society and wishes him well in
       his future endeavours;


  (2) expresses its concern that he will not be receiving any benefits due
       to him under the Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment
       Act;


  (3) further notes that this pathetic state of affairs smacks of the ANC
       Government's unjust dealings and the ANC's nasty habit of shooting
       the messenger when the news is bad; and


  (4) calls upon the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to
       urgently and appropriately deal with this matter and not to let his
       emotions cloud his judgment.

Ms N E NGALEKA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting  day  of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -
       (a)  a report entitled Cape Town's Economy: Current Trends and Future
           Prospects was released yesterday;


       (b)  the report raised amongst other issues that black people earn
           five times less than whites in the Mother City; and


       (c)  the Democratic Alliance councillor, Mr Kent Morkel, described
           this report as an eye-opener; and


  (2) welcomes the report and calls on the Democratic Alliance  to  embrace
       the poor and not the rich, join the Government's call  for  unity  in
       action to tackle the twin task of overcoming poverty and racism.

[Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that -


       (a)  despite assurances from the government of Sudan that they would
           cease air attacks against the Christian south, the National
           Islamic Front government has unleashed waves of artillery
           bombardments and ground assaults against Christian villages in
           the Nuba Mountains; and


       (b)  reports confirm that Sudanese government forces have subjected
           the beleaguered Christians in the Nuba Mountains to massive
           ongoing bombardment and military attack and that many villages
           have been burned, many people have been killed and communities,
           churches and schools are under attack and in the gravest danger;


  (2) commends Frontline Fellowship which has sent five teams to help in
       Sudan this year alone despite their mission base and high school
       being bombed nine times in the last fourteen months; and


  (3) calls on the Government to put pressure on the government of Sudan to
       stop waging war against its own citizens.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with great concern the decline and further deterioration in the
       state of the roads in this country;


  (2) realises that failure to recognise the economic and social importance
       of maintaining roads properly has serious consequences that may
       result in the collapse of the economy and lawsuits resulting from
       road casualties may follow;


  (3) prevails upon the Government to allocate the Department of Transport
       enough funds to be able to maintain the roads; and


  (4) calls on the Minister of Transport to ensure that roads are safe to
       drive on.

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock and dismay that a Zeerust farmer has employed
       children between the ages of nine and twelve on his farm to obtain
       cheap labour, and that while the owner's grandson rides his bicycle
       without a care, his peers are paid R25 per week to perform hard
       labour on the farm;


  (2) thanks the Department of Labour for putting a stop to this inhuman
       reality of the Sopieshoogte farm by forcing the farm owner to sign a
       compliance order to prevent him from employing children again;


  (3) calls on all citizens to end the exploitation of our children; and


  (4) recognises that our children are the country's most valuable asset
       and therefore should be treated with the necessary respect, love and
       honour.

[Applause.]

Mr R S NTULI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that surveys indicate the appalling disparity between rich and
       poor which is widening instead of narrowing in some parts of our
       country;


  (2) notes further that it is the task of the Government to follow
       policies which lead to growth and job creation, as it is only jobs
       for our people which will close the poverty gap; and


  (3) therefore condemns the Government for its failure to deliver jobs and
       opportunities for all South Africans.

[Applause.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) salutes the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and his
       Lesotho counterpart for signing a memorandum of understanding to
       conserve the Maluti-Drakensberg Mountains as a peace park;


  (2) applauds the fact that this project has received a grant of about
       R120 million from the World Bank which will serve the purpose of
       enhancing sustainable development efforts;


  (3) believes that this move will help to conserve our natural heritage
       for generations to come; and


  (4) calls on the Minister to give special attention to promoting economic
       development, and to address poverty and joblessness in developing the
       peace park.
Ms S B NQODI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that South Africa will accede to the 1997 Kyoto Protocol;


  (2) further notes that South Africa will also ratify the Montreal and
       Beijing amendments to the Montreal Protocol;


  (3) believes that this reflects the commitment of the ANC-led Government
       to a clean and safe environment; and


  (4) commends the Government for embarking on this most important
       initiative.

[Applause.]

Mr J DURAND: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the worrying signs of civil disobedience all over our country,
       and that to date the ANC Government has failed dismally to deliver on
       their election promises of free basic services to all South Africans;


  (2) further notes that only the DA-controlled Cape Town Unicity is
       putting all the people first; and


  (3) urges President Mbeki and the ANC Government not to make promises if
       they are not serious about delivering on those promises, and to start
       putting all the people first, before civil disobedience escalates to
       chaotic proportions.

[Applause.]

Prof L M MBADI: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the valid criticism of the Dutch Reformed Church against the
       Minister of Education regarding the self-determination of religious
       instruction at schools;


  (2) further notes the constitutionally protected rights relating to
       religious freedom and the sensitive matters surrounding the interface
       between religion, education and the youth; and


  (3) calls on the Minister of Education to urgently acknowledge and
       address the Church's concerns, as well as those of all religions, by
       allowing them to participate in the discussions on the matter,
       thereby adhering to the principles of transparent, participative and
       fair governance.

Mr K MOONSAMY: Comrade Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes reports that the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa
       (Numsa) will investigate South East Asian companies running
       sweatshops in South Africa;


  (2) further notes that it is alleged that these sweatshops pay workers
       starvation wages and deny them the right to join trade unions;


  (3) believes that the democratic Government has passed laws that
       guarantee workers collective bargaining rights;


  (4) supports Numsa in its investigation; and


  (5) calls on the union to pass on relevant information, which might
       constitute a breach of the laws of the Republic of South Africa, to
       the Department of Labour, so that speedy appropriate action can be
       taken.

[Applause.]

              GOOD WISHES TO SPRINGBOKS IN GAME AGAINST FRANCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) wishes the Springbok rugby team success in their international match
       against France on Saturday; and


  (2) trusts that the two-match series against France will be the start of
       a triumphant 2001 season.

Agreed to.

                               POINT OF ORDER

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. During the motion
read by the hon member Heine, he referred to the hon the Minister as
``Minister Sigau.'' Now I know that this is a difficult surname to
pronounce, but an attempt has to be made by all of us in this House to
pronounce the names and surnames of all hon members correctly. The point of
order is that the surname is Sigcau, not Sigau. [Interjections.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I know some names and
surnames are very difficult for some of us to pronounce. All I can do from
the Chair is to appeal to all hon members to try by all means to pronounce
people's names correctly. I am aware that it is not easy, but I believe
that we can all try.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 7 - National Treasury (including SA Revenue Service), and
Vote No 12 - Statistics South Africa:

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Mr Chairperson, hon members, it is with immense
pride and excitement that I once again bring good tidings and reflect on
the achievements of our economy, and chart the way forward for the three
departments entrusted with the management of the economy.

The theme of this year's budget is the sharing of the fruits of the tough
decisions, hard work, consolidation and reprioritisation of fiscal
spending. The three entities that constitute the Ministry of Finance have
played a critical role in ensuring that the policy choices that have been
made bear fruit.
Today we have an opportunity to reflect upon the contributions of the
National Treasury, the SA Revenue Service and Statistics South Africa to
our economic performance. We can be collectively proud of the fact that all
three organisations have successfully aspired to, and shown concrete
progress towards, benchmarking their work against the most rigorous
international standards and norms. They have become the important
repositories and training grounds of a growing group of black and white
intellectual talent and leadership. [Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER: Mr Chairperson, I am sorry that Mr Lee is making so much
noise that I cannot hear myself.

Together, these three organisations have undertaken some of the most
exciting, ambitious and far-reaching institutional changes in the public
administration, probably even surpassing such initiatives in the private
sector. [Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER: Mr Chairperson, if he were making any sense, he would be
heard.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Could we please give the Minister a
chance to address the House, hon members.

The MINISTER: These formidable changes have been clearly planned, carefully
managed and systematically delivered. Their efforts are in the service of
the development of a resilient economy, and a proud nation which can hold
its own in the most challenging of international fora.

There is ample evidence of a steady improvement in the performance of the
South African economy over the past three years. Real growth in GDP
increased to 3,1% last year, after just 0,7% in 1998 and about 2% in 1999.
Despite the sharp rise in oil prices and the depreciation of the rand,
price inflation has remained moderate, and in the first four months this
year we made encouraging progress towards our target range of 3% to 6% for
next year. Exports grew by over 7% in real terms last year and have
continued to perform strongly this year, despite the adverse international
environment. The balance of payments and the nation's foreign reserves are
in a healthier state than they have been for many years, and the public
sector borrowing requirement has fallen from over 5% of GDP to just over 2%
in the past four years.

Yesterday, the R150 government bond traded at 10,98%, down from about 13% a
year ago. The steady decline in long-term interest rates since 1998 is
perhaps the most notable signal of the fact that our financial
infrastructure is powerfully positioned for a robust expansion over the
years ahead. It reflects confidence that inflation is under control. It
means that funds are available for investment. It reduces the cost of
capital to businesses seeking to build new plant or purchase equipment. It
lowers the cost of borrowing for Government, raising the affordable level
of real spending on public goods and services. It represents a significant
decline in the price we must pay to attract foreign portfolio investment
into our bond market.

The interests of consumers are closely bound up with another financial
reform, namely the introduction of the inflation-targeting regime last
year. We believe that we are on course to achieve the 3% to 6% target for
2002, agreed with the SA Reserve Bank. Because we have little control over
exogenous shocks, such as increases in the price of crude oil, the
agreement with the Reserve Bank provides an escape clause, as I indicated a
few weeks ago, and I shall today release the letter which we gave to the
Governor of the Reserve Bank in February last year. The escape clause was
deliberately agreed on to take account of serious supply shocks and to
avoid unnecessary monetary tightening, particularly when inflation is seen
as an aberration, and to ensure that inflation is not the only thing
measured, but economic growth can be taken account of, notwithstanding the
shock.

Given the importance attached to the inflation-targeting regime, the
Treasury and the Reserve Bank have formed a joint task team to develop our
understanding of the inflation process, the implication of both macro and
sectoral policies and propose further steps in the inflation-targeting
framework. The new target will be announced along with the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement in October this year.

The healthy state of the nation's finances is a critical foundation for
growth, but it does not guarantee economic success. And so, our efforts
must now turn to the details of industrial policy, the provision of
infrastructure, investment in skills, the structure of our labour markets,
and the evolution of transport, communication and other services on which
dynamic growth and employment creation depend. These are themes that extend
well beyond our mandate in the Finance Ministry. But we have a modest role
to play, which is the subject of this budget debate.

Our influence is not limited to our own national boundaries. As a country,
we have actively participated in shaping the international economic agenda
through our participation in various multilateral fora. In chairing the
annual meeting of the Boards of the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank in Prague last year, we gave prominence to the pressing need for
democratisation of the international financial institutions, the urgency of
developed country reforms to complement those of developing countries in
attacking poverty, and the importance of measures to ensure a more
equitable distribution of the benefits of globalisation. We have called for
fair access to markets as an important aspect of the development agenda.

We have also been contributors to the economic and social well-being of our
continent and our region. In the past year President Mbeki has elaborated a
vision for economic recovery in Africa that rests on the foundations of
democratic governance, emphasises sound and sustainable economic policies
and puts the needs of the very poor first. Mindful of the message our
President has taken to the British Government this week, and to Westminster
today, it is appropriate that this House should note our own substantial
commitments to the development of our region and our continent. These
include contributions to the Highly Indebted Poor Country Initiative and to
the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility of the International Monetary
Fund. We have cancelled South Africa's bilateral debt to Mozambique, and we
will soon do so in respect of Malawi.

The National Treasury Vote includes annual provision for payments to the
African Development Fund of the African Development Bank, which provides
financial assistance to the poorest countries in Africa on highly
favourable terms. Our shareholding in the African Development Bank has
increased to just over 4%, and we expect the bank to play an active role in
supporting the goals of the Millennium African Recovery Programme.

Our largest contributions to neighbouring countries are not made through
the voted appropriations, but through a revenue-sharing partnership. The
Southern African Customs Union provides for transfers of some R8 billion a
year to Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Namibia out of a common revenue
pool. We are hopeful that a revised agreement will soon be given effect,
enhancing its development impact by reserving a component of the pool to be
distributed in relation to per capita income.

In our quest for setting world-class standards, we have proactively
participated in the various international programmes and processes. In 1996
we subscribed to the IMF's Special Data Dissemination Standards, and we are
one of the very few countries to have fully complied within the set
timeframe. We have also agreed that a report on observance of standards and
codes should be undertaken in respect of our economic and financial data.

We have now participated in three financial-sector assessment programmes,
all of which confirm a general soundness of the financial system, and see
no risks to macroeconomic stability. They present a broadly positive
endorsement of the South African financial system. South Africa's markets
are described as highly developed and balanced, Government financial and
monetary policies as sound, the national payment system as modern and
sophisticated, and the legal and regulatory framework as impressive in the
comprehensiveness of its coverage.

The fundamental financial reform of our economy is well under way. The
significant restructuring of our public finances will continue to bear
fruit for many generations to come. Because our public finances are in such
a healthy state, we are better positioned to continue to spend more on
education, health, social services and infrastructure, all of which
contribute significantly to the eradication of poverty and the creation of
a better life for all. What we need now is something that no economic model
can give us, namely a healthy dose of national pride in what we have
achieved.

We must state quite unequivocally that our economy has never been in better
shape. Let us now build on these achievements. We must also be frank about
the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead and confirm our resolve to
tackle them with the same vigour and determination that we have
demonstrated until now.

I need to briefly outline the achievements, challenges and plans for the
three organisations in the space of the next 10 minutes or so. It is the
first time that we are reporting on the National Treasury and it has been a
period of consolidation, reorganisation and delivery on a range of new
initiatives. We have had financial management improvements, better
budgetary planning and fiscal policy. We have taken these together and
started intensively in the roll-out of the Public Finance Management Act.

The new Treasury is in place and it is, clearly, an environment within
which learning, debating, reporting, analysis and interpreting takes place.
It is a very special place for young people to work and be part of a
greater set of intellectual activities. The amount to be voted for this
year is R9,176 billion. Of that, R491 million is for the actual work of the
department. Colleagues will all be familiar with the documents prepared by
the Treasury: the Budget Review and the Intergovernmental Fiscal Review and
this year, the new Estimates of National Expenditure. These indicate the
broad range of work and analysis undertaken within the Treasury.

The intergovernmental relations unit has a very important part to play,
taking responsibility for Budget reforms and ensuring that these reforms
are carried through into the provincial and local spheres also. This year,
the Division of Revenue Act takes a significant step forward in fiscal
transparency, setting out the provincial conditional grants in detail and
the various transfers to local government with allocations listed per
individual municipality. Over the next three years, the focus will be on
improving the financial and fiscal position of local government.

The Public-private partnership unit is now fully operational. Priorities
over the next year will include strengthening our financial regulation
office and bringing greater coherence to the related work of the regulation
of financial services and the banking sector. A financial intelligence
centre is to be established to address money laundering and financial fraud
concerns.
The asset and liability management division has not only met our targets
for our annual borrowing requirement and managed our considerable foreign
and domestic debt portfolio, but it has also introduced a more modern
approach to financial risk management.

In the period ahead we will also be focusing on an ambitious programme to
reform state procurement policies and procedures, the co-ordination of
implementation of the Public Finance Management Act, the Office of the
Accountant-General and the management of Government's central financial
management systems.

In respect of Sars, I think that hon members will be very familiar with the
substantial changes that have taken place over the last while, in respect
of both income tax and customs which are parts of the revenue service. In
the year ahead, much of the pioneering work done in laying the groundwork
for the emergence of a completely new service will begin to be implemented.

The approach of the Sars in uncompromisingly ensuring that tax and customs
fraud and evasion are brought to book will continue to improve the business
climate in this country. It will also ensure that the individual taxpayer
carries less of the tax burden and continues to benefit from the tax cuts
that we have been able to undertake over the past few years.

Today the leaders of legitimate businesses in the retail electronic
industry can praise the efforts of Sars and publicly acknowledge that the
tough and creative investigative work of Sars has created a level playing
field in the electronic retail trade for the first time ever. Tomorrow we
want the clothing and textile industries to say that, as a result of close
collaboration between Sars, the trade unions and the organised business
leaders, this sector has been cleaned of endemic fraud.

I can assure this House that over the next year we will uncover illicit and
unlawful activities in several sectors of the economy. We will work with
business and labour representatives in creating a new culture of
compliance. As colleagues know, in the financial year that ended on 31
March, Sars collected a record amount of R219 billion. This helped to bring
down the Budget deficit from the projected 2,4% to 1,9% of GDP.

Last year we introduced, in this House, the most comprehensive set of tax
policy reforms in recent memory. These reforms culminated in major
legislative changes, principally to the Taxation Laws Amendment Act, which
was promulgated on 19 July last year, and the Revenue Laws Amendment Act of
2000 promulgated on 6 December last year. Not only did Sars staff
participate in the development of the policy proposals and legislation, but
they also ensured that the trained people and technology changes were ready
on the designated dates in respect of the big changes that we introduced.

What is remarkable about the achievements is that they happened at the time
when intensive work was being undertaken to radically transform the Sars in
terms of its business processes, structures, skills profile, the
orientation of its staff and the technology supporting the business. In
January last year I gave my blessing and support to the Sars management to
initiate the change process.

Notable gains have already been made through the creation of war rooms that
have resulted in the elimination of the backlog of 2,3 million income tax
returns in tax assessments. This resulted in an additional refund of R1,7
billion to South African taxpayers.

Big changes are under way in respect of the processing of customs as well.
In respect of customs the focus is, clearly, on combating commercial fraud.
Customs will facilitate the flow of higher volumes of trade, including the
implementation of trade agreements, through improved clearance of exports
and imports.

The Sars management has adopted a bold and uncompromising approach to all
forms of internal corruption. Tough action has been taken in the past year
against both those who bribe the Sars staff and the staff themselves. There
have been 57 dismissals in the past year. Five staff members have already
been criminally convicted.

The changes in the Sars have, as their most important element, the
repositioning of all the people and attracting highly skilled and motivated
professionals to what is now, clearly, a dynamic and exciting organisation.
A number of challenges still remain.

Turning then to Statistics SA, as I said before, we need the right data to
work with and this is the role of Statistics SA. If we cannot measure it we
cannot manage it. The best way to characterise the transformation in this
organisation is from a point of decline that we inherited in 1994 to the
present, which is clearly sustainability.

The apartheid era saw a fragmentation of the statistical system resulting
in poor quality statistics designed to support the interests of the white
elite, rather than providing an accurate picture of the social, economic
and demographic situation of all our people. A major revitalisation of
official statistics took place between 1995 and the present culminating in,
amongst other things, the appointment of a Statistician-General towards the
end of last year.

The achievements are significant, but there is a need to support and review
the outputs of the organisation to ensure methodological rigour, veracity
and relevance. The newly-appointed Statistics Council will take on the role
of oversight and advice for this challenge.

Very importantly, up ahead is the work that needs to be done to deliver
Census 2001. We were privileged to address Parliament on this matter two
weeks ago. The roll-out is continuing. This very day, just a few hours ago,
the Premier of the Western Cape, Premier Morkel, launched the seventh
provincial launch of Census 2001. So, work is clearly under way.

The new organisational structure will promote a more responsible
professional organisation focused on the needs of users in three broad
areas of work: product output, statistical support, and organisation and
management.

In conclusion, the three organisations which are the subject of debate
today have demonstrated in practical terms our determination to transform
the institutions of the South African state. They have, planned and
implemented a wide-ranging set of changes and initiatives which ensure
South Africa a proud and prime place on the world stage, and continue to do
so.

They will continue to grapple with the challenges of creating learning
organisations; organisations which set and strive for the highest
standards; organisations that build a new cadre of professional men and
women who provide an energetic and creative service to South Africa.

Allow me to express my sincere appreciation to President Mbeki, Deputy
President Jacob Zuma and all my Cabinet colleagues for challenging us to do
more, better; Deputy Minister Mandisi Mpahlwa for sharing the burden;
Barbara Hogan and Qedani Mahlangu, chairs of the portfolio committee and
the select committee respectively, for their guidance, support and
patience; and also to all members of the portfolio committee here, because
politically, notwithstanding party differences, their support has been
forthcoming. I would really like to express my appreciation to all of those
active members and then to the three Directors-General, Maria Ramos, Pali
Lehohla and Pravin Gordhan, and their teams for the incredible amount of
hard work and professionalism that they endowed us with, and last but not
least, this House for its continued support and guidance. [Applause.]

Ms B A HOGAN: Chairperson, I would like to propose a motion to the House
that the Minister be granted a five-day leave break to recover from this
pathetic state of coughing and flu that we witness before this House, and I
am sure the Deputy President will grant such leave. Am I right?
[Interjections.]

It is with great pleasure that I recommend the budget of the National
Treasury for the financial year 2001-02 for approval to this House. Under
the well-acknowledged and competent leadership of the Minister of Finance
and his deputy, together with the capable and skilful management of the
director-general and her senior staff, this department consistently
produces work of high standard and professionalism. It has successfully and
energetically implemented crucial and much-needed economic, financial and
institutional reforms in this country, with the consistency and vision that
is highly commendable. This has resulted in a stable and sound macro-
economic environment, high levels of domestic and international confidence
in the management of this economy and its financial systems, and continual
improvements in the financial management systems of Government.

As a portfolio committee, it is always a pleasure to interact with this
department for it always responds in a highly professional and competent
manner, and seldom do we have to deal with issues of grave concern arising
from this department. Unlike many other departments, the National Treasury
does not deliver basic services to our people on a daily basis, yet, its
task is as important and wide-ranging. It has to provide the financial
resources for Government to do its work. It does this by raising revenue
via taxes, borrowing money, and paying back debt. It draws up the Budget in
consultation with other Ministries for delivery purposes and promotes
accountability through establishing systems for financial management
controls and reporting. It also plays a fundamental role in advancing
economic growth, employment and income distribution by formulating and
implementing microeconomic policies. Finally, it has to ensure that the
financial institutions of the country operate on a sound footing. It has
highly responsible tasks that are placed on its shoulders and it has
certainly risen to the occasion. In all of these activities, it operates
both in the national and international spheres.

This department has had significant achievements, when we bear in mind what
it inherited when it came to Government. It inherited archaic budgetary
systems, a collapsing system of revenue collection, serious distortion in
macroeconomic indicators and virtual international isolation with little
international influence. Over the period of time that it has been in
control, this Ministry has fundamentally transformed and modernised the
Budget process, introduced things that we are now very familiar with, for
instance measures for the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, significantly
improved Budget transparency, making much more high-quality information
available via various publications and the setting up of the systems of
intergovernmental fiscal relations, including the Budget Council and the
Budget Forum. Management of debt has been vastly improved by more active
management of the debt portfolio and there has recently been, the
introduction of co-ordination of public enterprise borrowing.

As regards taxation reforms, Government has introduced the most
comprehensive reforms ever initiated in this country on taxation reforms
and has undertaken the most complete and comprehensive overhaul of the SA
Revenue Services, which, during the apartheid years, was allowed to
deteriorate so badly. There is still a long way ahead, but an encouraging
sign is that Sars has consistently overshot its revenue collection targets
over these last years, and under the capable and determined management of
the commissioner, Mr Pravin Gordhan, Sars is systematically moving towards
its goals and being transformed into an efficient and capable institution.

On the level of financial management reforms, this Ministry has introduced
the Public Financial Management Act, which has completely overhauled the
manner in which Government manages its financial management systems
internally, and it is working progressively to implement these reforms. On
the level of international participation, this Government has moved from
being an insignificant player to a very influential voice in the
international community, as evidenced last year by our Minister chairing
the meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

In terms of microeconomic reforms, reforms initiated by this Government
have contributed towards stabilisation of microeconomic environment in this
country. These are significant achievements. We often speak of Government
battling to deliver. What we have from this Ministry is a Ministry which
has successfully and energetically delivered with very profound and
positive consequences for the society at large.

There are a couple of issues which I would like to raise in terms of the
programme ahead. Wisely, the National Development Agency and the Umsobomvu
Fund have been transferred to agencies which are better positioned to
monitor and oversee the work of these funds. We would look forward to
reports from these institutions in Parliament in the coming year.

Reform of the procurement system remains a vital step forward in that we
need to reform a system which has not adequately met our needs as a country
and as a Government. We already see movements in that regard and we look
forward to those reforms appearing before us in this coming year.

The office of the Public Investment Commissioner controls and invests one
of the most significant amounts of funding available in the investment
markets. We as a committee will be taking a closer look at the activities
of the Public Investment Commissioner as we believe that they have a vital
role to play in this economy and for this Government.

We are interested in the comments made by the Minister on inflation
targeting, and we welcome the announcement that the letter given to the
Governor of the Reserve Bank will be made public. We look forward to the
debate on inflation targeting as a two-year deadline draws to a close, and
we are moving to the next phase of inflation targeting. We also look
forward to an assessment of our macroeconomic framework. We have achieved a
considerable amount in terms of this framework, and maybe now is time to
assess which way we need to go in the future.

The amalgamation of the two departments of this Ministry, State Expenditure
and Finance, has taxed this department enormously and it will still be, at
least, another one and a half to two years before this amalgamation has
been completed. It has been tackled energetically and we certainly hope
that in the year to come this process will be completed. We bear in mind
how taxing, actually, it has been for this department.

We welcome, too, this establishment of the financial intelligence centre
which will be the final link in the laws which combat money-laundering and
corruption in our society. Our committee will be looking closely at the
implementation of this financial intelligence centre as it is a critical
part of the array of mechanisms to combat money laundering at our disposal.
Finally, we still question the inclusion of the intelligence budget in this
particular Vote. The Intelligence department has a Ministry now and we feel
that their budget should be separated from this. It should not be a simple
transfer from this Ministry.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the Minister, the Deputy
Minister, the director-general of this department, Ms Maria Ramos, her
Deputies, Mr Pravin Gordhan and Mr Pali Lehlola, as well as the whole team,
including the MECs of finance in the provinces, who have all contributed so
ably, so determinedly and so energetically to the wellbeing of our
financial systems. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, could you please lower
your voices. I can hear what you are saying right where I am. Could you
please lower your voices and give other members a chance to debate.

Mr K M ANDREW: Mr Chairperson, it is always a pleasure to follow the hon Ms
Hogan at the podium. I would also like to join in wishing the Minister a
speedy recovery. In economics it is said that when the US sneezes, the rest
of the world gets a cold. I have never taken that literally before. Perhaps
I thought it was a joke, but maybe it is not.

I would like to start by congratulating Mr Pali Lehohla on his appointment
as Statistician-General since the last budget and wish him well in his new
position. I would also like to congratulate the Director-General of the
National Treasury and the commission of the SA Revenue Services, as well as
their departments on the good work they have done over the past year. I
thank them most sincerely for the way in which they have assisted the
portfolio committee and its members. Perhaps I should also congratulate the
hon Turok on his promotion to speaking after me in the place of the hon Mr
Andrew Feinstein. Unfortunately, this does represent a further loss of
skills in our society.

There are three specific issues which I want to raise this afternoon.
Section 77 of our Constitution requires that an Act of Parliament provide
for a procedure to amend money Bills before Parliament, and it must be
enacted within a reasonable period after the date on which the new
Constitution took effect.

In October 1997 the hon the Minister submitted an inadequate draft Bill,
which was rejected by the committee. Since then nothing further has been
forthcoming. Now, five years on, we are in breach of our own Constitution.
This is not an incidental matter. It is of cardinal importance.

The role of Parliament in determining taxation and expenditure is a
critically important function. The current all-or-nothing, take-it-or-leave-
it approach to the Budget is totally unacceptable. It may suit the Minister
to retain absolute control, but it is inappropriate for a democratic
Parliament to have no ability whatsoever to amend the Budget. It is
disgraceful that, five years after the adoption of our new Constitution,
the necessary legislation is not on the Statute Book. It deserves urgent
attention. We cannot expect others to heed the Constitution if we in
Parliament fail to do so.

The second issue is of importance, because it tests the credibility of the
Minister and could affect large numbers of people. In the debate on capital
gains tax last month I said that inflation could have a devastating effect
on home owners if the R1 million exclusion on capital gains on private
residences was not increased regularly.
The portfolio committee was given a specific and unequivocal assurance that
there would be a clear undertaking in an explanatory memorandum which would
commit the National Treasury to increasing the R1 million exclusion on a
regular basis to take into account inflationary effects.

The Minister responded by saying:


  I also want to say that at no point was a commitment made to include
  increases to the value of property sold in the memorandum.

Further on he said:


  We made no commitment and, therefore, there is nothing included in the
  memorandum of the Bill.

What are the facts? On 9 March Sars tabled a document in the portfolio
committee containing the responses of Sars and the National Treasury to
comments made on the first draft of the Bill. One of the comments was:
``Provision should be made for increase of limit in line with inflation.''
And the response of the department was: ``The limit will be increased
periodically to ensure that it remains consistent with equity norms,
revenue needs and the general price levels.''

On the same day the National Treasury tabled a summary outline of major
policy changes. On page three of that outline the following is said:


  Commitment to review the R1 million cap along with other numerical caps.


  While a R1 million cap is reasonable in the current environment, some
  concern was expressed that the R1 million cap would devalue over time.
  The revised CGT draft does not address this concern, but the the
  explanatory memorandum contains a commitment by the National Treasury and
  Sars to adjust the cap upwards to cover anticipated inflation, revenue
  availability permitting.

This was confirmed by an official of the Treasury, who said:


  What we will do, in terms of an explanatory memorandum, is to give a
  undertaking that that threshold will be reviewed periodically, but it
  will be conditioned on affordability issues.

On 19 March a further document was tabled by Sars summarising the comments
on the second draft of the Bill. In this document one of the comments from
an accounting firm was:


  If this cap is to be retained, notwithstanding the comments of Treasury,
  there should be a provision - as was the intention stated by Sars in
  replies to questions at the portfolio committee on finance - that this
  amount be increased by the RPI on an annual basis to take account of
  inflation.

The response to that was dealt with previously by the National Treasury.
There is no doubt that an undertaking was given that the explanatory
memorandum would contain a commitment to adjust the cap upwards on a
regular basis to take into account inflationary effects, revenue
availability permitting. I call on the Minister to have the decency to
apologise to the House and to confirm that the undertakings given will be
honoured.

Last but not least, I want to refer to the problem of the unacceptably slow
pace at which money collected by the Fiscus, which is intended to assist
people in need, actually is distributed. In respect of matters falling
under the control of this Minister there is, firstly, the Umsobomvu Fund,
which has accumulated about one billion rand over the past few years but
has not yet distributed any of it - not one cent. There is also the issue
of the amendment to the Income Tax Act, promulgated in the middle of last
year, which provides for certain additional tax incentives for people and
companies to donate money to NGOs. This has not come into effect as yet and
there are organisations that are suffering, because donors are holding back
in the hope of qualifying for a more favourable tax dispensation.

These amendments and this fund are both supposed to assist in alleviating
poverty. It is unacceptable that when the Government wants to grab extra
money from taxpayers, it gives it the highest priority, but when it is the
poor and disadvantaged who are awaiting desperately needed assistance,
Government drags it feet and adopts a lackadaisical attitude. Paying lip
service to caring about the plight of the poor is no substitute for action
which would make a real difference to improving their lives. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Mr Chairperson, if I had known that the hon Andrew was going
to start this debate with personal jibes, I would have indicated that it is
one of the perks of Parliament to follow the hon Ken Andrew, because it
gives one an opportunity to clear up a great deal of misunderstandings and
distortions.

I work quite well with the hon Andrew, and I am very glad that his name is
not Nigel Bruce. [Interjections.] I would also say that if I had known the
kind of detail that he was going to bring up in this debate, I would have
moved a motion that the House adjourn for a tea break. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]

Let me say that one of the distortions that the hon Andrew has brought here
is about the ANC's approach to amending the powers of Parliament and the
budget process. Can I draw the attention of the House to the fact that the
ANC has done a considerable amount of research on reforming the budget
process. There has been a great deal of discussion, and this includes the
amending powers of Parliament.

We have completed a conceptual framework of the issue. The chairperson of
the Finance committee commissioned research and distributed - a year ago, I
would like to say to the hon Andrew - this material to the whole of the
Finance committee, including the opposition, and has received no comment as
yet. We want this process to be open and consultative. We want it to be all-
party, we want the whole House to agree, and we want civil society to be
part of it. The details of all these proposals will be made available in
due course, and the hon Andrew will have ample opportunity to join in the
debate.

In the very short time I have available, I would like to devote my comments
to the Treasury as an institution. What is clear - and it has emerged from
the speeches so far and also from my work in this House - is that the
Minister of Finance and his team has created a powerful institution for
good governance in South Africa. The consolidation of Finance and State
Expenditure, in particular, has created a unified department, which works
closely with the SA Revenue Service and which uses Statistics SA - although
it was part of the department previously - in what has become a very
powerful institution.

My view is that Parliament does not fully appreciate this department as it
is now, nor does Parliament appreciate the complexity and scope of the work
of the Treasury. It seems to me that we ought to do something about this,
because this is a new Treasury and it performs an immense role in our
Government and in this Parliament. I want to elaborate on that, but, I
first want to draw attention to some weak spots.

Finance and the Treasury excel at the big picture; they are not so good at
the smaller things. I want to give some examples. The National Development
Agency took a long time to be formed, and I think that it is correct that
it has moved to the Department of Social Development. Umsobomvu previously
fell under Treasury; it has moved to labour and, I think, correctly so.
There have been some problems in the special pensions area. This has
greatly improved now, and the Finance committee was able to interact with
the department and things are much better.

The not-for-profit issues have also been a bit delayed, but now we see they
are on the way to resolution. There have also been some problems, hiccups
here and there, with development funding. These are the smaller issues,
which have high visibility and great exposure in the public domain, and to
which the press pay a lot of attention and create unnecessary irritation in
the country and in the work of Finance and the Treasury.

So, I repeat that Finance and the Treasury excel at the big picture, but
there are some small issues, which I think we should get out of the way so
that Finance and Treasury can make the immense contribution they are making
now, without the irritation of those small things. Above all, I think
Parliament does not appreciate the full scope of the work of Finance and
Treasury.

When we have the Budget debate, the whole House is full, the press is here,
it is a great occasion, because it is understood that the Minister of
Finance is speaking for the Cabinet and for the whole Government. The
Minister of Finance correctly lays down broad policy for the whole country,
which affects national, provincial and local government. But, thereafter,
it seems that Finance tends to move into the background, individual
Ministers take over their departments, and Parliament begins to focus on
those areas.

Yet, Finance retains, throughout, very important oversights and financial
controls, and this is why the consolidation has been a good thing. There
will be more of this, more oversights and more controls, as we shift the
focus from macroeconomic issues to microeconomic issues, as were set out by
the President and the Budget itself. This is going to have major
implications for departments and for all three spheres of government, and
we should allow Treasury and the Minister to operate with the excellence
that they are able to do on those big issues.

Furthermore, with the Public Finance Management Act there is going to be
even more oversight, and there is going to be the need for even more policy
direction from the Treasury and from the Minister. We should allow him and
give him full scope and the full attention of the House, and the whole
House should understand fully what kind of department this is. It is a
special department, it has huge responsibilities, and that is the way we
like to see it.

My time is nearly up , but I should say that very recently we had an
example of the way Treasury and one department - the Department of Trade
and Industry - operated in the incentives for industry. We saw an excellent
example of how the macro economic responsibilities of Finance meshed with
the microresponsiblities of one department, namely Trade and Industry.
[Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Mr Chair, I will not indulge in the infighting between the
hon Turok and the hon Andrew. I will concentrate instead on the Minister.
The Budget allocations to the Treasury are fully justified. During May the
IFP supported the Budget in general, and complimented the Minister and the
department on a well-constructed Budget. We will now also support Vote No
7: the National Treasury, which includes the SA Revenue Service, and Budget
Vote No 12: Statistics SA. With regard to the Intelligence part of Vote No
7, which we will also support, that particular aspect of the Vote will be
dealt with by my colleague, the hon Prof Ndabandaba.

The Department of Finance has shown competence and professionalism, and has
gained the reputation of achieving its goals and objectives. The Minister,
the Deputy Minister and the director-general deserve credit for the good
sense and determination which they have displayed in adhering to firm
fiscal policy, and, at the same time, very strong fiscal discipline. They
exercise this discipline so well that many times they are unpopular with
fellow state departments. It is a common fact that they who keep the purse
strings tight, cannot be expected to be popular.

The significant advances that have been made by the lowering or narrowing
of the forward cover book is a highlight of the department. By improving
the overall financial position with the dedication that they did, we have
gone a long way. It can be expected that the finalisation of the De Beers
transaction will further improve and benefit their forward cover book.

On the monetary side, discipline policies are being pursued, and the doubts
about achieving the inflation targets seem to be unfounded. In order that
the economy may grow, we need to attract much more foreign direct
investment, whilst, at the same time, convincing our domestic investors to
do likewise. We cannot expect foreigners to invest in South Africa when our
own people disinvest. The recent announcement of the Minister about the
Government incentive scheme for industrial development projects is a major
step in breaking this logjam.

Preferential industrial projects can now deduct as much as 200% of the
investment costs for income tax purposes. It is estimated that the
Government could sacrifice as much as R3 billion of tax revenue over the
next four years in order to facilitate this incentive.

In addition to the normal depreciation rate of 20%, which has been taken
over five years, that particular industry would now be allowed a further
100% deduction of establishment cost, subject to a maximum of R600 million.
Not all investors would, however, benefit from this tax-free scheme, since
the majority of recently established industries would operate on a loss for
at least three years after inception. That is the basic average that we
know as applicable.

We trust that the Minister and his colleagues from Trade and Industry will
be able to announce further incentives that can also benefit these
categories and smaller enterprises outside the industrial sector, such as
tourism - in addition to the normal depreciation rate - something we said
could be done for these organisations. We all hate to pay income tax.
However, despite our personal misgivings, without a doubt, Sars is the
largest jewel in Trevor Manuel's crown.

Without the dramatic turnaround in the performance of Sars, particularly in
its revenue collection efforts, we would still be hovering on the brink of
the frightening debt trap. Instead, the large revenue overruns of the last
four years has not only enabled the Minister to reduce the country's Budget
deficit and reduce the national debt that the new Government inherited, but
has, importantly, also done much more for the country.

Sars has to be thanked for the reduction in tax rates and the increased
spending on social services. As a party whose constituency is largely poor,
the IFP acknowledges the contribution the Sars successes have made to the
lives of ordinary South Africans. Much has been changed to both the tax
base and the overall tax system. The balance, being equity and economic
stimulation, is always at the centre of developments.

The IFP believes that, given the numerous areas of tax reform over the past
five years, it is time to consolidate and to carefully assess the tax
regime, in order to ensure that the balance that I have referred to is
appropriate. While expressing gratitude for the redistributive aspects of
the recent tax changes - which the IFP has long understood - we also
understand the impact of tax rates and various tax types on the real
economy.

The Minister is, therefore, urged to now contemplate and ask whether the
business sector, in particular the manufacturing sector and its smaller and
medium business strata, is being given the tax stimulation that is
necessary. Taking into consideration the recently announced industrial
incentives and possible implementation of further incentives, I believe it
is now time that small business and tourism also received the Minister's
urgent attention.

The IFP also wants to congratulate the Minister on the improved role of
Statistics South Africa. People quickly forget that a few years back
Statistics South Africa was constantly under criticism and confidence in
the numbers that they produced was, indeed, very shaky. However, over the
past three years new internationally used methodologies have been
introduced and the quality of data captured enhanced to produce information
that is rapidly gaining public respect. People no longer scoff at the
monthly consumer price index results and the quarterly GDP results produced
by Statistics South Africa. This, in turn, adds to stability in the economy
as business, in particular, feels that it can trust the statistics and base
important decisions on it.

At a more general level, the quality of the statistics produced by
Statistics South Africa is vital to almost every area of policy
formulation. Quality statistics lead to quality policy in most instances.
People easily forget this, and mistakenly regard national statistics as
interesting general knowledge, something such as the ``did you know''
inside the Chappies bubble gum wrappers.

The IFP, however, understands the vital work of Statistics South Africa and
expresses its appreciation for the good and reliable information it has
come to produce. In this regard, the IFP wishes Statistics South Africa a
successful national census - to be exercised later this year - and asks
everyone to co-operate with the census as the findings will inform
Government how better to serve the people.

South Africa has so much to offer, particularly our financial, trade and
industry policies that go a long way towards opening up opportunities for
entrepreneurs. A tendency has developed where many South Africans complain
simply for the sake of complaining. If we could stem the tide of crime and
corruption, particularly violent crime, this country would be the best in
the world.

Few people realise that the recent weakening of the rand was only in
respect of the United States dollar. They tend to overemphasise this. In
fact, should we measure ourselves against the basket of other world
currencies, we would find that the rand has indeed improved. As an example,
not so long ago, the rand was quoted against the euro at R7,30 whilst it is
presently below R7. In fact, it is now at R6,90. Why do we not look at the
other side of the coin regarding the positive aspects of South Africa's
exports at a favourable exchange rate, which could make us more competitive
against the United States? If I were the Minister of Finance of the United
States, or Alan Greenspan, I would, indeed, have been more worried about
the escalating dollar and its devastating effect on their exports.

The visit of President Mbeki to the United Kingdom and his overwhelming
reception will open further doors to us. The delegation, including the 80
business personalities, is doing steady work for South Africa. The
President's statement - that of South Africa being an open economy and a
true constitutional state - is music to the ears.

Let us work together. Let us work positively in building our country,
instead of shooting it down in the flames of negativity. [Applause.]

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, hon members, the Vote before us today is no doubt
the most important of them all, as its aim is to promote economic
development, good governance, social progress and raising living standards
through accountability, economy, efficiency, equity and sustainability of
public finances. This Vote has turned programmes in total, and one of these
is fiscal transfers. It is from this programme that the SA Revenue Service
derives its allocation, and I am going to confine myself to this particular
programme.
The South African Revenue Service is charged with the task of collecting
approximately 90% of the entire Budget of this country. In order to perform
this task, this department has to be well-resourced and well-managed, and I
can only sing Sars' praises for the latter. The achievement of Sars, as we
have all heard from all parties, are uncountable. The most outstanding
achievement of Sars is the revenue collection, where it has consistently
exceeded its collection targets, of which we are all aware and have heard
from all the speakers.

The SA Revenue Service has achieved this through a number of efforts,
ranging from the improvement of tax morale to the closing of tax loopholes
and the tightening of the tax compliance measures. The processing of tax
returns has improved tremendously in terms of turnaround time and
efficiency. Records show that a backlog of 2,3 million income tax returns
in October 2000, was brought down to zero by April 2001.

The zero tolerance of corruption in this institution is evidenced by the
criminal investigations that have resulted in a number of convictions
amounting to a total of 121 years of imprisonment. Internally, Sars has
been equally firm on corruption. Up to five convictions have since been
obtained and culprits dismissed - of course, within the confines of the
labour legislation. Efforts to improve taxpayer services is given attention
by putting key performance indicators in place, and these are being
filtered down to all levels of operation.

Under restructuring, the Siyaka restructuring project is currently being
piloted in KwaZulu-Natal and should be in operation by October 2001. It
will be rolled out to other provinces towards March 2003. This entails the
establishment of processing, compliance and service centres.

With regard to customs, 350 additional staff are to be employed in order to
expand the capacity and reduce the delays. A mobile office is to be
established and procedures are to be aligned with the Kyoto Convention and
the risk profiling capacity is being strengthened at the customs
components. In line with technological developments, an automated system
called the Warehouse Inventory Management System is being put in place and
is in the process of being expanded to all state warehouses.

The implementation of the residence-based tax and capital gains tax by Sars
has commenced. Sars has come to the portfolio committee and provided us
with their implementation plan, which provides comfort that Sars are on
track with the latest changes in the tax system, particularly the
implementation of the two that I have mentioned. Sars has also advised the
committee that there are ongoing negotiations between them and the National
Treasury to ensure that their sterling work will not be hindered by lack of
funds. The current budget shows an average growth of 17,7% per year for
this subprogramme, reflecting the priority of building additional capacity
in tax administration.

Let me conclude by commending Sars, under the leadership of Commissioner
Gordhan, for being endowed with the dedicated team that has always been
available to the committee and the National Treasury that this healthy
relationship has produced the results this country needs so much. When
those who caused the mess fight back, we shall march forward to a better
life for all. The ANC supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
the South African economy is becoming an integral part of the new global
economic order.

During the past fiscal year the rand has weakened against the dollar, but
has retained relative strength against the euro. I will refer to the SA
Revenue Service, taxation that relates to the retirement industry and SA
Statistics.

The SA Revenue Service has made commendable progress regarding the
narrowing of the tax gap. I interviewed a number of tax consultants and
they suggested the following. The recently introduced Nitt system is
apparently having teething problems regarding the assessment of tax and the
interest that taxpayers owe. Apparently, the scheduled statement on how
much the client owes is problematic and does not carry the full outstanding
balance. The respondents also expressed reservations regarding the vast
amounts of printed paper they receive. The Statement of Account IT93 can be
more user-friendly and they requested that tax form IT34 be redesigned.

The tax committee of the Commercial Financial Accountants of South Africa
has suggested some changes to the format of the tax forms and I trust that
the Director of Revenue Services, Mr Gordhan, and the tax committee will be
able to discuss these problems.

Another problem cited is that in the revenue offices in Cape Town and
Bellville it is extremely difficult to establish direct telephone contact
with relevant officials. However, I was asked to mention that the legal
interpretation department of the Bellville branch has gone out of its way
to help with requests and enquiries.

I think all of us will agree that it is of importance that one's tax
assessment documentation is user-friendly. A further request was that the
hon the Minister and his officials look at the lump sum exempted from tax
at the date of retirement. The amount of R120 000 which is tax free has
remained constant for a number of years. The retirement industry is a very
complex one and articulates the needs of a very vulnerable segment of our
society. The asset base of this segment is at present affected by
inflation, CGT, estate duties and taxation on retirement funds. An urgent
request is made to the hon the Minister to review our present tax system
that relates to the retirement industry in general.
Section 11 of the Income Tax Act, which deals with the entertainment
deduction of R2 500, has remained constant for a number of years. A
constituent mentioned that this amount was less than his annual golf
subscription. An appeal is made to the hon the Minister to review this
amount as well.

A sound statistical, empirical database is of crucial importance to
accurately monitor economic growth. If affects the forecast of policy-
makers and influences prospective investors. Reliable statistics are also
essential for responsible proactive policy implementation.

Of serious concern, however, is that some of the recent statistics released
by the National Treasury are suspect. Ecosa reports in the Financial Mail
of 6 April that the percentage growth in revenue and expenditure between
the 1999-2000 and 2000-01 fiscal years was incorrectly reported. The
mistake was in the figures for 1999-2000. It is shown as 19,7% and 18,6%
respectively. In fact the increases were 8,7% and 9,3%.

There are a number of current limitations to our empirical data that relate
to the balance of payments reporting. Our present financial and economic
database is inadequate. To cite a number of examples, the last census of
the mining companies was conducted in 1996; the census for the
manufacturing industry in 1995; for hotels in 1994; and for wholesale and
retail trade in 1993.

The errors in South Afica's empirical data have important implications for
the economy as a whole. What are the real earnings from exports of goods
and services, if all transactions are not properly recorded? What foreign
investors look for before deciding to invest in a country is accessible,
reliable up to date representative data. The question we should ask
ourselves is: Is enough money budgeted for the October 2001 Census? It is
in the national interest that all role-players participate in this census.

Two other figures often cited by officials, politicians and academics
relate to unemployment and emigration. It is easy to hide behind
definitions regarding jobs, work and employment. What is a reason for
concern is the expanded figure of Statistics SA that at present between 5
million and 6 million, or 35,5%, of the total workforce can be categorised
as unemployed. We can go even further. It is accepted that unemployed
matriculants could be as many as 1,5 million. My contention is that it can
be even higher.

One of the reasons for the escalating figure of unemployment is the
seriously underestimated official statistics that relate to the serious
loss of skilled migrants, because skilled migrants provide work and can be
labelled as entrepreneurs. The present manner in which Statistics SA
sources migration figures from the Department of Home Affairs is questioned
by a number of research units. To elaborate upon this statement, Statistics
SA estimates that nearly 20 000 skilled South Africans left the country in
the period 1994 to 1997.

A Cape Town-based development research unit instituted a research project
called SA Network of Skills Abroad, Sansa. What they in essence did was to
investigate the number of skilled South Africans that had taken residence
in the five big destinations - the UK, the US, New Zealand, Australia and
Canada - accounting for 77% of our total emigration. What they in fact
found was that 43 000 economically active people emigrated during the
period 1994 to 1997 and a total of 66% of them were highly skilled
migrants.

One of the major shortcomings of our present labour market, in particular,
is the skills shortage. Is it possible to devise a proactive labour policy
regarding given needs, if one's information database is inadequate? A
challenge to all South Africans and to policy-makers in particular is to
cultivate a positive attitude regarding South Africa in the minds of our
large migrant populations abroad. Negative reports about South Africa by
exiles tend to discourage foreign tourism and investment in South Africa.

The national Circle of Sunshine campaign aims to bring South Africans
working abroad so far as to share their expertise with people working in
their fields in South Africa. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr M S BOOI: Chairperson, Minister, director-general, I have been asked to
speak on Sars, which is quite crucial to us since the commissioner has
given us our returns. It is the result of the work that he has been able to
do since 1994.

When we came into Government in 1994, we established a number of
commissions to make recommendations to the new Government. One of those
recommendations was to deal with the issues of the autonomy of tax
collection. That is when the SA Revenue Service came into being.

Since the Margo commission recommendations, we need to look at how far we
have gone. Have the institutions been built to the rectify capacity and
have the right personnel been found? The state of matters or problems that
were attributed to the performance of the commission were condemned by the
Auditor-General in his report in 1992. He raised the issue of inefficiency
and shortages of personnel with appropriate experience and qualifications.

The issue of the lack of autonomy of the revenue offices related to the
power to make appointments, to determine the grade of persons appointed and
associated salary scales and to effect promotions and the filling of
vacancies. It is very important for us to understand the role of the SA
Revenue Service. They have to design a proper infrastructure that can
handle the intricate and sensitive task of evoking proper responses from
taxpayers. These responsible officials must have at their disposal
expertise and an extraordinarily broad range of experts in commerce and
industry to take cognisance of our diversity.

Billions of rands are handled by these revenue offices and failure to
effect revenue collection effectively threatens the sustainability of
Government's social and economic spending. It is very crucial for the ANC
to take cognisance of the fact that this is not just growth on its own. It
is not a responsibility that came about on its own. It came out of the
efforts and the good policies of the ANC. The ANC has to play its role and
keep its eyes on the performance of the South African Revenue Service.

What are the issues that Sars is faced with and what is it supposed to be
doing? There is continued dualism in the national economy. The population
is growing. There is a culture of low tax morality, high levels of
unemployment and increased demands for improved delivery.

What are the other things that that SA Revenue Service has shown us that it
is able to do under Pravin Gordhan? Pravin Gordhan has been able to
introduce a new management system. This system has been able to produce the
money that is needed by the community and South African society. The other
issue that Pravin Gordhan has been able to tackle is the culture of not
paying and not caring. He has also been able to address the process, ie how
we can continue the process and ensure that everyone gets what they want.

Before I leave the podium, there is a crucial issue that I need to tackle,
and I will do so in Afrikaans. I will do so in simple terms because it is
very important to me to reflect upon this. Even the hon Ken Andrew has
talked about the poor.

Terwyl ons Minister op nasionale vlak belasting vir ons bejaardes besnoei,
doen die DA of die Nuwe NP in die Wes-Kaap onder die leiding van Peter
Marais die teenoorgestelde. Hulle is nog besig om te diskrimineer teen die
armes, bejaardes en gestremdes.

As gevolg van die DA se begroting in Kaapstad, en hulle belastingtariewe,
betaal arm gebiede soos Belhar, Guguletu, Langa en Kewtown nog steeds
duurder belastingtariewe in rand as Bishopscourt, Clifton, Bantrybaai en
Plattekloof. Dit is duidelik dat die DP en die Nuwe NP geen gevoel het vir
die armes nie, en voortgaan om net die belange van die rykes en die meeste
wit inwoners te bevorder.

In die tyd van ANC-beheer van die Tygerbergse en Kaapstadse munisipaliteite
is daar afslagtariewe vir gestremdes en bejaardes ingestel. Peter Marais en
die DA bewys weer eens deur hulle begroting dat hulle glad nie omgee vir
ons bejaardes en gestremdes nie, want hulle het nie hierdie afslag vir
bejaardes uitgebrei na die hele stad nie. Die gevolg is dat ons mense net
eenvoudig sal móét verseker dat dit voortgesit word! (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Whilst our Minister is reducing tax for our elderly at national level, the
DA or the New NP in the Western Cape, under the leadership of Peter Marais,
are doing the opposite. They are still discriminating against the poor, the
elderly and the disabled.

Due to the budget of the DA in Cape Town, and their tax tariffs, poor areas
such as Belhar, Guguletu, Langa and Kewtown are still paying higher tax
tariffs in rands than Bishopscourt, Clifton, Bantry Bay and Plattekloof. It
is clear that the DP and the New NP have no compassion for the poor, and
are continuing to further only the interests of the wealthy and of most
white inhabitants.

During the time that the ANC controlled the Tygerberg and Cape Town
municipalities discount tariffs were introduced for the disabled and the
elderly. Peter Marais and the DA are once again proving with their budget
that they do not care about our elderly and disabled, because they have not
extended this discount to the elderly in the whole city. Consequently our
people will simply have to ensure that this is continued!]

Ken Andrew says that the Minister is doing nothing for the poor. What I
want to point out is that exactly the opposite is taking place in the
Western Cape. A lot of rates are being raised in the Western Cape. This
specifically happens in poor areas. This is being done by the DP and the
New NP and they continue do so under the mayorship of Peter Marais. They do
not attend to the plight of the poor at all. It is therefore quite shocking
when they stand on platforms and make sure that they are seen as standing
with the poor.

During last year's elections campaign, they continued expressing the view
that they were for the poor. But now that they are in power, none among us
is able to bear testimony. The people in Manenberg are not able to bear
testimony because crime is being attended to only in the urban areas of
Cape Town. The way rates are being raised helps people in areas such as
Clifton.

It is therefore quite shocking that Ken Andrew comes here and claims that
he speaks on behalf of the poor. It is again quite shocking that Ken Andrew
claims that they are doing as much as they can for the poor. The examples
that they have set up in the DA-run Western Cape continue to show that in
terms of performance, the DA is unable to do what the poor expect from it.
[Interjections.]

I want to inform Ken Andrew that the Government has provided the
infrastructure, but the DA is allowing Peter Marais to destroy what has
been put in place by the Government in the past. The DA should ensure that
Peter Marais does not do what the DA is unable to do. The DA must convince
Peter Marais to improve the lives of all people, not only his own or those
of only a few people. He is failing on the issue of the naming of streets.
He is wasting the taxpayers' money. This is one issue we should talk about.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, on 25 May last
year, when we debated the Votes of the departments that fall under the
Ministry of Finance, we used the opportunity to draw to the attention of
the National Assembly some important policy matters that faced us and
undertook to report back to this House on progress as we dealt with them.

This debate provides us with such an opportunity, and to us it is of great
importance and a pleasure to honour that commitment. The first of these
policy matters was that of procurement reform. We indicated that we were
grappling with fundamental questions about the model for a procurement
system, in the light of the more mature provincial government structures
and systems and the existence of the Public Finance Management Act, PFMA,
which devolves more managerial flexibility to heads of departments. We
posed the question as to whether we should still retain a highly
centralised and rules-driven system as our model for procurement.

The purpose of the PFMA is to introduce a system of sound financial
management which focuses on outputs and responsibilities. It compels an
accounting officer to establish and maintain an appropriate procurement and
provision the system which is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and
cost-effective.

It became obvious that there was no complementarity between the PFMA and
the procurement. In fact, implementation of the PFMA created an ideal
situation to expedite public-sector procurement reform and to align the
procurement system with the spirit and purpose of the PFMA.

Ultimately, it became clear that the retention of a highly centralised
system of procurement would undermine a fundamental tenet of the PFMA that
sought to enable managers to manage, but hold them accountable for outputs.
Procurements constitutes a substantial portion of the expenditure of
Government departments.

Therefore, we have developed a procurement system that will decentralise
and devolve the function directly to departments. Cabinet has since
approved that the National Treasury and three other departments be used as
pilot organisations for the implementation of the new proposed procurement
system that will be in line with the PFMA. As departments implement the new
procurement methods, they will be exempted from the jurisdiction of the
State Tender Board.

Ultimately, the present system of the national and provincial tender board
and their supporting offices will be phased out and the various tender
board Acts will be repealed. As implementation progresses, accounting
officers will become fully responsible for their respective departments'
procurement and will need to put in place procurement procedures which will
be drawn from, and be consistent with Government's general procurement
guidelines. The National Treasury is to provide advice and assistance to
all departments regarding implementation issues, including training of the
relevant officials.

Government is moving its Public Service towards a more business-focused
environment in which, within a given set of resources, heads of department
have the flexibility to manage their organisations in order to achieve set
outputs against which performance will be measured. Procurement is one
input towards the achievement of outputs and outcomes.

In most organisations, money spent on procurement is the next highest
outlay after human resources. That means that procurement itself has to be
subjected to a much closer examination to determine, firstly, the degree to
which its inputs contribute directly to the desired outputs and outcomes -
in other words, effectiveness - and, secondly, whether it can be done in a
better way to achieve internal cost savings or efficiency.

Proper and successful government procurement rests upon core principles of
behaviour, and those principles have now been incorporated into
Government's General Procurement Guidelines which were issued by the
Minister of Finance. These will serve as the central framework within which
all departments must operate, and will ensure that there is value for
money; open and effective competition; ethics and fair dealings;
accountability and reporting; and equity.

On the question of equity, Parliament has approved the Preferential
Procurement Policy Framework Act. Draft regulations supporting this Act
have been prepared and will be promulgated once they have been approved by
the Minister of Finance.

The second policy matter that we raised last year was that of how best to
position the Government's Employees Pension Fund and the Public Investment
Commission, which currently exist as two separate entities that are
governed by separate legislation. Since then, Cabinet has given approval
for a review of the organisational structure and institutional capacity of
the PIC and the GEPF, which includes an investigation of the desirability
of integrating the two entities into one agency. An important part of this
work entails an evaluation and incorporation of the findings of a fact-
finding study tour to Europe and the USA which was undertaken in August and
September 1999, with a view to investigate best practice as regards public
sector benefits administration and investment.

The salient points of that investigation are that the three largest
retirement funds in the world are managed by nonprofit government agencies,
the main features of which are autonomy from government, with management of
the agencies answerable to a board of trustees who have the ultimate
responsibility, and that government exercises indirect control of the
agencies by appointing half of the trustees. The senior management are
employed on a contract basis, and the other staff remain and are
remunerated as civil servants, with a view to attracting highly skilled and
experienced personnel at management level.
The organisational structure provides for investment and benefit
administration as the core functions of the agencies. Generally, the
agencies are regarded as being in the business of providing retirement and
health care benefits to government employees in an efficient and cost-
effective manner, and whose performance is constantly compared with that of
equivalent organisations in the private sector. Among other advantages, the
creation of an agency is seen as creating the flexibility to structure
agency staff through appropriate remuneration, contracts and performance-
related pay.

In the context of examining all these issues, there are a number of
questions that arise. Chiefly, it is how the GEPF and the PIC - which
constitute the largest pension fund and asset manager in the country - can,
in investing the funds under their control, contribute to important
national economic objectives such as human resource development, SMME
development, infrastructure development, black economic empowerment, and so
on.

What the practice and experience elsewhere demonstrates is that a
comprehensive investment policy must be the framework within which such
objectives can be met. This applies equally with respect to the Isibaya
Fund - which was established following an amendment to the Public
Investment Commission Act - to allow investment of a portion of funds under
its management for infrastructure and social responsibility programmes; the
investment of funds towards these objectives must be part of such a
comprehensive investment policy framework. I am happy to indicate that
substantial work has been undertaken with regard to both matters.

In this connection, a further matter that arises is that the development of
a comprehensive investment policy will, of necessity, require a review of
the portfolio management agreements entered into in 1995 with five major
private sector asset managers. Already, there are clear weaknesses that
have been identified in the agreements in their current form in the areas
of the terms of appointment, remuneration, investment guidelines and
investment performance management. In the meantime - and while all this
work is in progress - we have found it prudent to promote closer co-
operation and integration between the GEPF and the PIC, such as in areas of
human resources and information technology. Parliament will be kept abreast
of developments, as decisions are taken and implementation gets under way.

The third area which we referred to last year was that of financial
regulation. The critical challenge facing the South African financial
sector is that of providing appropriate and sufficient access to banking
and finance for all the people of South Africa. Current South African
banking legislation is in line with international standards, but makes
access to finance among low-income groups difficult.

The Ministry is contemplating an approach to making affordable financial
services accessible to all sections of the population based not only on the
development of a new legislative framework, but also on broadening the
scope of the existing regulatory framework to accommodate informal and
formal providers of financial services to the under-banked population. Over
the year, this approach will be fleshed out and discussed with relevant
stakeholders. With regard to consumer protection, there is also work that
is going on to examine a voluntary banking code of practice, with a view to
improving it and improving compliance with it by institutions.
There is a range of pieces of legislation that will be tabled during the
course of this year that are aimed at enhancing the financial and
regulatory framework in the country, namely, inter alia, the Pension Funds
Amendment Bill of 2001, which clarifies the position of pension funds,
furnishing guarantees in addition to granting loans for home loan purposes,
broadening the concept of home ownership and providing for the deduction
from the benefits of members amounts due in respect of guarantees and loans
in cases of default on loan repayment and transfers to other funds. We will
also be tabling the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Bill,
which creates a new regulatory framework for the rendering of financial
advisory and intermediary services to institutional and private clients.

Within the area of financial regulation, a further matter we highlighted as
work in progress last year was money laundering. We have since tabled in
Parliament the Financial Intelligence Centre Bill, which is currently
before the joint Portfolio Committees on Finance and Justice.

The Bill that we have tabled and the process that is taking place under the
auspices of the committees will challenge all of us in a number of ways,
such as ensuring a proper and best possible location for the Financial
Intelligence Centre; achieving a close and co-operative relationship among
all the relevant stakeholders; and implementation which will ensure a quick
process to get the centre up and running. We welcome the vigorous and
intense debate that has been generated by this process and will work
closely with the committees to ensure the best possible outcome.

Again, within the area of financial regulation we indicated last year as
work in progress legislation to regulate the disbursement of surplus funds
that accumulated within the pension funds. We have since tabled the Pension
Funds Second Amendment Bill which deals with this matter. I must, however,
indicate that our best efforts to achieve consensus between labour and
business, both in Nedlac and outside, were unsuccessful.

Therefore, in the end, we proceeded to legislate, but taking into account
the views expressed by both sides which we sought to incorporate, as far as
possible, as we worked to finalise the Bill. Quite obviously, Parliament
must expect that when the Bill is finally served before it, the
participation and the representations will reflect the fact that the two
key stakeholders still stand far apart on this matter.

The final point concerns on the accounting profession, which also falls
under our responsibility. I just want to say that a process, which started
some ten years ago, has almost reached a point of finality in that a final
draft has been tabled before us. However, there are still areas in respect
of which there has not been 100% agreement, and areas in which we still
have some concerns. As far as those are concerned, we will try to make the
best possible policy choices taking into account experience and practice
elsewhere. We also hope to table the draft accountancy profession Bill
later this year. The final point that I would like to make ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr T R MOFOKENG: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members, the Budget Vote
for Statistics SA was presented by the Minister of Finance here today to
Parliament against the background and precised data of Statistic SA. I
would like to speak more on Statistic SA. This debate has been brought to
Parliament against the background and data of Statistics SA, which made it
possible for steady and easy economic growth to be achieved and renewed
focus in public policy on microeconomic and structural reforms.

We call for co-operation between Statistic SA, the citizens of the country,
the private sector, the three spheres of Government and the Government
institutions. This is essential for a successful statistical system.
Without the continued co-operation and goodwill, the timely release of the
relevant and reliable official statistics will not be possible.

Consciously, it must be borne in mind that without proper and reliable
national statistics it would be impossible for the Government, the private
sector and the other role-players to plan properly and to develop
appropriate policies. It is for these reasons that we must provide adequate
resources for Statistics SA. This is more important now, in the light of
the fact that Statistics SA will be involved in the major sales operations
before the end of this year.

Let me deal with interesting facts about Statistics SA on economical
issues. With regard to microeconomic indicators, the seasonally adjusted
estimates of real gross domestic products at the market prices for the
first quarter of 2001 increased by an annual rate of 2% compared to the
fourth quarter of the year 2000. The official inflation rate, for example,
the annual rate of change in the Consumer Price Index, was 6,5%. The
Production Price Index reflected an annual rate of 8,1% at April this
current year.

With regard to labour market, there were 16,2 million people who were
economically active in the year 2000. Of these people, 11,9 million were
employed, including those working in the formal and informal sectors, for
example, domestic workers and small-scale or subsistence agriculture, while
4,3 million were unemployed. The official unemployment rate in the year
2000 was 26,7%.

Amongst the employed there was a downward movement away from working in
elementary occupations, from 32% of the employed in 1995 to 27% in 1999,
towards more skilled work. For example, there was a movement of machine
operators and artisans from 25% of the employed in 1995 to 29% in 1999.

Between November 1999 and November 2000, the average monthly salaries and
wages, including bonuses and overtime payments, remained constant at 1995
prices and, real salaries and wages paid to employees in the measured
component of formal nonagricultural business sector, excluding specific
industries and subgroups, increased by 1,5%.

With regard to education, 94% of children aged between 7 and 15, the
compulsory school-going age, are actually attending school. Of the 23,3
million people in the country aged 24 years on more, 2,9 million have not
received any education. Twenty-seven per cent of women aged 28 years or
more who are living in rural areas cannot read or write in at least one
language, as against 10% of women in this age category living in urban
areas.

I want to talk about housing, infrastructure and services. There has been a
steady increase in the proportion of people living in formal households,
from 64% of households in 1995 to 70% in 1999. At the same time, a
proportion of households who were living in traditional dwellings decreased
from 15% to 11% between 1995 and 1999. But the proportion of households who
were living in informal houses increased from 8% to 12% between 1995 and
1999.

The proportion of households with access to electricity for lighting has
increased from 64% in 1995 to 70% in 1999. The percentage of households
with access to clean water has also increased from 79% to 89%.

I have full confidence that Statistics SA has a team that can work at the
maximum speed required by the Minister of Finance. I, therefore, support
the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker and hon members, the UDM would like to
congratulate the hon the Minister of Finance and his team, including the
hon the Deputy Minister of Finance, the Director-General of the National
Treasury, the Commissioner of the SA Revenue Services, Statistics SA and
all officials of the National Treasury on their highly effective and
professionally run department and linked units. It is, therefore, a
pleasure to participate and to support the Budget Votes before us.

As can be expected in any well-run department, not all is rosy in the
National Treasury. Let me make but a few observations. Firstly, we are
concerned about the manner in which the Financial and Fiscal Commission is
being treated. Chapter 3 of our Constitution deals with co-operative
government and spells out the principles of intergovernmental relations.
Chapter 13 of the Constitution empowers the Financial and Fiscal Commission
(FFC) to make recommendations on this and other matters.

Based on extensive research and the international best practice, the FFC
made far-reaching recommendations with regard to the allocation of national
revenues for the period 2001 to 2004. These recommendations were, however,
rejected by the National Treasury. Sadly, the National Treasury did not use
these recommendations to refine the current formula. We are of the opinion
that recommendations of the FFC should, in future, be more rigorously
debated, and that it should be encouraged to submit recommendations, for
instance, on how conditional grants should be allocated.

The hon the Deputy Minister of Finance has already stated the importance of
a mature process of procurement with particular reference to the provinces.
Various questions have been asked in this regard, for instance, what
capacity provinces have to implement procurement reform. Have there been
consultations with provinces on the implementation of the Act? How do we
measure that preferential procurement is successfully implemented? What
database do we have? Has a procurement unit been established, and have
regulations been promulgated and implemented?

Thirdly, the problems with regard to the processing of special pension
benefits have mounted. During a recent visit by the Portfolio Committee on
Finance to the Special Pensions Administration in Pretoria, they became
aware of the serious problems faced by this administration, amongst others,
a lack of research capacity. We hope that the new board that had been
appointed in January 2001 will be able to produce a business plan by the
year end that will produce results and get this unit out of the trough in
which it currently finds itself. This aspect is not a happy experience for
the National Treasury.

Fourthly, we are concerned that the envisaged income, derived from the
restructuring of state assets amounting to R18 billion for the current
year, may produce serious budget constraints if the process is slowed down
for whatever reason. It is important that the Minister sticks with the
announced policy in this regard.

In conclusion, I want to commend the SA Revenue Services and Statistics SA
for work well done. For the first time, the SA Revenue Services has
produced a strategic plan which will assist them in achieving their
collection targets during the next few years. I want to thank the
department and the hon the Minister for this work well done. [Applause.]

Ms F B MARSHOFF: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and members, I am privileged
to participate in this budget debate on Statistics SA, especially as we
will be conducting a census during October of this year and as Statistics
SA is required by law to conduct a census every five years in accordance
with the Statistics Act.

In 1996 we had the first democratic census, which established the baseline
against which to measure change. The 2001 Census will give us an even
clearer indication of how circumstances of life and living conditions have
changed in South Africa. It will assist us to make informed choices when
planning and developing policies for the future. Whilst Census 1996 was the
first democratic census which provided us with baseline data against which
to measure change, Census 2001 is intended to serve as the first legitimate
benchmark against which to measure Government against service delivery.

The information will provide statistics that are crucial for planning, not
only by Government, but also by business communities, international
investors and so on. It will track Government progress in delivering
services and infrastructure in even the smallest rural villages, and most
importantly, it will be used for allocating budgets to provinces and local
governments to achieve our goal of a better life for all.

Let me emphasise a few of the salient points that were highlighted by
Census 1996. We discovered that the total population of South Africa was
40,6 million and not 43 million as was previously assumed. It was confirmed
that KwaZulu-Natal has the largest population, with the Northern Cape being
the least populated. Women constituted 51,9% of the population and 34,3% of
the population was under 15 years old, indicating that we are, indeed, a
very youthful nation. It was found that 23,8% of Africans older than 15
years of age were illiterate compared to only 1,1% of whites. Only 4,8% of
the population were older than 65 years of age. And, approximately 1
million South African households lived in shacks. It could even be more
now.

The question that we have to ask ourselves is: How will these figures
compare to Census 2001? Have we made a meaningful impact on people's lives
through more targeted and effective service delivery programmes? Have we
been able to decrease illiteracy levels and, more importantly, have we been
able to increase access to formal housing to the poorest of the poor?

I want to take this opportunity to encourage our communities to participate
in the census so that Government can be in a better position to improve the
quality of life of our people. The people's answers to the questionnaire
will tell us exactly what is needed and where it is needed. Without their
co-operation, this census will not be a success.

Members of Parliament are also requested to play a leading role in
encouraging their constituencies to participate in the census. It is not
only our responsibility to participate, but it is also our right to be
counted and to make a difference in our country.
We also want to assure our people that the information gathered during this
census will not be divulged to anyone and will be kept strictly
confidential. The completed questionnaires will be destroyed once data has
been captured. Staff of Statistics SA are also compelled to take an oath of
secrecy to ensure that any information given to them will be kept
confidential.

Once again we are appealing to our communities to stand up to be counted
and to become instrumental in making a difference to their lives. The
information gained through this census will be used to plan effectively for
the future to provide houses, schools and in other social and
infrastructural needs.

Statistics SA will employ 80 000 enumerators who will be recruited from
local communities. Supervisors will be people with the necessary skills and
competence to oversee the process. It is also envisaged that these
supervisors will be the same people who had worked for the IEC during the
local government elections. So, through this process, we will ensure
economic empowerment to local communities and that skills are transferred
to the unemployed.

We believe that everyone has the right to be counted, and it is for this
reason that we have changed the methodology for the 1996 and 2001 Census
away from the demographic model and we now use the actual head-count model
to ensure that the outcome of this census will, indeed, count everybody in.

Statistics South Africa has also embarked on partnerships to ensure that
the outcome of this census will be as inclusive as possible. One of the
innovative projects is the census-at-schools initiative, which involves
learners between grades 3 and 12 who will gather information about
themselves. This information will then be included in the national and
international database and teachers will be able to use this information in
a variety of learning areas.

The project also aims to enhance learners' data-handling ability to raise
awareness about population and housing surveys, and will demonstrate the
purposes and processes involved in the census. This project will run during
September and October in schools across the country.

After the completion of the questionnaire summaries will be sent to
Statistics SA who will analyse and interpret the results and distribute
them to schools, where they will serve as a database to inform curriculum
development and serve as a resource for effective teaching and learning. We
want to thank the international agencies who assisted us, ie USAid, UNFP
and Statistics Sweden.

In conclusion, we would also like to congratulate the staff of Statistics
SA under the competent leadership of the newly appointed Statistician-
General, on the sterling work already done to ensure the successful outcome
of this census. We as the ANC support this Vote. [Applause.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Madam Speaker, it is beyond dispute that the granting of
administrative authority to Sars was a bold and brave decision with clear
benefits.

Sars has certainly succeeded in maximising Government revenue. From a base
of R147 billion in 1996-97, the revenue has risen considerably to allow the
Minister of Finance to announce income tax relief. For the period 1995-96
to 1999-2000 Sars has collected R16 billion above the target set by the
Department of Finance, as well as an additional R8,8 billion for
efficiencies already built into the target, which then adds up to a total
of R25,199 billion in additional revenue. Nominal revenue growth has
averaged 13% per year. Targeted revenue for 2000-01 is R212 billion and the
commissioner has assured us that he will meet this target again.

We must realise, however, that despite these welcome efficiency gains at
Sars, the revenue bonanza unleashed by Sars' efficiency gains cannot
continue indefinitely. Similarly, Sars' successes must also never obscure
the appropriate policy decisions that have not yet been taken by the
National Treasury, such as the need to ensure that relief is given to the
top income tax bracket of the corporate sector, and that the tax base is
broadened to make it more inclusive.

As we laud the sterling successes of Sars, we need to concede that these
successes need to be consolidated. But the sustainability of Sars'
successes could be compromised by the raft of policy changes and certain
inappropriate policy decisions that they have been required to implement.

Due to the Minister's and the National Treasury's policy decision, Sars is
in an ongoing and continuous change management revolution resembling a
gruelling and never-ending hurdle race. Sars has to grapple with managerial
and institutional challenges of implementing the policy shift from a source
to a residents base of taxation, tax on foreign dividends, capital gains
tax, the tax incentives for strategic investments, the employment
incentive, changes to customs and excise provisions due to a raft of free-
trade arrangements.

These are mammoth arrays of simultaneous steps that the Sars team have to
take and they are about another introduction of the next Revenue Laws
Amendment Bill in June. We have to question our priorities, however. All
efforts were made to prioritise the passing of the capital gains tax
revenue amendments while the draft legislative amendments to implement the
employment incentive have not come to Parliament. Given South Africa's
unemployment figures, we have to ask where our priorities are.

Furthermore, given the shortcomings highlighted by the Auditor-General in
his recent report on Sars, there are causes for concern. When the
commissioner himself highlights to us, as he did before the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts, that Sars is still grappling with the legacy
of being bureaucratic and with deficiencies in terms of skills and
information systems, alarm bells must ring. This legacy must be eradicated
by Sars' Siyakha re-engineering programme, but it must be done in the
context where goal posts keep shifting.

The difficulty Sars is experiencing, particularly in terms of systems and
information management, showed up recently in the incorrect trade figures.
This incident is a symptom of the scale of internal revolutionary change,
in terms of skills in IT, required at Sars if it is to consolidate its
successes. Sars's difficulties are further compounded by having to make the
legally required shift to generally accepted accounting practice, and this
is required in terms of the Sars Act. We need an urgent resolution to these
matters by the Treasury, the Auditor-General and Sars.

A snapshot of Sars is, therefore, disconcerting despite the revenue
successes. It is a revenue service in the grip of constant change; a
revenue service that is still lumbering with the skill and IT legacy that
hampers efficiency; a revenue service that has to stumble from negative
Auditor-General's report to negative Auditor-General's report; and a
revenue service that has to ensure that they place the interests of the
taxpayer first while having to adjust their systems constantly as the goal
posts keep shifting.

Appropriately, the term ``Siyakha'', meaning ``we are building'' was chosen
by Sars. Perhaps the strongest message we need to convey to the Minister of
Finance today is: Give Sars a chance to build. Stop moving the goal posts
through inappropriate tax-policy decisions such as the introduction of
capital gains tax.

Equally importantly, in the context of the most recent staggering
revelations of the loss to the taxpayer at SAA and the commitments we have
incurred in terms of the arms deal, we simply have to ask the following
from the Minister of Finance as well. Even if Sars jumps all the hurdles
the Minister have set for them and consolidates their performance, will
they ever be able to garner enough revenue to plug all the holes that are
rapidly appearing? [Applause.]

Mr K A MOLOTO: Madam Speaker and hon members, today one can proclaim
unashamedly and with pride that the finance of this country is in the hands
of men and women who serve with distinction and utmost dedication.
[Applause.] It is a cause for much jubilation and optimism for every South
African.

Let us reckon with the fact that the treasury of every country is a
reflection of its economic potential and an indication of the country's
ultimate destiny. I challenge anyone to show me a treasury of any country,
and I will prophesy its future with great certainty.

The achievement of our National Treasury are monumental and fills the heart
of every South African with immense pride. It deserves the praise of every
member of this House. In recent times the national treasuries of some
developing countries - even those of the so-called new industrialised
countries - had to seek financial rescue packages from the International
Monetary Fund to survive difficulties they encountered.

Our National Treasury endured all the storms and developed a debt-
management strategy which is envied by all. Our enhanced international
creditworthiness bears testimony to the fact that our National Treasury is
the great steward of the finances of this country. The asset and liability
division of the department has performed well in developing a sound debt-
management strategy and it plays a pivotal role in giving assistance to the
Department of Public Enterprises in the restructuring of state assets and
improving the financial management of these assets.

I am really proud of the work of Statistics SA. During the apartheid era no
credible statistics existed. Let me elucidate this point by informing the
House of my own practical experience. In 1994 I was employed by a firm of
consulting engineers which worked closely with Mvula Trust with regard to
the design and provision of water and sanitation in the rural areas. I was
assigned the task of collecting population statistics and design a rough
sketch of the layout of the village.

This population statistic is vital to the calculation of the number of
litres required per person per day, the capacity of the reservoir, the
diameter of the pipes and the number of the stand pipes to be provided to
the whole village. Without these figures one will not be able to cost the
project.

I went to most local authority offices expecting to find the population
data and I left disappointed. This is just a testimony of the lack of
integrity of the previous statistics. The gruelling work of assigning the
local water steering committee and the task of calculating the number of
people had to be undertaken for the success of this project. Now I feel
proud of Statistics SA. The information is readily available at the touch
of a button.

The National Treasury, through the Sars, has ensured that South Africa has
an efficient tax regime, which puts our taxes in line with that of most
countries. Sars' collection capacity has improved greatly and is a
reflection of the integrity of the system. Our people are more willing than
before to comply with tax obligations after realising the benefits of
compliance. The current integrity of Sars is incomparable to any efforts in
the history of South Africa, with particular reference to the colonial and
apartheid eras.

Let me now speak as a young person of this country and express my joy at
these achievements. Let me relive the past events to explain my joy. In the
early 1980s, during the existence of Bantustans, it was common to see young
men and women, especially the tall ones - I will explain this concept of
the tall ones - getting out of buses to avoid being arrested for failure to
pay a Bantustan tax. What mesmerised me most was the fact that one's height
was a qualifying criteria to the Bantustan police for being eligible for
this tax. I found it the most unscientific method, because it was assumed
that if one was tall enough, then one should be carrying a dompas and one
was eligible to pay this Bantustan tax. [Interjections.]

It was common to see school-going youth alighting from the bus because they
forgot to request a letter from the principal, stating that they were not
income earners and could not pay this Lebowa tax. I do not think that even
the Roman Empire's tax collectors, even though they were despised by the
populace, were vicious to that extent or applied such an unscientific
method as height as a criterion.

After 1994, painstaking work was undertaken to build a revenue collection
service with credibility and which would stand out today as one of the
best. I am really proud of the SA Revenue Service, despite the comments
made by the previous speaker. It is a really world-class institution.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether I have to pay
the Ramodike tax today, but, hopefully, he will spare me. Let me start by
expressing general appreciation for the debate that has taken place, and
for the obvious amount of work that so many members put into their
contributions here today.

Let me deal with some of the issues that have arisen. Obviously the hon
Andrew would be quite incapable of being positive about them. He raises
three issues, and let us deal with them. Firstly, in respect of the
procedure to amend money Bills, this is ongoing work. I want to give him
the assurance that what he has lost at the hustings, he will not gain in
the House. The power to make a budget remains that of Government. It is not
only their power, it is also their responsibility. So, in respect of
curtailing it, we will have the legislation, but one needs a series of
processes in Parliament. The chair of chairs would be able to confirm that
there are processes under way to create an environment that can receive
this legislation.

In respect of the cap on housing - the R1 million cap on capital gains tax
- I want to stand here again today and give him the assurance that he is
wrong in his interpretation. I checked with the officials who were in those
hearings again today. They say that part of general good tax policy is to
up the rates. Those agreements were struck, but there never was an
equivocal commitment to include this in the memorandum to the Bill. I want
to give him the assurance that he is entirely wrong on that issue, and we
will not concede now. [Interjections.]

In respect of nonprofit companies, we will continue to work with them as we
have been doing. There was a big conference convened by the nonprofit
companies just recently. We will ensure that we have a system that works, a
system that is administratively functional and not one that merely pokes
holes in the system of taxation.

In respect of the hon Rabie, let me assure him that if people want
membership of golf clubs, then they must pay for it out of their own
pockets. One cannot ask the taxpayers to pay for the games of the wealthy.
I want to give him that assurance. We do not take account of that because
that has been practised in the past and it is wrong in the extreme.
[Interjections.]

In respect of the hon Taljaard, the tax policies that she has difficulty
with are those that strive towards equity. Whenever we move towards equity,
she has a problem. But she cannot change it because the electorate will
speak. They want equity and that is why they will put the ANC in Parliament
and in government again and again. [Applause.] They will do so until such
time as we have attained the goal of equity in this country,
notwithstanding the history of this country. [Interjections.]

In respect of the National Development Agency - and this is something that
has been raised - we have received more than 4 000 applications in the NDA.
The system is running - 1 323 applications have been processed to the value
of R310,42 million. Clearly, payments are in terms of performance
agreements struck between the board of the NDA and the project receiving
it, and the process is ongoing. Clearly, at the rate of more than 30
applications a week, one will never be able to cover the entire ground. But
let us give this House the assurance that the NDA, now located in the
Ministry of Social Development, is ongoing and functioning well. The
machine is well geared.

Let me just express one general reservation, and it is not about
Parliament. It is about the fact that we have recorded so much in so short
a period of time, but sadly so little of this has been researched by
academia and recorded. The upshot of it is that members of this House and
the general public are not familiar with the kinds of changes that have
been made, be they in general economic management or be they in
organisational development, and in respect of the three departments whose
budgets we are dealing with here this afternoon.

The changes are legion. They need to be recorded so that we can understand
them, but, perhaps more importantly, they need to be recorded for posterity
and also so that those in other countries, who are in the process of
change, can understand the speed with which we have been able to implement
change in this country.

We have not had time to go into all the issues today. We were allowed about
two and three quarter minutes per department. It is sad, because, given the
amount of work that we have undertaken and will undertake, this kind of
time does not allow for adequate oversight by Parliament.

When the hon Andrew speaks it is very clear. I heard somebody carping that
he was going to be the Minister of Finance. I want to say: ``Not in my
lifetime!'' [Laughter.] But let me just say that what his comments here
have shown is that he has never run anything but his mouth, and look at the
mess that he has made of that. [Laughter.] Let me conclude by saying ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, are you prepared to take a
question?

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, of course I will take a question.

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, there may or may not be some concerns in the
market. We understood that the Minister only had a cold, not a terminal
illness. I hope he can clarify that. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, I will clarify it by saying that the bulk of
South Africans are poor, they support the ANC, and for as long Ken is a
member of Parliament, there is no chance that the DP will be in government.
That is a fact. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Let me conclude by saying that I have been advised this afternoon that
there is some very good news for all South Africans in the economy, again
arising from some hard work undertaken by Government. There is some very
good news in the pipeline, but we will allow the Governor of the central
bank to make the announcements. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 7 - National Treasury (Intelligence):

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Madam Speaker, members of Parliament, I need
to share some good news myself, but perhaps not on the scale that Minister
Manuel has. I want to say to members here that the former and honourable
Minister for Intelligence, Minister Nhlanhla, is recovering very well. The
ANC has made sure that he is given all the necessary medical attention that
he requires. [Interjections.] I hope that he will be back with us before
the end of the year. This is just to prove that, in fact, whatever happens,
the ANC does look after its members. [Applause.]

Since my appointment as Minister for Intelligence on 26 January 2001, I
have been grappling with what, to me, is an all-consuming issue of what
direction the services should take to enable them to deal adequately with
the challenges that they face. As we enter the 21st century, we find
ourselves on the verge of a revolution - a revolution of ideas about us,
about the way that we would like the world to relate to us and the way that
we want the world to perceive us. At the same time, it is a revolution in
the application of new technologies which have radically transformed the
tools of our trade and heightened the complexities of our activities.

To us in the intelligence services this revolution coincides with a natural
hiatus in which, at all levels, we have new management that has brought new
ideas into the services. It is against this backdrop that we intend
launching the services to what we envisage could be new heights.
The past six years were utilised by my predecessor, the former Minister
Nhlanhla, to carve out a new dispensation for the intelligence services; a
dispensation that has a mandate worked out by the Constitution, a
dispensation that united the myriad of services into one, a dispensation
that respected human rights and, further, a dispensation that was very
distinct from the old services.

Within the brief period that I have been Minister for Intelligence, I have
had the opportunity of accessing the work that was done by former Minister
Nhlanhla in the Ministry, and I am satisfied that he met the objectives
that he set for himself and, despite the very adverse publicity that he had
received in an exceedingly difficult portfolio, I believe he really
acquitted himself very well. [Applause.]

We now, however, have to move forward from this premise, which was
necessary for the establishment of this order, to one that strives for new
ideals. We necessarily have to chart uncharted waters to make our new
ideals possible. To this end, we have broadened our understanding of
intelligence and its scope in the new era. We have also identified key
strategic goals of intelligence away from the traditional spy of
yesteryear. Within this environment we have determined that, first and
foremost, our role is that of preserving the integrity of the state.

Our responsibility is to advise Government when choices have to be made.
This would require prior knowledge of the prevailing setting and to
underpin the work of law enforcement agencies by providing them with the
kind of information that should give them a head start in the fight against
all those who seek to undermine the constitutional order of this country.
As a result, our work now encompasses all that which provides national
security.

To meet these goals, our services would have to raise themselves to a level
where they could give advice to the kind of leadership we have. They must
provide the President - who, as we all know, sits up half the night looking
at the Internet - with the kind of information that he will find useful and
in which he will have confidence.

This means, therefore, that if the President spends six hours on the
Internet, I would expect my services to spend 12 hours on the Internet, so
that we can keep that much better in pace with him. If we do not at present
have that intellectual capacity and if any of the members here feel that
they have that intellectual capacity, we would like to have permission from
the Speaker to recruit those members here!

I expect our services to have the kind of commitment, dedication and
culture that define them as a cut above the normal employee of Government.
I want around me that calibre of person in the services, which should allow
hon members here to identify them immediately from their personal
behaviour. I want the very best of our patriots for the services.

Furthermore, in the context of a globalising world, where the acquisition
of appropriate technology guarantees superiority, intelligence services all
over the world are required to be highly sophisticated and innovative. Gone
are the days when intelligence officers hid behind dark glasses in heavy
coats and followed their targets up the street, down the dark alley into
the pub and out through the back stairway. Intelligence now is about the
sophistication of the technology we employ to execute our work. If, in the
past, our major investment was in repairing the soles of the shoes of our
surveillance officers, our major investment now will be in technology.

Unfortunately, over time we have allowed ourselves to fall behind in the
development of the human capacity and scientific advances necessary to
protect our information environment against being manipulated, and in the
development of a capacity necessary for us to manipulate our own
environment. This, in my view, has posed a serious national security threat
to us. The breakneck speed at which technology changes has also compounded
our problem. I am, therefore, convinced that the only way we can render
ourselves, indispensable within the modern context, is to acquire the above
information technology.

We have identified that we need a massive injection of resources ...
[Interjections.] Please do not leave yet, Minister. We need a massive
injection of resources, in order to take ourselves forward on this matter.

It is in this light that we will be embarking on a brave initiative to
drastically restructure the Intelligence Academy. I have resolved to close
the Intelligence Academy, to allow it to completely refocus and restructure
itself, so that it could serve the needs of our present time. With this new
shape, we will be entering into smart partnerships with a number of
academic and technology institutions.

This is the point from which we will relaunch ourselves. That is why we
have to ensure that it is appropriately structured to take us forward. I
have this dream that, in time, the quality of research that will come from
the new academy will be at a level where we can serve as a reference
library for members of Parliament here.

The field of intelligence is continuously evolving and expanding. Within
the services we therefore expect a continuous process of vigorous
reassessment, which at times will reinvigorate the services. Our recent
assessment in this regard has identified economic intelligence,
sociopolitical intelligence and environmental intelligence as new and
important areas in which we still need to invest our resources.

We have previously not had this capacity and we have had to develop it.
With this type of intelligence we are able to provide the state, the
parastatals and the private sector with sound economic advice, to make sure
that we can make this country as competitive as the best.

We are also continuously improving our trade, so that our services become
central to the eradication of crime, and so that we are central, also, to
attempts to end corruption within the Government sector. Our greater
efficiency will ensure that we, as South Africans, will be protected from
all the scourges that undermine our democracy and the integrity of the
state, including scourges that weaken the Government's ability to deliver a
better life for all.

I am sharing this with the House, so that hon members understand the kind
of services we require and the massive training and retraining that is
demanded of us. I am also sharing this to show that the services need to be
infused with strategically determined resources to turn this ship in its
new direction. More importantly, I am sharing this so that hon members here
can rally behind the imperative of ensuring national security by supporting
the objective of attaining this highly skilled cadreship that we need to
secure our country.

Allow me, further, to inform the House of the initiatives that we have
undertaken so far to build the kind of services that we are speaking of
here. Shortly after my appointment, we embarked on a process of radically
restructuring the Ministry.

Firstly, a Presidential Intelligence Support Unit, which will ensure that
the President receives accurate, timely and relevant intelligence reports,
is being set up. Secondly, we intend to introduce a new public relations
approach to the Ministry, and to this end we intend to establish a client
liaison office where members of the Cabinet, departments, as well as
Parliament, can get the support they need from time to time.

Thirdly, in the past the services had a very bad image, which I am
convinced was not necessarily of their own making. This image is rather a
product of history, because intelligence has historically been abused in
the previous dispensation. Regardless of the reasons and the circumstances,
this image has had a negative impact on the services and their efforts.
Moreover, the image of incompetence and fumbling has led to a number of
misconceptions about the services and their contribution towards peace and
stability in our country and elsewhere in the world. These misconceptions
need to be replaced by an understanding of the work the services do.

As a first step in dealing with this problem, I am committing myself, as
far as possible, to having an open relationship with the media so that I
can mediate on behalf of the services. In this regard I also hope to pick
up on a broader debate started by the President. I would like to engage the
media in discussions around the concept of national security. I am hoping
that through this engagement we would establish a common understanding of
what can be disclosed publicly and what, through common interest, we agree
cannot be disclosed. Let me hasten to add that I am not, however, pleading
for special treatment in the media. When we have done wrong, we expect the
media to treat us in the same way as they would treat anyone else.

I will, in addition, be launching a public lecture series where we can
think about and engage on intelligence matters with all the relevant
stakeholders, such as universities, NGOs, human rights organisations and
security practitioners, both in the public and parastatal spheres. Let me
emphasise that my approach in these interactions would throughout be to
create a positive attitude towards the work of the services. In this regard
I am motivated by the dedication of the staff of the services, who, when I
called upon them to join me in reorientating the services shortly after my
appointment, gave me an overwhelmingly positive response.

I appeal to hon members here to assist me in this regard. Let us not fail
these many positive people, whose dedication and commitment to this country
is second to none. They work without the recognition they deserve, for I
can assure members that nothing is as difficult as working under extremely
dangerous conditions where, because of the nature of the work, daily
experiences cannot be shared, even with close family.

The problem is further exacerbated by the fact that, by its very nature,
human beings have a weakness that each one of us wants to be recognised for
the work that we do and acknowledged for the work that we do. This also
applies to members of the services. I would like to make sure that, from
time to time, we recognise the service they render to us behind closed
doors. The services are a national asset and therefore we talk them down at
our own peril.
Let me very briefly go through some of the highlights of our successes in
the intelligence services. I know that hon members have been very concerned
about the backlog in disciplinary cases within the services. I would like
to take this opportunity to assure members that this matter is now under
control. On assuming office, I found a number of initiatives under way to
improve discipline and organisational conduct within the NIA in particular.
These initiatives were aimed at increasing productivity, boosting morale
and organisational dedication. Of the cases we have spoken about, we can
happily inform members that I have processed all those outstanding cases
that were before me when I arrived in the Office. We have also set up a
specialised unit to deal with discipline - a move that has significantly
reduced the number of outstanding cases.

Secondly, we have an intelligence signal capacity whose potential ensures
that we can compete with the best powers in Europe. It is by far the best
we have in Africa. It is therefore in our interest to harness this
advantage. Thus, we request members to support us in our request to invest
in this particular field. It is also on that basis that we hope to
establish our new National Communication Centre.

To meet the awesome challenges that we face, we have purposefully turned
our attention to providing Government with the kind of security information
it needs. Chief amongst the requests we receive is assistance in uncovering
corruption. Our commitment in assisting Government in fighting corruption
is motivated by the fact that the preservation of the integrity of the
state is our core function. We are therefore aware that if we do not use
our resources and skills to fight this scourge, we would by omission and
facilitating the erosion of the capacity of the state. It is in this
context that the services have helped Sars. I listened very intently,
hoping that the Minister of Finance would give recognition for this, and he
has not! I am sure he will now give recognition to the fact that we
assisted them in recovering millions in taxpayers' money.

The extreme rightwing, which is intent on carrying out subversive
activities, was identified, including the responsible individuals.
Definitive advice to Government on the extent of disinformation and the
generation of artificial information was given to highlight the methods
used by information peddlers and mongers who want to undermine the
integrity of the state. The services have further identified money
laundering, the smuggling and supplying of drugs, as well as the operations
of various syndicates as of paramount importance in the assistance we are
rendering to the SAPS.

Our responsibility is not limited to the boundaries of South Africa.
Internationally South Africa now occupies a position of moral authority,
because of its history and its gains. Increasingly the country is being
requested to play a leading role in international mediation. This places an
additional responsibility on us, because we have to provide quality
intelligence and infrastructure for these efforts. Our external service
therefore has had to prioritise the provision of these services.

In this regard, the SA Secret Services, together with Defence Intelligence,
are actively involved in the Burundi peace process, which our former
President Mandela is leading. Members will recall that initially the
process had reached a stalemate and that there was no peace agreement in
sight. On the appointment of the former President as the new facilitator,
the services gave intelligence support which assisted in bringing the
rebels and the primary leaders of the different warring groups together
around the negotiating table. I could go on counting the successes of our
services, but I am sure what we have outlined here is sufficient.

In conclusion, allow me briefly to say a few words about the intelligence
oversight committees that we are working in. As members know, the Inspector-
General - who, I believe, is here with us today - was appointed on 15 May
2000. Unfortunately, shortly afterwards the then Minister of Intelligence
Services fell ill and an interim Minister was acting in his capacity. The
process of establishing the Office of the Inspector-General was slowed down
considerably. I am, however, happy to announce that the office is now
operational and the Inspector-General was sworn in this morning. The
Inspector-General has been through a trying time with all these disruptions
around him. However, all that is behind us now and he will add value to the
work of this Government. [Applause.]

Allow me also to acknowledge the support of the Joint Standing Committee on
Intelligence. I am privileged to work with the committee and have found a
very high degree of understanding of intelligence among its members. I have
found that they have the ability to go beyond party-political affiliation
when dealing with matters involving national security. With this committee
and their approach, we feel confident that our national security interests
are in good hands. They have, in the past, presided over sensitive national
issues without fear or favour. I have found the committee, and especially
the chairperson, an important pillar of support, and they have made my work
so much easier.

I am also privileged to work with the kind of team that I work with. I have
with me here my co-ordinator, my directors-general my DDGs and some of the
top management of my staff. During the time that I have worked with them,
they have done me very proud. Their dedication, commitment, professionalism
and, above all, integrity, make me feel that, with this team around me, we
will definitely achieve our goals. I am convinced that, together, we will
take the services to the new heights that we have spoken of.

In conclusion, I would like hon members, if it is possible for them, to go
beyond thinking of us as spooks. I would like them at least to think of us
in a positive light, as Casper the friendly ghost. [Laughter.][Applause.]

I am very grateful to my staff for the 24-hour dedication that they give,
ensuring that we are at least two steps behind our brave, new, pioneering
President, and the negotiator, the hon the Deputy President. We want to
assure them that we will be the wind beneath their wings.

I heard the DP heckling here. Just when I was thinking that nothing could
ever go right for them, I was proved wrong. Unfortunately for me, something
did go right for the hon Tony Leon. What happened is that he was saved from
himself. He married the type of woman who, in the short space of time that
they have been married, has been able to teach him lofty concepts such as
national security. I now find his utterances about national security so
heart-warming, I could not have hoped for better news. This renews my faith
in women. Long live women! I wish we had many such women to scatter around,
because then we would have a more sober lot in the DP. [Applause.]

It is unfortunate that we have so few of the ill-fated UDM. I want them to
convey to the hon Holomisa that, since he has always threatened those who
know him with the heavy files that he always carries - which have made him
stoop towards the right, as he carries these imaginary, heavy files - if he
has any files with him, he should please hand them over to me. I will make
his load lighter, and he might walk straighter. [Laughter.]

I want the hon Mr Green to please convey to the Rev Meshoe that he should
stick with us, the friendly ghosts. We will lead him down the path of
righteousness, away from the pyramid schemes. [Laughter.]

Finally, our capacity is such that I wanted to offer the ANC caucus our
services to plug the leaks from their caucus. But what would life be
without the daily newspapers that depend on those leaks? Alas! [Applause.]

Ms N N MAPISA-NQAKULA: Madam Speaker, your Excellency hon Deputy President
Zuma and hon members, this is the maiden budget speech of the Minister for
Intelligence. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate her on
her appointment.

The challenges that the hon the Minister faces are daunting. We know that
she will succeed and we are confident that under her leadership,
Intelligence will soar to great heights. We know that the hon the Minister
has a committed and dedicated team. I want to take this opportunity to
salute the Inspector-General for Intelligence, the Co-ordinator for
Intelligence, the directors-general of both the NIA and the Sass, and the
head of the ministerial services and his team.

Many challenges lie ahead and we need the Minister's continued commitment
and hard work. This is a legitimate expectation the hon the Minister has to
live up to, to use the President's phrase, as we steadily and surely edge
closer to our intelligence vision. With each dawning day, through sweat and
goal-oriented work, we edge towards the realisation of a vision that the
legislature envisioned when it established the intelligence services, with
the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence as their oversight
institution. With the establishment of the office of the Inspector-General,
the dispensation now has all its components.

This House, when establishing the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence,
tasked us with, among others, the responsibility to review the budget of
the intelligence services and make recommendations to Parliament. This task
has been fulfilled as it will soon be evident when we table our report,
which has been submitted to the hon the President.

Ever since Parliament established the committee, we have interacted with
many international oversight committees for intelligence. Out of these
interactions, it has been proven that the work that we do and our
experience compare favourably with international standards. This has
happened on the basis of hard work, commitment and loyalty to our cause by
all members of the committee, past and present. I would like to commend and
honour all of them for their dedication.

While we continue to benefit from the experience of those who have been
members since 1995, members who were sworn in in 1999, are equal to the
work at hand and have been quite tenacious in issues we handle in our
committee. These hon members' contributions are highly appreciated.

We have been able to do our work in the committee, because at all times we
were alive to the fact that the nature of our mandate is of such a
sensitive make-up that the best way to do it was by consensus. Those who
tried political grandstanding in the committee soon discovered that they
were completely out of place.

Let me indicate that we, including the Inspector-General, have a
responsibility to protect the integrity and image of the services, and to
uphold the constitutional rights of our people. The agenda of the committee
is not guided by narrow political point-scoring and bickering. It performs
its functions with integrity, without fear, favour, bias or prejudice. We
do this to maintain and nurture the confidence and trust of both the
services and the public.

As each passing day dawns, our intelligence services edge closer to being
better. They are doing so within the constraints and difficulties produced
by a turbulent process of globalisation, growing domestic and international
challenges, the legacy of our immediate history and the forever shrinking
resources. These new challenges are designed to make our world confront
hunger, joblessness, homelessness and organised crimes such as people-
smuggling, drug peddling, abuse and arms trafficking. These challenges are
awesome and unpredictable.

To face these challenges, we have to strengthen and consolidate our
services. This is a mammoth task, given the scanty resources that we have,
both human and material. The technological expertise and experience
available to us at this moment is not in sufficient supply. Meanwhile,
intelligence continues to entail people, innovation, technology and money.
In less than 10 years of democratic rule, this Government has placed on the
national agenda a programme that is meant to fully transform the country
into a democratic dispensation of peace, security and comfort.
Consolidating our democracy means the fulfilment of this national agenda.
It means accelerating our work with regard to peace and security.

Intelligence is the cornerstone of that work and acts on behalf of all
South Africans. It is to preserve the dignity of our collective being as a
people. It provides the state with sound, relevant and accurate advice on
national security issues. It is to add value to decisions and policy-making
on a range of matters of scientific importance to our country. Our services
have been doing more with less, to use their phrase. They secure
international conferences and seminars that are hosted by South Africa, and
meeting the required international standards of performance during these
activities.

We are happy to report that the NIA and the Sass have had notable success
in the discharge of their functions, especially as it relates to crime
combating, urban terrorism and political violence. These issues will be
dealt with in greater detail later by my colleagues.

I would like to briefly touch on the matter of the alleged plot against the
President, which recently dominated media reports and political discourse
in the country. The JSCI has been concerned about the allegations. We have
reviewed the role of the intelligence services in this matter, and we are
happy to note that they have observed their legislative mandate. We also
commend them on the professional manner in which they dealt with this
issue. In the meantime, we await the outcome of the SAPS investigation.

It is against this backdrop that we should examine closely the resources
that the services have at their disposal. Let us objectively interrogate
these against the country's expectations and needs. Surely, it is
reasonable to expect the resources to be commensurate with those needs.
When we finally judge the performance of the services, it must be measured
in accordance with the size of the allocations made to them.

The Government's democratisation programme is anchored on the establishment
of a strong, efficient and developmental state which will use the resources
at its command to meet the basic needs of all people. A precondition for
this is peace and security - peace and security found in a stable
environment.

As part of our work, we have interacted with the services regarding their
individual budgets and expenditure. The committee is convinced that the
resources are far from addressing the needs of South Africa and its people.
In fact, the allocation to the services has been shrinking overall from
year to year. Meanwhile, this budget includes funding for the Office of the
Inspector-General for Intelligence - an integral part of the intelligence
services. We are happy to note that this office has now been established.
The Office of the Inspector-General of Intelligence is a mechanism that is
built within the intelligence dispensation to ensure adherence to the law
by the services.

Furthermore, it also covers the budget of the National Intelligence Co-
ordinating Committee, which is responsible for the co-ordination of
intelligence production, a cornerstone of a quality product. It ensures
efficiency and effectiveness, and helps to produce well thought-out and
tested intelligence products. The spending centre of the Ministry is also
located here. I am sure by now that it is clear to all and sundry what
intelligence resource in this country is. This intelligence has to drive
the security of this country within these resources.

The JSCI calls for adequate funding of intelligence services, to enable
them to drive security in this country. As we do that, we equally take the
responsibility of ensuring that these resources are used in a cost-
effective way. This ensures that the meagre resources at our disposal are
used purposefully and creatively. In this respect, we interact with the
Auditor-General, and seek guidance where necessary. We are happy to note
that the intelligence services are also co-operating on these matters.

We are just sorry that our committee - and I assume the Ministry as well -
has not received the latest report of the Auditor-General on the secret
services' account, and therefore, as we discuss some of these issues and
raise some of them, we are not aware of some of the remarks which may have
been made by the Auditor-General in his report.

In conclusion, I salute the steps taken by the Presidential Intelligence
Budget Advisory Committee to review the budget for intelligence services.
The budget for this year shows that things are changing for the better, but
it is still a far cry from what these services need. The Deputy President
will agree that the road ahead is still long and very difficult, and I just
thought that my speech today should be confined to addressing him on this
matter. [Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, officials
of the intelligence services present here today and honoured guests, the
IFP congratulates the new Minister, Dr L N Sisulu, on her appointment as
Minister for Intelligence. We wish her well in the challenges ahead. The
new Minister has been quick to adapt to her stupendous responsibilities,
and she has already made her mark. By the same token, the IFP congratulates
our chairperson on giving the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence good
direction.

In supporting the budget of the National Treasury - that is, Auxiliary and
Associated Services - I want to emphasise that the IFP subscribes to a
minimalist view of the role of covert intelligence, focusing on foreign
intelligence collection in the pursuit of an informed foreign policy. In
the IFP's view, the accuracy and quality of such intelligence can and
should be enhanced by the exchange of intelligence with allies and friendly
nations, both regionally and internationally. The Deputy President should
note that that means a lot of money, and that we are appealing for more
money for the services.

The IFP further supports a clear break from the past in the sphere of
intelligence - that is, transformation, transformation, transformation. Any
decrease in the budget will affect the services deleteriously. We cry for
more funds for the services.

The department appears to have many programmes. Is there no way that some
of these programmes can be integrated, so as to ensure efficient
utilisation of resources? Therefore, the services clearly require a
financially healthy budget to be run smoothly and efficiently. To
appreciate the importance of a good budget, we need to understand the place
and role of intelligence in our young democracy. The legal framework for
intelligence services in our country is to be found in our Constitution and
the relevant legislation.

I want to refer briefly to the National Intelligence Agency's,
responsibilities. The NIA has done a very very good job during the past 12
months, and it has the following responsibilities: to gather, correlate,
evaluate and analyse domestic intelligence; to fulfil the national
counterintelligence responsibilities and to gather departmental
intelligence at the request of any department of state. By the same token,
the SA Secret Service has also done a very good job, and it is charged,
inter alia, with gathering, correlating, evaluating and analysing foreign
intelligence which must be transmitted speedily. I want to underline
``transmitted speedily’’.

To be able to transmit intelligence information without delay, the services
need funds. Intelligence services therefore require a sizeable budget that
befits their tremendous responsibilities in our young democracy.

Let us look at some of the achievements and successes of intelligence. The
NIA and Sass have done a very good job. The JSCI has interacted with all
the role-players and stakeholders in the services in order to identify
problems as well as analyse the budget and ascertain that funds are handled
in a responsible manner. Meetings and follow-up meetings have been held
with the NIA, Sass, the Provincial Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee,
Picocs, the law commission, Crime Intelligence, Defence Intelligence and
His Lordship Justice Gordon. The oversight function has been done well. We
congratulate our chairperson on her good leadership. The Ministry and the
JSCI need more funds to run further workshops and attend important
international conferences. Another important achievement has been the
passing of the general laws amendment Act which, inter alia, aligned our
services with the Constitution.

In its interaction with the services, the JSCI has become convinced about
the necessity to prioritise and reprioritise the financial needs of the
services so as to fast-track transformation where it is not visible.
Another achievement has been the appointment, for the first time in the
history of South Africa, of the Inspector-General for Intelligence. He has
been duly sworn in, as the hon the Minister has told us, and we are happy
to say that he is present among us today.

In conclusion, the IFP believes that South Africa's foreign intelligence
requirements are determined by levels of internal stability and its
relations with the outside world. I concur with Adebayo Oyebade who, in his
book Africa After the Cold War, said:


  In Africa, the march towards a new world order is fraught with old and
  emerging problems.

He goes on to say:


  In some cases, the search for a democratic political system has turned
  into civil violence, which threatens the very foundation of national
  sovereignty.

Therefore, it is abundantly clear from the foregoing that the budget for
intelligence services needs to be beefed up.

Finally, by virtue of its position in Government and in Parliament, the IFP
can play a crucial role in the intelligence services. It is exciting to
hear that the Minister is considering involving the universities and
research academies. I can only say amen to that.

I hope that what I have said today has assured the hon the Minister, on a
lighter note, of my intellectual capacity to join her team. [Applause.]

Mr L T LANDERS: Chairperson, I also want to congratulate our new Minister
for Intelligence on her appointment, and on the dynamic manner in which she
has fulfilled her duties in the short four months since she was sworn in. I
am particularly privileged to have served with the hon the Minister on the
Subcouncil of Intelligence, or what was then called the Transitional
Executive Council, TEC.

It is particularly significant and heartening that many of the plans,
ideas, proposals and resolutions that served before that subcouncil have
now become a reality, and this is in no small measure through her efforts.
We welcome, in particular, her call for a debate on, and greater awareness
of, the concept of national security. My contribution to this debate seeks
to address some of the notable achievements of the National Intelligence
Agency.

The NIA's primary function, in terms of its legal mandate, is to collect
intelligence, in order to counter any threats or potential threats to the
state or to South Africa's constitutional order. Examples of such threats
are terrorism, espionage, sabotage, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, subversion and organised crime.

In terms of its counterintelligence mandate, the NIA is also responsible
for security vetting of state employees and render security advisory
services to all state departments and certain parastatals or state-owned
enterprises. However, like all the other intelligence services, the NIA has
continuously had to do more with an ever-shrinking budget. The NIA improved
on its performance on domestic intelligence priorities and helped achieve
major breakthroughs on some key national security concerns prior to and
during the year 2000-2001.

These include the prevention of the loss of millions of rands to the state
in the form of unpaid revenue, the apprehension of perpetrators of violence
such as urban terrorism, the uncovering of organised crime networks, the
identification of corrupt Government officials, the exposure of information
pedlars, as already been referred to, and the relative stabilisation of
political violence in KwaZulu-Natal.

I will attempt to deal with some of these in a little more detail. During
the year 2000, the NIA established a special operation to look at urban
terror in the Western Cape. This was done as a consolidation of work done
on urban terrorism. To further ensure the success of this operation, the
National Intelligence Agency has worked, and is working, closely with
enforcement and prosecutorial agencies. Consequently, Government now has a
better understanding of the root causes of the violence in the Western
Cape, and can therefore address those root causes.

The bombings in the Western Cape have stopped, and while we cannot give a
categorical assurance that they will not recommence, the NIA's successes
have helped give the taxpayer and public a crucial insight into the
debilitating role of urban terrorism in our society.

Intelligence obtained by the NIA played a prominent role in criminal
investigations at ports of entry, at which several arrests have been made
and more are imminent. The NIA has also focused on progress regarding the
illegal issue of identity and related South African documents. This has
confirmed the involvement of Department of Home Affairs officials at all
levels in a variety of corrupt and criminal activities.

The NIA has also helped to achieve success through providing intelligence
related to corrupt activities, especially by members of the the SAPS
pertaining to their direct criminal involvement, corruption and
mismanagement in the Department of Correctional Services and corruption in
the state tender system.

The NIA has also participated in investigations in the field of organised
crime. The agency's focus on drug trafficking is primarily directed against
organised structures, that is, drug syndicates that are behind the drug
trade. This also includes those elements within state structures who are
assisting these syndicates.

Some notable successes have been achieved in terms of which intelligence
provided by the agency to the SAPS was instrumental in the arrest of drug
traffickers, both locally and abroad. We note in this regard that crucial
surveillance was provided by the NIA on the movement of a large shipment of
mandrax tablets that was confiscated on arrival in Johannesburg, in the
year 2000.

Violence in the transport industry is a national security concern and will
remain a priority until such time that industry is free from violence.
During the period between 1999 and 2000, the NIA played a leading role in
intensifying an investigation which focused on the activities of individual
perpetrators of taxi violence. Intelligence gathering on this approach was
successful.

However, it must be noted that it still remains a problem to turn such
intelligence into court-directed evidence. The introduction of the
Directorate of Special Operations has, however, improved the situation.
Consequently, a number of arrests have been made in flashpoint provinces
like Gauteng, the Eastern Cape, and the Western Cape during the same
period, and some of the perpetrators were convicted. The NIA also played a
prominent role in terms of monitoring and assisting to maintain general
stability in the province of KwaZulu-Natal.

However, the JSCI is concerned about the limited capacity and the slow pace
of vetting as conducted by NIA. From January to November 2000, the NIA had
finalised 253 vetting requests from external clients and 228 internal
vetting cases. However, we note that from December 2000 to March 2001, a
new vetting approach was implemented within the NIA that resulted in the
clearance an additional of 691 external clients being finalised.

Specific clients received priority attention in this regard, namely, the
Office of the President, the Department of Foreign Affairs, the State
Information Technology Agency, and the Directorate of Special Operations.
These improvements will be monitored by the JSCI.

Whilst the NIA has made a supreme effort to deliver on these and other
matters with the limited financial resources at its disposal, the harsh
reality is that it is seriously underresourced in key areas of delivery. In
the main, decisions about resourcing of intelligence have thus far been
taken at a mechanical and bureaucratic level.
This point needs to be stressed. What informs the Treasury or State
Expenditure as to what financial resources are required by our intelligence
services is not necessarily what informs those services as to what, in
financial terms, they should be allocated. Therefore, we welcome the new
statement about the budgeting process for intelligence services. As a
matter of urgency, it is time that the decisions about the strategic
resourcing of intelligence must be taken at the strategic political level.

We share the sentiments expressed by the hon Chairperson of the JSCI about
the members of our intelligence services. They are true patriots and serve
this country well. But we also want to pay tribute to the inspiring and
outstanding leadership of the Chairperson of the JSCI, the hon Mapisa-
Nqakula, and we wish her well in her future endeavours. [Applause.]

Mrs M E OLCKERS: Chairperson, a great number of Budget Votes were debated
this year without this Parliament having had the Auditor-General's reports
available to us. Today is another such case. This situation severely
impairs the role of Parliament which must also be the public forum where
departments and Ministers are called to task, or praise for good governance
can be given.

It is unacceptable that the Auditor-General's Office did not table the
reports for 2000-01 timeously for us to scrutinise. It is not of much use
to us if it lands on our desks after the budget debates. I hope that this
unacceptable situation will not repeat itself, especially as the Minister
for Intelligence had already requested the release of this report from the
Auditor-General in April.

Another very important matter of concern to us is the fact that certain
officials and also some members of the executive seem to think and act as
if they are above the law and the scrutiny of portfolio committees which,
after all, are extensions of Parliament.

The JSCI is an oversight committee empowered by an Act and, therefore, has
even more powers than ordinary committees. This is especially relevant
where the security of the state is at stake which is our mandate. Because
of the very nature of their work, intelligence services are not always
exposed to detailed public examination and scrutiny, hence, the
establishment of oversight mechanisms like the JSCI. Therefore, also,
Ministers and officials should acknowledge the importance and powers of
this committee.

I want to raise a matter that need not even have been necessary to mention
in this House, but events necessitate me to do so. The JSCI requested the
National Commissioner of Police to appear before the committee so as to
enlighten us on the security matters directly linking him personally to
some very problematic issues. The National Commissioner of Police had three
weeks' notice of the date of that meeting, which he accepted. However, on
the day of the meeting with the JSCI, the commissioner sent his deputy on
his behalf. His excuse was that another important matter came up. I find
this arrogance and unavailability totally unacceptable. The commissioner
was personally accused in media reports and, therefore, he was personally
requested to address us.

Nobody, no member of the executive or any official, is above the scrutiny
of this Parliament. The perception out there is that certain important
officials are a law unto themselves. If need be the opposition will request
the chairperson to subpoena any official or Minister to appear before us.
Our meetings are closed to the public and the media and therefore, the
excuse of confidentiality is irrelevant.

When various intelligence services do not co-ordinate and work together,
there is a need for concern. When the NIA alerts other intelligence
services to a problem area or person, the country expects a co-ordinated
approach. It seems that the National Commissioner of Police has forgotten
that his role is to serve the public and not the party only, and to answer
to the representatives of the people and not those of the party only.

Coups throughout the world are, more often than not, staged from the ranks
of the intelligence or the army. Therefore, ignoring the reports by an
agency like the NIA is a problem to this committee. We need an explanation
by the person allegedly involved.

There is, therefore, a greater possibility of coups or assassinations
coming from those ranks than from three successful businessmen. To ignore
the oversight committee appointed by the President smacks of arrogance and
borders on audacity.

Dit is nodig om die Kantoor van die Inspekteur-generaal ook aan te spreek,
want dit is nou 'n volle jaar nadat die pos gevul is en steeds is daar nog
nie 'n kantoor ingerig of personeel aangestel nie. Die situasie is totaal
onaanvaarbaar vir die opposisie. Daar word vergaderings gehou en besluite
geneem, maar niks is nog van die grond af gekry nie. Ek dink dit is tyd dat
dit reggestel word.

Daar is sake waaroor ook nog steeds nie duidelikheid verkry is nie,
byvoorbeeld die Trytsman-ondersoek na die visbedryf en sy betrokkenheid by
Luthuli-huis, saamgesien met die sogenaamde intelligensie-afdeling in
Luthuli-huis; die Kubu-saak oor onreëlmatighede in die Nasionale
Intelligensie-agentskap; die duidelike opdrag van die
Besigheidsintelligensie-eenheid wat in die Ontvanger van Inkomste se
kantoor gestig is; die sameswering of komplot om die President te vermoor,
en die wapenskandaal, om maar 'n paar te noem.(Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[It is necessary to address the Office of the Inspector-General as well,
because it has now been a whole year since the post was filled and there is
still no furnished office and no staff members have been appointed either.
The situation is totally unacceptable to the opposition. Meetings are held
and decisions are taken, but nothing has been established yet. I think it
is time this was rectified.

There are matters about which we still have no clarity, for example the
Trytsman investigation into the fishing industry and his involvement with
Luthuli House, together with the so-called intelligence division in Luthuli
House; the Kubu investigation into fraud in Foreign Affairs; the clear
directive of the Business Intelligence Unit that was established in the
Receiver of Revenue's office; the conspiracy or plot to murder the
President, and the arms scandal, to mention but a few.]

Finally, my appreciation to the Minister for her energy and the wisdom with
which she performs her tasks; also to the chairperson and the members of
the JSCI, for the openmindedness they display in our meetings. We work well
together and there is a great deal of trust amongst us.

We have not reached Camelot yet, but we are on our way. I want to say to
the people and powers that are trying to cover corruption and spread
disinformation that, between the JSCI, the opposition and the media, we
will expose them. We need honest answers. With the combined efforts of the
opposition and the media, I want to tell the arrogant and corrupt officials
that Big Brother is watching them. [Laughter.]

Mr E I EBRAHIM: Chairperson, hon members, all societies seek secret means
by which to defend them from both external and internal threats. The SA
Secret Service, Sass, draws its mandate from the National Strategic Act and
from the national intelligent priorities, which is issued by the Cabinet
committee on intelligence and security annually.

A distinction is drawn between external and internal security. Internal
security is concerned with, inter alia, subversion and terrorism that
either challenge the authority of the state or threaten human security,
while external security is concerned with threats posed by external forces.
Each is often dealt with by separate agencies, for example the NIA deals
with internal security, while the Sass deals with external security.

A clear distinction, however, is often blurred in practice. If there is a
conflictual domestic political situation, it might become vulnerable to
exploitation by foreign parties. A persecuted minority or a persecuted
religious or cultural group is likely to gain support from outside the
country's borders, from groups sharing similar objectives.

Therefore there is a link between external and internal threats to any
society, and the existence of the intelligence services is vital in this
link. In the current international environment, the main threat comes not
from conventional war, but rather the indirect involvement of forces which
could include state, multinational companies, political or religious
organisations, criminal syndicates and even NGOs.

Intelligence on the intentions and activities of such bodies becomes of
utmost importance to the intelligence community. South Africa is faced with
a broad range of challenges due to the transformation into a democracy. Our
vision of the African Renaissance now reflected in the Millennium Africa
Recovery Programme, Map, requires us to be proactive on the continent in
addressing the question of poverty, good governance, human rights,
democracy and sustainable, all-round development.

Our country and our President have led the programme for the renewal of the
continent. Peace, security and the prevention and resolution of conflict,
become an important factor in the renewal of the African continent. South
Africa's immediate environment within the Southern African region and in
the rest of the continent revealed increasing tensions last year. We have
witnessed growing intra and interstate violence, including the ongoing use
of mercenaries and private security companies by beleaguered statutory and
nonstatutory forces.

There has been conflict and instability in both SADC states and in central
and east African regions. Major foreign powers remain active in Africa in
order to advance their own economic and strategic interests. The continuing
existence of conflict in Africa will have a negative impact on the attitude
of foreign investors and undermine confidence in the African Renaissance,
while also contributing to Africa's declining share of global foreign
direct investment. President Mbeki has called for African ownership of the
renewal of the continent and African-led solutions to the many problems of
Africa.

The SA Secret Service, which is not mandated to support unconstitutional
and tyrannical regimes, plays a key role in fostering positive development
by, inter alia, alerting our President to potential threats to peace and
stability on the continent. An effective early warning system enables us,
together with our multilateral partners, to timeously intervene to prevent
conflict-filled situations.

Sass has an important role to play in the success of the peace process on
the continent. In the Burundi peace process our Intelligence has made an
invaluable contribution through our Deputy President's attempt to seek a
solution there. Sass also supports our peace missions in the DRC and in
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

There is a serious and considered effort on the part of the international
community to prevent the exploitation and sale of conflict or what is
referred to as ``blood diamonds,'' which fuel the fires of tragic war on
our continent. As a diamond-producing nation, our Intelligence provides
support in order to locate and prevent the movement of blood diamonds. It
is also the core business of Sass to deal with the proliferation of both
conventional and small arms weapons and of antipersonnel mines on our
continent. Sass also deals with maritime threats which target our marine
resources.

South Africa has been the venue recently of numerous international
conferences and these have to be secured by our security forces, including
our intelligence community. The post-Cold War era has placed increasing
emphasis on international crime and criminal syndicates, on drug
trafficking, on money-laundering and on war crimes. Sass is actively
involved in intelligence gathering on international crime, and also tackles
the question of harmful trade practices, such as underfactoring, dumping of
goods, and counterfeit and illegal imports.

Sass has collaborated closely with the SA Revenue Service in successfully
combating crime, and has recouped millions of rands in revenue. Through the
activities of Sass, numerous illegal containers have been seized at our
ports of entry. Sass was central to the negotiations which resulted in the
release of Callie and Monique Strydom when they were kidnapped by
Philippino terrorists. From the beginning to the end, Sass was very active
in securing the safety and release of our nationals.

Sass also focuses on South-South relations and on strategic partnerships
worldwide, as well as on designated multilateral organisations. Our
successful role in Nam, SADC and the OAU, and our presidency next year of
the African Union, require us to take up various issues of the developing
world, such as debt cancellation, poverty alleviation, and trade and
development issues. Our involvement in all these issues must be backed by
intelligence information.

Members of Sass are hard-working, dedicated men and women who work for long
hours and, at times, under hazardous conditions. They work without
receiving any glory from the media or the public. It is their hard work
that secures our country from instability and which contributes to the
success of our foreign policy.

This state of affairs could be negatively affected if the capacity and
resource issues facing the intelligence community are not addressed. Of
main concern is the inability of Sass to establish offices abroad, in line
with South Africa's foreign policy objectives, and our inability to deploy
adequate intelligence services, while foreign powers are doubling their
personnel in many countries. Of the 93 diplomatic offices that we have
around the world, Sass has only a fraction of that number. Yet Sass has
achieved many successes with proven financial management. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, before I start
speaking, I want to assure the Minister that there is no reason for alarm,
there has been no change in the UDM's member of this committee. Mr Abram
has, unfortunately, fallen ill and he apologises for not being able to
participate in this debate.

The total budget for the secret services for the current financial year
amounts to R893 million, increasing to R1,1 billion in the year of the
MTEF. This budget is carried by the National Treasury for the programming
of its budget. For obvious reasons very little is known about this budgeted
amount with regard to the output and service delivery indicators, which
makes a proper evaluation virtually impossible. Therefore, very little is
left to say, but, like a true politician, I will go ahead and say it in any
case.

The fact that the national Intelligence has a full Minister responsible for
the department, begs the question why this budget of the secret services
should not be removed from the National Treasury to its own department. The
Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence can retain its role of
parliamentary oversight and accountability, while Scopa should continue its
function of financial management oversight over national Intelligence.

The Portfolio Committee on Finance and members of Parliament have no basis
or tool upon which to judge the secret services. At the same time we are
aware of the important task that the secret services fulfil in our
democratic society.

The UDM supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, since South Africa re-
entered the global political arena, it has become a significant
international role-player. Although South Africa is still a young
democracy, the global issues it is faced with are more complex than its
capacity can sometimes endure.

It is in this regard that our country's national security agencies must be
competent and equipped to demand respect for its intelligence capacities
and abilities. The increase in the expenditure on intelligence is, of
course, to be welcomed by the ACDP, especially if it is to support the
improvement in intelligence gathering and defence capacity.

It is essential that national intelligence agencies should be independent
and serve the national interests of the state, and not party interests.
Unfortunately this appears to have been compromised in what appears to have
been an attempt by the Minister of Safety and Security to use state
security mechanisms to defend the President's party-leadership position. I
stand to be corrected on this issue, but this is the impression that most
newspapers have created.

South Africa is an international player and has other greater problems to
contend with. South Africa is open to international threat and violence
from many corners of the world. International terrorism is a key factor
that South Africa has to guard against.

The recent extradition to the USA from South Africa of a terrorist
responsible for the bombing of the US embassy in Kenya in 1998 is a result
of good intelligence work done by the NIA and Sass. International arms
syndicates and crime warlords are using South African territory to operate
its clandestine business. There have been several arrests and successful
prosecutions. This is indicative of good intelligence work done by the NIA
and we commend them for that.

The arms deal is another example of South Africa's vulnerability to dubious
international transactions and the NIA and Sass should tell the committee
... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Carry on, hon member.

Mr L M GREEN: The NIA and Sass should tell the intelligence committee
whether any probity checks were done on the foreign companies involved in
the arms deal. There are many allegations of fraud and corruption and our
intelligence service should be able to confirm or deny this.

South Africa is a democracy that allows much more latitude for all forms of
activities than other well-established democracies. It has therefore opened
its borders for abuse and misuse by other undemocratic and violent forces.

We congratulate the new Minister on her appointment, and we believe that
she will raise the level of the intelligence services. We also believe that
she will restore stability, pride and national confidence in all our
intelligence services. We also commend the chairperson of the JSCI for her
dedication and all her hard work.

The ACDP supports this Vote.

Dr S C CWELE: Chairperson, hon members, hon Mike Ellis, last Saturday I
listened with sadness to a lady struggling to answer a qualifying question
to a one million rand competition on a KwaZulu-Natal radio station. When
she was asked: ``Who is the Deputy President of this country?'', she
answered: ``Thabo Mbeki.'' She was then asked: ``Who is the Minister of
Correctional Services?'' After a few seconds of struggling, she answered:
``Steve Tshwete.''

With such a level of ignorance, I am sure she could not even guess the name
of the Minister for Intelligence. May I take this opportunity to inform her
that this department is under the capable leadership of an outstanding ANC
MP, Dr Lindiwe Sisulu. We hope that this debate will contribute to
informing the public that our intelligence services are the servants of
democracy and the peace-loving people of our nation, striving to protect
our people, identifying the threats to the national security and promoting
freedom from fear and want.

My input will focus on the National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee,
Nicoc, and the Inspector-General for Intelligence, the IG. Over a year ago,
this House, the public and our intelligence community welcomed the
appointment of Dr Faizel Randera, the first Inspector-General of our
intelligence services. This complemented the oversight of services by the
Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence and the Minister, ensuring that
the services carry out their mandate within the confines of the law and the
Constitution, and at all times hold the flag of our national security very
high.

The Inspector-General must, in terms of our law, monitor compliance of
services with their policies, review activities of the services with the
aim of proposing remedies to any irregularities, pursue tasks given by the
Minister and give reports to the Minister, the President and the committee
at regular intervals. Our legislation locates the Inspector-General to be
part and parcel of our intelligence community. He is not, and shall not be,
another Public Protector, nor is he, or shall he be, another chapter nine
institution of our Constitution. While there have been some teething
problems, the Minister fulfilled the mandate of setting up the office of
the IG. This is understandable, because this is a new institution. The
JSCI, the IG and the Minister spend a lot of time developing guidelines for
the functioning of the Office of the Inspector-General.

The ANC says that now is the time to implement these regulations with
immediate effect. The swearing in of the IG this morning is one of the
mechanisms of ensuring that his office enjoys the high confidence of all
our services. Without this confidence it is doomed to fail, like it was the
case previously in Canada. The international experience, including even
America, confirms our committee's position that the IG must draw the staff
mainly from within the services. The Office of the Inspector-General must
be located within the services in the most secure environment and in our
case, the NIA headquarters.

Lastly, the budget of the IG, like that of the Minister, must be through
the NIA as the accounting office. Our laws provide the public with several
avenues to communicate with our Inspector-General. They can write directly
to the Inspector-General through our Minister and through the Joint
Standing Committee on Intelligence.

The National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee, Nicoc, continues to
harness all our intelligence services, ensuring efficient utilisation of
our limited resources, minimising unhealthy competition among agencies and
providing the President and the state with a useful, quality intelligence
product. The broader definition of intelligence which includes
environmental, economic and socioeconomic intelligence demands more
resources if our developmental goals are to be met.

The National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee has played a central
role, as many members have said, in co-ordinating the strategies for
clamping down on crime syndicates and warlords in our communities. We are
indebted to them for the peace in KwaZulu-Natal. We salute them for placing
us on top of taxi warlords, gangster kingpins and senseless bombers of our
Mother City.

While intelligence is an exclusive national competency, we deliberately
created provincial intelligence co-ordinating committees, Picocs, as the
operational substructures of Nicoc. Last year our committee undertook a
short assessment of Picocs and came out with the recommendation of
strengthening their management. Now that we have strong provincial offices
of the NIA, we need a comprehensive review of these provincial structures,
clarifying their functions, accountability and their clients.

If we accept that intelligence must lead and guide policy and development,
we must realise that our new integrated approach of governance demand
modern and efficient methods of delivering intelligence. We welcome the
establishment of a Nicoc early warning centre in the office of the
President, to keep it abreast of fast-breaking events. This is not a new
parallel intelligence structure, but a Nicoc substructure, to improve the
service delivery to the Presidency. It is also in this vein that we welcome
the client liaison centre to assist the department, including this
Parliament.

In conclusion, let me emphasise that our country needs a strong and
functioning Office of the Inspector-General which commands respect from all
our services and the public. We need an efficient and well-resourced
National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee which is capable of
delivering intelligence products to deal with the challenges of the current
phase of our national democratic revolution. The ANC and the Joint Standing
Committee on Intelligence support this Budget Vote. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEE: Order! Hon members, I wish to
recognise the Zimbabwean delegation, which is in the gallery. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Mr Chairperson, very briefly, I would like
to thank all the hon members who participated in the debate.

First of all, I would like to thank the chairperson. Most members here will
know that she occupies my post there. That is the job that I had hoped I
would carve out for myself for life, but I had to leave and hand it over to
someone else. It is a job that I enjoyed doing.

I was in the committee as chairperson, together with the hon Mr Green and
the hon Mr Landers, and we had a very good time. We had immense power
there, which I miss terribly now. I do not have the same power that the
chairperson has. I envy her and her job. I thank her very much for her
support.

I would also like to recognise hon members Landers and Ebrahim for the
recognition and acknowledgement they have made towards the work that the
services are providing for the country. It is much-needed recognition, as I
indicated earlier. The services do not get the kind of recognition that
most members of the opposition party try to get on a regular basis in the
media. [Interjections.]

I would also want to thank big sister Martha Olckers for her contribution
in this debate. However, I think that I need to make just one correction.
Hon member Martha Olckers says that the opposition in JSCI are watching
criminals. The hon member is very wrong. It is, in fact, the services that
are watching criminals. We would never put such a responsible job in the
hands of the opposition. [Laughter.] They would sleep on the job.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] We are looking for a suitable wife for the hon
member, so he should just hang in there.

Mr F BEUKMAN: I would marry the hon Minister. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER: That is not acceptable.

I actually found it very surprising that I agree with the hon member Van
Wyk. She is gone now, but she raised the very important issue of our
delinking our Vote from that of the Treasury. We would welcome that. I am
sure it would also work in her favour, if she is standing in for an hon
member who is not here, to have some prime time next year when we are on
our own. But we are looking into that and we are going to make sure that we
attend to it.

Finally, I would also like to thank Prof Ndabandaba. Yes, I am impressed
with his intellectual capacity and I will be seeing Minister Buthelezi to
see if, in fact, I can recruit Prof Ndabandaba into the services.
[Laughter.]

I have also taken note of the hon Green's suggestion about the probity
investigation and we will look into that matter and see if, in fact, it
would be possible for us to report back on it. Again, I thank all hon
members very much for their time. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I hope the hon the Minister
also notices the hon Mike Ellis for a job in the services. [Laughter.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:50.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the Acting President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


                  Housing Amendment Bill [B 7D - 2001] - Act No 4 of 2001
                  (assented to and signed by Acting President on 13 June
                  2001); and


                  Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2001] - Act No 5 of
                  2001 (assented to and signed by Acting President on 13
                  June 2001).


     (2)    The following Bills were introduced by the Minister of Trade and
         Industry in the National Assembly on 14 June 2001 and referred to
         the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
         Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Merchandise Marks Amendment Bill [B 33 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              22249 of 24 April 2001.]
        (ii)     Trade Practices Amendment Bill [B 34 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              22249 of 24 April 2001.]


         The Bills have also been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry of the National Assembly.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 21 -
     Labour [RP 130-2000].



