---
title: 'National Assembly - 22 June 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-06-22
---

FRIDAY, 22 JUNE 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 10:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Resumption of debate on Vote No 1 - Presidency:

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, Deputy President and hon
members, I would like to welcome the representatives of our Public Service
who are here with us today. They are critically important to the success of
what we are trying to do, which is to change this country for the better. I
am, indeed, very glad that they are here this morning. [Applause.]

I am going to do something that I do not normally do and which I do not
like doing. I am going to speak about myself. [Laughter.] As we grew up, we
were taught always to tell the truth. We learnt that we should always
search for the truth and not be happy with repeating dogma, however
widespread the belief that such dogma represented the truth.

We were taught never to fear to defend what we believed was right. It was
said that we must respect people, even if they hold views that are
different from ours. Furthermore, we should understand that to swear at
people or otherwise resort to foul language indicates that the dialogue has
ended and the stage is set for a physical fight.

We were taught that no self-respecting person tells untruths and that a
person who does not respect himself or herself cannot expect others to
respect him or her. I am certain that there are many in this House who will
recognise themselves as students who were exposed to these instructions.
I speak in this manner because of some of the things that were said
yesterday, as the hon members participated in the debate on the Vote of the
Presidency. I refer, in particular, to the charge that far too often we use
the so-called ``race card''; that what we say and do leads to feelings of
marginalisation and disempowerment among the Afrikaners; that discussion of
racism leads to mutual accusations, more racism and new tensions; and that
the real issue that divides our country is poverty, which can only be
addressed through higher rates of economic growth.

The burden of these statements is that we should not discuss racism,
because to discuss racism is racist and foments racism. Indeed, one of the
speakers said that calls for reconciliation have been replaced by a debate
on racism. Observations were made that even as the international community
seeks to address the issue of racism, this should not take place in our
country, as will happen when the UN World Conference on Racism convenes in
Durban two months from now.

Evidently, some of the matters that are legitimate and correct subjects for
discussion are national reconciliation, self-determination for the
Afrikaners, poverty and economic growth. We must assume from this that what
is spoken of here is colour-blind national reconciliation, colour-blind
self-determination for the Afrikaners, colour-blind poverty and colour-
blind economic growth.

Let me hasten to state that I agree fully with the hon members that we must
pursue the objective of national reconciliation with the greatest
determination. This is fundamental to stability in our country and the
building of a new society without racial tensions.

The Government and the parties in Government will not waver in their
pursuit of this goal. The Government will also continue to address the
issue of the collective rights of the Afrikaner people, as it must respect
and advance the collective rights of all language and cultural groups in
our country. This is an inherent part of the process of our national
reconciliation, and is therefore also fundamental to the building of a new
society free of racial and ethnic tensions.

We also agree fully that we must sustain a concerted offensive against
poverty, aiming at its complete eradication, and agree that this is one of
the structural faults that characterise our society, which we cannot but
attend to, using all means at our disposal. We further agree that we must
work to ensure that our economy achieves higher rates of growth, to
generate the opportunities and the material resources we need to realise
the goal of a better life for all.

In all humility, I would like to suggest that the Government does not need
educating on any of these matters. What we said in this House yesterday
refers to all these matters in one way or another. Beyond what we said
yesterday and have said before, an honest and unprejudiced assessment of
what the Government is actually doing and has been doing will show that, at
the very least, we have endeavoured to translate our words into action.
This was the central message of our statement yesterday. The country and
the opposition parties will be at liberty to ask, in future, whether we
have kept to what we said we would do.

Accordingly, on the issues of national reconciliation, the rights and
aspirations of all national groups, poverty, economic growth and
development, we will continue to pursue that, ready to listen to criticism
where we fail and ready to listen to the opinions of those who might not be
in Government, including the opposition parties that sit in this House.

Let me now return to the matter of my educational upbringing and its
relevance to the matters we have been discussing. According to the advice
we received yesterday - and before - from some of the hon members of the
opposition parties, one of the things we must do is to stand up and say
that our country has no problem of racism, with the exception of occasional
incidents of black and white racism.

We must then go on to say that the racial socioeconomic legacy we inherited
from our apartheid past is no longer a distinguishing feature of our
society. We would then proceed to say that, in reality, South Africa is a
society of equals, regardless of race, colour, gender or geographic
location.

Such inequality as exists, we are required to say, is inequality between
and among social classes rather than between racial groups. I presume that,
in terms of this advice, with regard to the provisions in our national
Constitution, which talk about our racist legacy and prescribe that we must
act to address it, we must also stand up and proclaim that these
prescriptions are irrelevant and are only of rhetorical importance.

Were I to rise anywhere to make these extraordinary statements, I would not
be surprised at the accompanying hoots of derisory laughter and the
universal conclusion that the President is truly unhinged - which brings me
back to my education. Respect for the truth, as I see it, obliges me to say
that it would be eminently dishonest to pretend and assert that the legacy
of centuries of colonialism and apartheid has been wiped out in a period of
seven years since our liberation. [Applause.] Such an assertion would
obviously be false.

Love for our country and all its people also tells me that because we
recognise and accept the reality of this legacy, which condemns our country
to continuing conflict and the failure of the project for national
reconciliation, we must act to eradicate this legacy. Because this is a
legacy of racist policies, we cannot and must not avoid discussing racism,
precisely to ensure that we end it in our country. It would seem only
logical that to cure an illness requires, in the first instance, that the
illness be diagnosed correctly. Any failure to recognise the fact of the
illness, can only condemn the sick person to a further deterioration of his
or her health.

I would like to believe that all this is simple enough. Yet, there is a
problem. The problem is that some of our compatriots, including some in
this House, are uncertain and deeply fearful of the future. Trapped in the
entrenched consciousness of the past, they cannot define themselves outside
the categories of the past. Accordingly, they see our country as one that
is divided according to racial majorities and minorities, with conflicting
and irreconcilable interests. It is in this context that they decry what
they describe as ``majoritarianism.''

They also make passionate appeals to us to abandon our long-standing allies
and take them on as our new allies. They promise that they will come to us
as representatives of a national minority or minorities, whereas we are
defined not by what we stand for, but by the fact that we represent a
racial majority. The irony in all this is that those who make this plea
walked out of the Government of National Unity and refused to form a
coalition government with us in this province ... [Applause] ... when, by
popular vote, we had emerged as the single largest party in the province.

To respond to the unfounded fears about the future among some of our
compatriots, we are asked to avoid telling the truth. We are asked to say
that the legacy of apartheid, of racial divisions and disparities, is no
more. To force us to tell falsehoods, the insult is thrown out that the
very people who sacrificed everything to end racism in our country have
chosen to entrench racism, for opportunistic political purposes. The
problem is that we will not turn our backs on what we learnt about the
absolute necessity to tell the truth, painful as the telling of that truth
might be.

On 10 May last year, we discussed the issue of Zimbabwe in this House.
Regardless of the fact that I had addressed the issue of Zimbabwe a number
times by then, strident calls were still being made for me to make a strong
statement on the situation in Zimbabwe. It was clear to me that the reason
for this insistence had nothing to do with Zimbabwe, but reflected fears
that here, too, we might act in a hostile manner towards our white
compatriots. I said that in this House, for which I was accused, yesterday,
of having used the ``race card'' once again.

According to Hansard, what I said was this:


  Here one has a black government across the Limpopo which is perceived to
  be doing particular things regarding this land matter. What guarantee do
  we have that the black Government this side of the Limpopo will not do
  the same things? ... That is what is driving this demand, not the
  resolution of the Zimbabwe question.

When I made this point, I believed it to be true and remain convinced that
I was right. On that occasion, here is what the hon Marthinus van
Schalkwyk, leader of the New NP, said:


  Madam Speaker, I was not going to ask a question but, in the light of the
  President's answer, I think I must make a short statement and ask a
  question, because he raised the issue, as he did outside in public, that
  it is a black government and that is why people here react in a certain
  way. Let me speak as a member of a minority. When we see, as members of
  minorities, what happens, inter alia, to minorities in Zimbabwe, yes,
  there is fear ... It is not a politically correct statement, but I am
  reacting directly to what the President said.

It is true that the hon member went on to say that the concerns of the
minorities did not arise from the fact that we had black governments on
both banks of the Limpopo, but from a matter of principle and the friendly
relations between the ruling parties in Zimbabwe and South Africa.

Nevertheless, the point about national minorities had been made. At that
point, I responded as follows:


  I perfectly understand how national minorities in any country would
  entertain fears like that. That is perfectly natural ... Why will that
  thing that is happening there not happen here?

On 10 May 2000 the hon member had the courage to tell the truth about the
fears of the minorities. It would seem that by 21 June 2001 that courage
had deserted him and what was true in May last year had turned into a
``race card'' by June this year. [Applause.]

I have discussed this matter at this length because the creation of a
nonracial society is central to the historic task of building a new South
Africa. To achieve this objective, we will continue to tell the truth as we
see it. We will continue to focus our energies on ending the racist legacy,
which stares us in the face everyday. We will not be persuaded that the
best way to deal with racism in our country is to pretend that the problem
does not exist.

We are fortunate that we too are South African. We do not accept that there
are some politicians who have an exclusive right and possibility to speak
for the white citizens of our country. [Applause.] The overwhelming
majority of our white citizens see South Africa, quite correctly, as their
home. They have no desire to and will not go anywhere else. They are
committed to work to rebuild this country as their own. They do not see our
black citizens as a threatening horde of barbaric natives, but as
compatriots with whom they work together everyday for the common good. I
would never insult them by suggesting that they say agreeable things when
they talk to me, while they tell a tale of fear for the future when they
interact with particular political parties.

Furthermore, nobody will convince me that the Afrikaners as a whole fear
that I might stalk them in the night to wreak vengeance on unsuspecting
women and children. There are too many Afrikaners that I have trusted for
many years and worked with to bring about change and who have done so
without asking for anything in return, for me to believe political stories
that the Afrikaners, in general, are afflicted by a disease of irrational
fear. I know that there are some among our white compatriots who behave in
unacceptable ways. Nevertheless, I am convinced that these are not
representative of white opinion in our country.

I will stand up to proclaim these truths everywhere, whatever the political
cost to myself. Perhaps needless to say, I will never seek to purchase
popularity and approval from those who have the capacity to amplify their
voices, by communicating what I know to be false, dishonest and
dishonourable. The high post we occupy demands that we act with integrity,
not informed by any desire to achieve cheap popularity. In addition, we
will not compromise the better future of our people, both black and white,
in exchange for positive opinion polls and temporary political gain.
[Applause.]

In this regard, I must make the point as strongly as I can that our country
is subject to too high a level of violence. Too many in our society have no
respect for human life and for the inviolability of the individual. I
believe that all of us have become too accustomed to violence against
persons, in all its forms. For years, by far the biggest cause of death in
this country has been what, in statistical tables, is described as
``external causes of death''.

The Government must clearly take the lead in communicating the message that
we have had enough of the violence in our society. We must communicate the
message that an injury to any one of us, to any of our people, is an injury
to all of us. Therefore, we must ensure that we give no quarter to criminal
violence.

The Truth and Reconciliation Commission is approaching the conclusion of
its work. As Government, we will return to Parliament with proposals about
how we should build on the important work done by the commission. This will
include the critical and complex issue of what the law describes as final
reparations, which are an essential part of our process of national
reconciliation. We will also have to discuss the issue of how we handle any
unfinished work that bears on political offences that were committed in the
past, for which a sizeable number of our people did not apply for amnesty.

Let me also take this opportunity to warn against the rush to reach
conclusions on the basis of allegations or insufficient information. It
might very well be an imperative of opposition to seize any opportunity to
oppose the executive. However, I have been concerned at the ease with which
some have found it possible to treat rumours and allegations as facts,
driven in part by the wrong concept that the executive is necessarily
corrupt and suspect.

I believe that the legislature must guard against the eventuality that the
people arrive at the determination that members of Parliament are more
interested in attacking the executive than in advancing the truth. The
members of Parliament who sit in the executive and the executive itself, do
not represent the epitome of evil, however much it might seem a beneficial
political strategy to present them as such.

The peoples of the world will gather in Durban towards the end of August,
to consider how humanity might respond to the challenges of racism,
xenophobia and other discriminatory practices. We will have to prepare to
receive these delegates with our usual hospitality, ready to engage the
serious issues that the World Conference will address.

Among other things, we will have to tell the peoples of the world what we
are doing to end racism in our own country. I pray that we have the
possibility to speak with one voice at this important conference. I trust
that we will be able to speak honestly to all the delegates about what we
have done, what we plan to do and the obstacles we face in our common
struggle to create a nonracial and nonsexist society. There is much that we
can add to the positive outcome of the conference. The world certainly
expects this of us, and we should not disappoint this expectation.

The hon Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi spoke of what might be done to give due
respect to the Office of Head of State. I thank him most sincerely for
raising this question. However, it is clear to me that our country still
needs time to evolve its own conventions about how to handle this office.
In the meantime, we will do whatever we can to protect the dignity of this
office and to position it as a representative of all the people of our
country, regardless of race or political affiliation.

I have referred some of the more specific questions raised by hon members
to our Ministers, who will communicate our responses to the hon members
concerned. These include the matter of the former members of the
Bophuthatswana Defence Force who opted for demobilisation.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Deputy President
and Minister Essop Pahad, Director-General Frank Chikane, the advisers and
the rest of the staff in the Presidency for the valuable work they do
everyday, as well as for their dedication, which means that they never have
any ``tjhaile'' or knock-off time. [Applause.]

I must also thank the Ministers, Deputy Ministers and directors-general,
who have all carried out their tasks splendidly. I am not afraid to say
that we have an excellent team. [Applause.] I am very pleased that we have
as many women Ministers and Deputy Ministers as we do, who are central to
the accomplishment of the task of creating a people-centred society.

Tomorrow, Deputy Minister Ntombazana Botha will be burying her son, Lt Col
Anthony Joseph Smith, an officer serving in the School of Armour at Tempe,
who succumbed to a brain tumour. I am certain that all of us extend
heartfelt condolences to her.

I have appreciated the time I have spent in this House interacting with the
hon members. I urge hon members to do whatever they can to contribute to
the mobilisation of all our people to unite in action for change.

I thank all the members who had the opportunity to participate in this
debate. We noted all the comments and will consider them carefully. I also
thank Madame Speaker and the other presiding officers. Our country is proud
of everything you have done and are doing. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr W M SKHOSANA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the ANC's longstanding commitment to nation-building, unity and
           reconciliation;


       (b)  the call by President Thabo Mbeki in his Vote speech for all
           South Africans to unite in action to fight poverty and speed up
           change;


       (c)  how well this call was received by the majority of South
           Africans, including the media, big business and organised
           agriculture; and


       (d)  the positive examples set by those businesspeople and farmers
           mentioned by the President, and countless others;


  (2) expresses its dismay at the reaction of the DP and its leader, Tony
       Leon, who seem intent on widening the divides of the past; and


  (3) calls on the DP to heed the call of the President for unity in action
       for change.

[Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on
the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the response of the President to the debate on his Vote
       yesterday ;


  (2) wishes to draw attention to the fact that essentially the President
       was having an argument with himself and his own party, because no one
       in this House yesterday suggested that there was no racism in the
       system in South Africa, but what was suggested was that how one
       addresses racism in South Africa is going to be the difference
       between making a success and making a failure of the new South
       Africa; and


  (3) further resolves that it will not address racism by putting more
       doses of racism into the system of a nonracial South Africa.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Southern African region has seen a solar eclipse after
       almost 61 years and at the beginning of the new millennium;


  (2) congratulates the Northern Province on having received substantial
       revenue from internal and international tourists through landing fees
       at its airports;


  (3) applauds the fact that the solar eclipse had an impact on the South
       Africans, especially the Zulus and the British, when they engaged in
       the Anglo-Zulu War;


  (4) further applauds the fact that a major historical event in Christian
       history took place when the eclipse overshadowed the Holy Land for
       three hours;


  (5) commends the Department of Arts and Culture on its campaign to alert
       people to the dangers of the eclipse and also providing protective
       sunglasses; and


  (6) welcomes the fact that no major terrible disaster occurred during
       this geographical event.

[Applause.]

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House notes -


  (1) that -


       (a)  the hon Sipho Mzimela has publicly accused the UDM of
           corruption; and


       (b)  the Leader of the UDM has positioned himself as a ``whistle-
           blower'' on corruption and chose to ignore allegations of
           corruption within his own ranks;


  (2) believes that the deliberate ignoring of these allegations
       demonstrates that the hon Holomisa is not committed to fighting
       corruption and that he is only using this problem for cheap political
       point-scoring;


  (3) calls on the hon Holomisa to investigate allegations of corruption
       within the ranks of his party; and


  (4) calls on Parliament, through the Standing Committee on Public
       Accounts, to investigate whether the alleged corruption in the UDM
       includes money allocated to UDM members of Parliament to fulfil their
       parliamentary obligations.

[Applause.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that, notwithstanding the Minister of Social
       Development's undertaking -


       (a)  a total of 47 962 applicants for social security grants are
           still waiting for payment for a period longer than three months;
           and


       (b)  the estimated amount of back-pay to these poor, deprived people
           amounts to over R262 million;


  (2) believes that this clearly indicates that the Government is not
       focused on service delivery and is not putting the people first; and


  (3) therefore requires answers to the following questions:
       (a)  how does the Government intend paying these people as no
           budgetary provision has been made; and


       (b)  how much longer must these people still wait before they get
           their money that the Government owes them.

[Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, I will move on behalf of the UDM ...

The SPEAKER: Order hon members! Would you please take your seats?

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the importance of job creation, especially in the textile
       industry, and specifically in the Eastern Cape, where unemployment
       and poverty are rife;


  (2) expresses its dismay that R1 billion in foreign investment by Ramatex
       in the Eastern Cape, which would have resulted in 18 000 desperately
       needed jobs, has now been withdrawn indefinitely;


  (3) condemns this state of affairs that, according to the ANC Mayor of
       Buffalo City, is the direct result of squabbles and confusion between
       the Department of Trade and Industry and the National Treasury; and


  (4) further notes that foreign investment is increasingly threatened by
       the actions of Government, such as the yet unresolved SAA saga,
       specifically noting the warning by Swiss Air that South Africa must
       clean up its act.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) endorses the position of President Mbeki on race and racism expressed
       in his response to the Vote debate; and


  (2) believes that the motion by the hon Tony Leon does not reflect the
       view of the House nor that of the people of South Africa.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with disapproval that television authorities in Zimbabwe have
       banned a new live weekly talk show which was critical of President
       Robert Mugabe's policies and actions;
  (2) acknowledges that Zimbabwe has only one broadcaster, the ZBC, in
       spite of the fact that the monopoly was broken last year in a ruling
       handed down by the Supreme Court, as no new player has been allowed
       into the market;


  (3) further acknowledges that the new broadcasting law forbids community
       radio stations from carrying any political programming, bars radio
       stations from carrying political advertising and requires private
       broadcasters to give the Government one hour of airtime each week to
       explain policy; and


  (5) calls on the South African Government and other democratic
       governments strongly to express their concern over this further
       clampdown on the media which represents another debilitating blow to
       democracy in Africa.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the enormous problem that drug-taking has become in our
       schools;


  (2) commits itself to support all legal means to protect our children
       from the threat that drugs pose;


  (3) expresses its support for random drug testing in schools under strict
       guidelines including -


       (a)  the informed consent of parents for the testing of their
           children; and;


       (b)  the education and counselling of learners about drugs and their
           consequences and the implications of drug testing; and


  (4) calls on the Minister of Education, Kader Asmal, to drop his
       objection to random drug testing in schools under these conditions.

Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Speaker has hinted that she intends to sue the Leader
       of the UDM, the hon Bantu Holomisa, for defamation;


  (2) believes that public representatives and members of the public have
       the right to express themselves, but should do so responsibly;


  (3) further believes that the recent pronunciations by the hon Bantu
       Holomisa were irresponsible and undermined the integrity of this
       House and our newly found democracy; and


  (4) supports the intentions of the Speaker to discipline him and
       inculcate a culture of responsibility in the hon Holomisa, as this
       will remind him that the nation expects him to abide by the laws of
       the country.

[Applause.]

Mr N S BRUCE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:
  That the House -


  (1) views with dismay the decision of the Malaysian company, Ramatex, to
       divert a new R1 billion textile factory from the Eastern Cape to
       Namibia because of confusion and delay over industrial incentives;


  (2) notes that while industrial incentives are controversial and not
       always desirable, if the Government cannot make up its mind, keep its
       promises, sort out bureaucratic differences swiftly and improve its
       efficiency, other potential investments will be jeopardised; and


  (3) therefore calls on the Government to review its labour and other
       obstructive laws so that industrial incentives are not necessary to
       attract fixed capital investment.

[Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that I will move
tomorrow that we all notice that the UDM has a new leader. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]
The SPEAKER: Order!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I also give notice:


  That the House -


  (1) takes note of the fact that the Springboks will be playing against
       the French tomorrow;


  (2) wishes the Springboks the best of luck and a great win; and


  (3) urges the Minister of Finance also to support the Springboks.

[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr M I SCOTT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -
       (a)  the DA's inhumane eviction of the Tafelsig Feeding Scheme,
           crèche and residents, and the cutting of the water of poor
           families by a security company and the police;


       (b)  the council's report on the gap between the rich and the poor,
           with unemployment at 20% and blacks earning five times less than
           whites; and


       (c)  allegations that their Mayor hands out RDP houses to his family,
           while the poor remain homeless;


  (2) condemns the DA council's vicious campaign against the poor people of
       Cape Town; and


  (3) calls on the DA to clarify how cutting the water of the poor, closing
       down community-run feeding schemes and keeping the poor homeless will
       close the gap between rich and poor.

[Applause.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the first anniversary of the sinking of the Treasure off the
           Cape west coast last year, which threatened almost 41% of the
           African penguin species;


       (b)  that South Africa has borne the brunt of four of the top 20 oil
           spills worldwide; and


       (c)  that Sarah Scarth, the Worldwide Emergency Relief Director, said
           her organisation was dismayed that a year had passed without the
           South African Government drawing any closer to tightening
           legislation to protect its shorelines; and


  (2) urges the Government to prevent a repeat of such a disaster by
       following the lead of the European Commission, and to accelerate
       legislation introducing double-hulled tankers, monitoring and
       controlling maritime traffic, and ensuring oil spill compensation and
       liability.
The SPEAKER: Before we take the last notice of motion, hon members, there
are too many private conversations going on. Please, would you have them
outside the House and allow the House to debate and proceed with its
business!

Miss O N MNDENDE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with growing trepidation the increasing occurrence of criminal
       and violent attacks on elderly people across the country;


  (2) further notes that these brutal attacks are more often than not aimed
       at elderly women;


  (3) laments the un-African behaviour of hon President Mbeki over the
       weekend, when he shoved an older woman in the face in full view of
       the public, the youth and the TV cameras, creating the impression
       that it is acceptable to hit women;


  (4) confirms that respect for the elderly and women are constitutionally
       guaranteed rights, which must be upheld by all, no matter their
       office of standing; and


  (5) calls on all South African leaders to commit themselves to setting an
       example to the youth by using maturity and reason to deal with
       differences of opinion, instead of resorting to conflict and
       violence.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order! Will conversations please cease? The time
for notices of motion has expired. Before we proceed with the next item, I
wish to recognise, as you are aware, that we have a delegation from Burundi
visiting us. They are with us today and I wish to acknowledge their
presence. [Applause.] We also have with us the winner of the Comrades
Marathon, Andrew Kelehe. [Interjections.] [Applause.] Thank you. Hon
members, the request that you cease your meetings still applies.

                          AFRICA PUBLIC SERVICE DAY
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


     (1)    notes that on 23 June 2001 public servants all over the African
         continent will celebrate Africa Public Service Day and the South
         African Public Service will participate in the celebration on 22
         June and 23 June 2001;


     (2)    further notes that these celebrations will give public servants
         a moment to reflect on -


         (a)     issues affecting the African public service;


         (b)     the working conditions of men and women who devote their
              lives to service delivery to the public;


         (c)     encouraging a more favourable perception of public
              servants among ordinary people; and
         (d)     rewarding good initiatives and the promotion of
              professionalism; and


     (3)    joins the Public Service in celebrating Africa Public Service
         Day.

Agreed to.

             ROLE OF AFRIKANER BUSINESS COMMUNITY IN DEVELOPMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


     (1)    notes that Saambou Bank will build a multifaceted school complex
         for more than 200 disabled children at the Vulekani Special School
         at Umzimkhulu in the Eastern Cape;


     (2)    also notes that former President Mandela and the Minister of
         Social Development, Dr Zola Skweyiya, commended the Afrikaner
         business community at the opening of the project for their role in
         development;


     (3)    concurs with Madiba that all South Africans, both black and
         white, must unite in action for change; and


     (4)    calls on the entire business community to emulate this example
         and work with the Government in helping to play a leading role in
         the development of the country.

Agreed to.

  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF DR G W KOORNHOF'S ACHIEVEMENT IN THE COMRADES MARATHON

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, it is not customary to recognise hon
members and acknowledge their achievements. However, I think it will be
remiss of me not to recognise that one of our members completed the
Comrades Marathon last week. He has shown me his medal - the hon Dr
Koornhof! [Applause.]

I am looking forward to acknowledging many more members in the coming
months. [Applause.]

                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for
this chance to replace the Finance Minister briefly. I shall resist the
temptation to increase my Vote favourably, but I shall reduce Parliament's
budget if it does not listen quietly to what I have to say!

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired! [Laughter.]

The MINISTER: My apologies, hon Speaker, your budget has been increased.
[Laughter.]

The amendments contained in this Bill can be grouped under four broad
headings. These are the codification of the majority of the tax proposals
announced earlier this year; the amendments to facilitate Sars' Siyakha
initiatives, which are intended to improve both service and compliance
levels; amendments to the Value-Added Tax Act to improve its
administration; and the first set of technical corrections to the capital
gains tax legislation.

With regard to tax proposals, although this Bill implements a number of tax
measures that were announced on Budget Day, I am only going to concentrate
on a few of the more significant ones. Firstly, there is the issue of tax
relief for individuals. The restructuring of the tax brackets and
additional rebates mean that an additional R8,3 billion will go back to
individual taxpayers, with more than 50% of the relief going to taxpayers
with incomes of less than R80 000 per annum. This is the continuation of a
trend that has put some R33,6 billion back into the pockets of individual
taxpayers since 1995.

The exemption for interest and foreign dividends earned by a natural person
has been increased from R3 000 to R4 000 for those under 65 and from R4 000
to R5 000 for those who are 65 and older. This reduces the complexity of
the income tax system for those whose income from these sources is less
than the limits.

Another measure to simplify the income tax system for the smaller or less
sophisticated investor is the increase in the threshold for nonemployment
income at which most individuals need to register as provisional taxpayers,
from R1 000 to R2 000. In addition, the threshold for interest, dividend,
rental and remuneration income at which those of 65 or older need to
register as provisional taxpayers, has been increased from R60 000 to R80
000.

In regard to pay-as-you-earn for private company directors, presently
directors of private companies are not subject to monthly PAYE deductions
on their salaries and other remuneration. In the past this has been
justified on the basis of the practical problems that arise when fixing a
private company director's final salary for a year of assessment. The
result of this concession is that private company directors need only
settle the tax bill on their salaries when they make their provisional tax
payments and finally on assessment. My advice to members is to listen to
this very carefully.

This gives private company directors a substantial cash-flow advantage over
ordinary employees. In addition, public companies have devised structures
to permit their directors to take advantage of this cash-flow advantage. In
order to create equity between directors and ordinary employees, this Bill
proposes that PAYE be deducted from payments to directors on the basis of
the remuneration that accrued to them in respect of previous years. The
current formula to implement this proposal is the product of a consultative
process, during which the first proposals in this regard were substantially
modified to address the practical problems that were identified by
commentators. This proposal is a workable one that will be monitored for
unintended consequences for either taxpayers or the fiscus.

Small, medium and micro enterprises have an important role to play in
economic development and employment creation, especially in the
manufacturing and tourism sectors. In the light of this, the concept of a
small business corporation and a split tax rate for small business
corporations were introduced into the income tax system last year. This
year sees the continuation of that split rate of 15% for the first R100 000
of taxable income and 30% for any remaining taxable income. In addition,
this Bill proposes that small business corporations be permitted to write
off the full cost of manufacturing plant and equipment in the year that
they are brought into use, as opposed to the five years' write off for
other taxpayers.

Now that macroeconomic stability and fiscal consolidation have been
achieved, it is possible to propose microeconomic reforms that are growth-
orientated. Two of these reforms are the investment incentive for strategic
projects and the wage incentive. The Department of Trade and Industry
announced a number of industrial incentives to facilitate investment in
South Africa in 2000. This Bill proposes an extension of the range of
available policy tools to encourage investment by introducing an investment
incentive for qualifying strategic investment projects. This incentive will
provide a targeted instrument to encourage projects that have significant
direct and indirect benefits for the South African economy in the areas of
growth or employment.

It is proposed that the incentives take the form of an additional 50% or
100% initial investment allowance on industrial assets used in a qualifying
strategic industrial project. The allowance is a deduction against the
income of the industrialist and is granted in addition to the annual
capital allowance granted in respect of the assets. The maximum amount of
the investment allowance is capped at R300 million for projects qualifying
for the 50% allowance and at R600 million for the investments qualifying
for the 100% allowance.

The total amount budgeted for this incentive is R3 billion over four years,
which means that the total of the investment allowances that may be
granted, in terms of this programme, is R10 billion. Depending on the mix
of qualifying strategic projects, the investments that may be attracted
will total between R10 billion and R20 billion.

An adjudication committee will evaluate applications for the incentive on
the basis of both mandatory and scoring criteria. Where an industrial
project meets the mandatory criteria and the thresholds for the scoring
criteria, it will qualify for either the 50% or the 100% allowance. The
committee will make appropriate recommendations to the Minister of Trade
and Industry, who will finally approve an application.

The mandatory criteria include the requirements that the industrial project
must bring into use industrial assets of at least R50 million, must have
long-term commercial viability after the incentive is exhausted, may not
qualify for more than one incentive concurrently, and may not be an
industrial participation project in terms of the National Industry
Participation Programme.

Scoring criteria are arranged around three broad themes of upgrading
industry, improved business linkages, and increased employment. These
criteria, therefore, include the introduction of new processes or products,
the improvement of the competitiveness of existing industrial projects, the
acquisition of goods or services from small, medium, and micro enterprises,
and the creation of employment in South Africa.

A company that enjoys an investment allowance in terms of this provision
must report annually to the Minister of Trade and Industry on its
achievement of both mandatory and scoring criteria. Where it fails to meet
the criteria, the Minister of Trade and Industry must direct the
commissioner to withdraw any investment allowance in that year or a
subsequent year. An exception is provided for in cases where the failure to
meet the criteria was due to circumstances outside the company's control
and the Minister of Trade and Industry agrees to permit the investment
allowances' continuation.

An annual report must be submitted to Parliament setting out various
details of qualifying strategic industrial projects and their benefits to
growth and employment. This report will also cover decisions to withdraw or
continue with the investment allowance where companies fail to meet the
mandatory or scoring criteria used. These criteria and reporting
requirements are intended to minimise the abuse that has been associated
with certain previous investment incentives, while encouraging growth or
employment in South Africa.

I want to say, very briefly, that it will be in everyone's best interest,
as our President urged us, not to comment on speculative matters in
connection with Ramatex, but to wait until the facts are known. We will
then be able to show, quite clearly, that considerable efforts have been
made to secure the investment. But should this company decide to invest in
Namibia, we, as South Africa, should not begrudge that, but every effort
has been made. Let us address the facts not the speculations.

With regard to wage incentives, the wage incentive that was announced on
Budget Day continues to be the focus of an interdepartemental team. It will
be included in the next round of income tax legislation for implementation
on 1 October 2001.

With regard to airport infrastructure, the capital allowances on permanent
structures became part of the income tax law last year, in order to promote
private investment in public infrastructure. It is now proposed that the
allowances be extended to new investment in aircraft hangars, aprons,
runways and taxiways for international airports and that such structures be
written off over 20 years.

The ad valorem tax system currently requires a cumbersome administrative
system, which leads to high compliance costs and provides scope for tax
evasion. In order to simplify the system, a move to the invoice price as
the basis for calculating the duty is proposed. This broadening of the base
is then paired with the reduction in rates to 7% and 5%, as announced in
the Budget.

The cosmetics industry has indicated that it will be particularly hard hit
by the changes proposed and will experience an increase in the duties it
pays despite the reduction in rates. An interim arrangement has been made
with this industry to overcome the problem created by its specific
circumstances. This arrangement will be reviewed over the coming year as
part of the overall review of the products to which ad valorem duties
apply.

Siyakha - which means ``we are building'' - is a project which Sars has
launched to make more efficient use of its resources through the re-
engineering of its work processes and the introduction of new technologies.
The project will be piloted in Kwazulu-Natal later this year. However, to
implement the new initiatives, various changes to the tax laws are
required. Most of these changes are of an enabling nature and relate to
changes to the Customs and Excise Act.

Some of the most important initiatives are: better reporting requirements
in respect of cargo on importation and exportation; stricter controls in
respect of the movement of goods within and through South Africa; the
movement of the point of liability for excise duties on tobacco, alcohol
and oil products closer to the manufacturing stage, thereby removing the
need for and control of storage warehouses; better control over the
registration and licensing requirements for persons doing customs business;
accreditation of licensed or registered persons doing customs business; and
the regulation of electronic communication for purposes of customs and
excise procedures.

With regard to VAT on accommodation, the Value-Added Tax Act has special
provisions relating to long-term accommodation in hotels, boarding houses
and homes for the elderly. These provisions are aimed at putting people
living in such institutions on an even footing, from a VAT point of view,
with people living in their own or rented homes. This is necessary because
interest, municipal rates and home rentals are not subject to VAT. The
present rules are, however, very complicated and experience has shown that
they are seldom applied correctly. The proposed amendments substantially
simplify the valuation rules and will result in a slight decrease in the
VAT payable by the residents of such institutions from October this year.

With regard to VAT on small cane growers, the sugar and wattle industries
have, over a number of years, encouraged the development of small-scale
farmers producing sugar for the sugar mills, and wattle timber and bark for
the wattle industry. This has brought a steady income to some 40 000
previously unemployed persons, many of whom are women. The so-called flat
rate scheme allows the sugar mills and wattle industry to pay the producers
the same basic price as they pay the big producers and to compensate them
for the input VAT they incurred, without these 40 000 producers having to
register for VAT. The proposed amendment formalises a previous arrangement
between Sars and the respective industries.

With regard to Capital Gains Tax, the proposed Bill also brings about the
first set of technical corrections to the tax on capital gains that comes
into operation on 1 October 2001. These amendments are generally of a minor
nature and will, no doubt, be followed by many more in years to come as the
legislation is clarified and the loopholes plugged. A more substantial set
of related amendments will follow in the next round of tax legislation and
will include measures in respect of group restructuring.

In conclusion, this Bill is the product of the combined efforts of
officials at Sars, the National Treasury and the Department of Trade and
Industry, as well as individuals and groups that have commented on the
drafts and participated in the hearings before the Portfolio Committee on
Finance and the Select Committee on Finance. My thanks and Mr Manuel's
thanks go to all those involved.

I hereby table the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, 2001. [Applause.]

Bill, together with the introductory speech, referred to the Joint
Committee on Revenue Laws Amendment Bill for consideration and report.

                      CRIMINAL PROCEDURE AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time.

                          SOUTH AFRICAN BOXING BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)
Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted and Bill agreed to.

                NATIONAL FOREST AND FIRE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 11:03.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 36 - 2001] was introduced in the
     National Assembly by the Acting Minister of Finance on 22 June 2001. In
     accordance with resolutions passed by the National Assembly and the
     National Council of Provinces on 5 June 2001, the Bill has been
     referred to a joint committee established in terms of Joint Rule 111.

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism in the National Assembly on 22
         June 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     National Parks Amendment Bill [B 38 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              22357 of 15 June 2001.]


         The Bill has also been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Bills passed by National Assembly on 22 June 2001: To be submitted to
     President of the Republic for assent:


     (i)    South African Boxing Bill [B 13D - 2001] (National Assembly -
           sec 75);


     (ii)   National Forest and Fire Laws Amendment Bill [B 14B - 2001]
           (National Council of Provinces - sec 76).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Bills:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Wysigingswetsontwerp op Patente [W 24 - 2001].


         The Patents Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
         75) was introduced in the National Assembly on 17 May 2001 and
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry.

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report on Parliament for 2000.

2.    The Minister of Environmental and Tourism:


     Request of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, in
     terms of section 6 of the Sea-shore Act, 1935 (Act No 21 of 1935), to
     lease to Salmon Salar Sea Farming (Pty) Ltd sea space for the
     mariculture of salmon in an offshore floating area at Kleinbaai
     (Franskraal) area NAJLZLMN, near Gansbaai in the Western Cape.

