---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 27 March 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2001-03-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 MARCH 2001
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the first state visit of a South African head of state to Cuba,
       currently under-way in March 2001;


  (2) further notes the size of the delegation, which includes at least
       five Cabinet Ministers;


  (3) given the poor status of Cuba's relations with several of South
       Africa's most important trading partners, poses the question as to
       whether any benefits that may arise from the visit may not be
       outweighed by the negative connotations raised;


  (4) Given Cuba's geography and the relative lack of importance of the
       Cuban economy and its poor human rights record, questions whether the
       visit is a good investment of scarce parliamentary and executive time
       and resources.

[Interjections.]

        POSITION OF PETROL RETAILERS UNDER CURRENT PRICING STRUCTURE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the position of many petrol retailers and the present pricing
           structure that places their continued viability under threat
           and;


       (b)  that petrol retailers as a group employ a large number of our
           citizens and;


  (2) consequently calls upon the Minister of Minerals and Energy to review
       the present pricing structure and settle the matter as speedily as
       possible.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr M V MOOSA: Yes, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is an objection. The motion will
therefore become notice of a motion.

        ALLEGATIONS OF MISAPPROPRIATION OF FUNDS AGAINST CEO OF SANTA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Me E C GOUWS: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem van bewerings dat die Departement van Gesondheid se oudit-
       verslag oor SANTV onreëlmatighede openbaar;


  (2) verder daarvan kennis neem dat die verslag na bewering  ernstige
       aanklagte teen die hoof-uitvoerende beampte, dr Andrew Ratsela, oor
       die wanbesteding van geld bevat;


  (3) gevolglik die Departement van Gesondheid versoek om die verslag
       openbaar te maak; en


  (4) versoek dat stappe onmiddellik teen dr Ratsela gedoen word indien die
       bewerings van wanbesteding inderdaad in die verslag gemaak word.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Ms E C GOUWS: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes allegations that the Department of Health's audit report on
         SANTA reveals irregularities;


  (2) further notes that this report allegedly contains serious accusations
         against the chief executive officer, Dr Andrew Ratsela, of
         misappropriation of money;


  (3) consequently requests the Department of Health to release the report
         in question; and


  (4) requests that immediate steps be taken against Dr Ratsela if
         allegations of misappropriation are indeed made in the report.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.]

                     FARM MURDERS IN THE ELLIOT DISTRICT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr P A MATTHEE: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem van die grusame dubbele plaasmoord op wyle mnr Kevin en
       mev Lu McGregor eergisteraand op hul plaas, Bloemvlei, in die Elliot-
       distrik terwyl hul twee-jarige kleindogter, Tayla McGregor, ook in
       die huis was, en dat sy die hele nag stoksielalleen deurgebring het
       saam met die lyke van haar vermoorde grootouers voordat sy en die
       lyke gisteroggend eers deur in huishulp ontdek is;


  (2) verder kennis neem dat hierdie die derde plaasmoord vanjaar in dié
       gebied is nadat die tagtig-jarige wyle mev May Rushmere op 8
       Februarie in 'n rooftog op haar seun se plaaswinkel naby Maclear in
       die kop geskiet is en wyle mev Martie Scheepel, voormalige
       burgemeester van Maclear, slegs twee weke tevore op haar plaas,
       Wickey Creede, in dieselfde omgewing doodgeskiet is;


  (3) 'n besluit neem dat die voortdurende plaasaanvalle en plaasmoorde in
       Suid-Afrika geheel en al onaanvaarbaar is;


  (4) die President en die Regering versoek om alles moontlik te doen om 'n
       stop te sit aan die vlaag van plaasaanvalle en plaasmoorde in ons
       land; en


  (5) die Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit versoek om so gou as
       moontlik aan die Raad verslag te doen oor die huidige stand van sake
       ten opsigte van plaasaanvalle en plaasmoorde in elke provinsie, die
       bevindings van die ondersoek na die moontlike motiewe vir die
       plaasaanvalle en plaasmoorde deur hom gelas en die stappe en
       maatreëls wat deur die Regering beoog word om 'n einde te maak aan
       hierdie euwel op ons platteland, insluitende die relevante
       tydsraamwerke.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairman, I hereby move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) notes the gruesome double farm murder on the late Mr Kevin and Mrs Lu
       McGregor the night before last on their farm Bloemvlei in the Elliot
       district, while their two-year-old granddaughter, Tayla McGregor, was
       also in the house, and that she spent the whole night alone with the
       corpses of her murdered grandparents before she and the corpses were
       discovered by a domestic helper only yesterday morning;


  (2) further notes that this is the third farm murder in this area this
       year, after the late eighty-year-old Mrs May Rushmere was shot in the
       head on 8 February during a robbery in her son's farm shop near
       Maclear and the late Mrs Martie Scheepel, a former mayor of Maclear,
       was shot dead on her farm, Wickey Creede, in the same area just two
       weeks prior to that;


  (3) resolves that the continuing farm attacks and farm murders in South
       Africa are completely unacceptable;


  (4) requests the President and the Government to have everything possible
       done to put an end to the wave of farm attacks and farm murders in
       our country; and


  (5) requests the Minister of Safety and Security to report to the Council
       as soon as possible on the present state of affairs with regard to
       farm attacks and farm murders in each province, the findings of the
       investigation he ordered into the possible motives for the farm
       attacks and farm murders, and the steps and measures envisaged by the
       Government to put an end to this scourge of our rural areas,
       including the relevant time frames.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Ek maak beswaar teen die mosie, Voorsitter. [I object to
the motion, Chairperson.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is an objection. The motion will
therefore become notice of a motion. [Interjections.] Could I indicate that
there is no debate in terms of the Rules. I wanted to indicate that I just
heard on the two o'clock news that there have been arrests in the
particular case referred to. But there is an objection, and the motion
therefore becomes notice of a motion.

  REPORT OF EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE INDEPENDENT COMPLAINTS DIRECTORATE IN
                    RESPECT OF THE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note of the findings and the recommendations contained in the
       report of the Executive Director of the Independent Complaints
       Directorate to Parliament, in compliance with the Domestic Violence
       Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998), for the period June to December 2000,
       inter alia that there are police stations which are still not ready
       to implement the Domestic Violence Act;


  (2) notes that -
       (a)  domestic violence cases are not treated as priority matters;


       (b)  only a few police stations visited have trauma centres;


       (c)  there is no uniformity in respect of the use of incident forms;
           and


       (d)  a lack of shelters for abused women is a major problem; and


  (3) urges the Ministers of Safety and Security and of Social Development
       to see to it that their respective departments comply with the
       recommendations contained in the said report as soon as possible.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          ARSON AT SCHOOL IN KENYA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Prince B Z ZULU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with shock and horror the recent incident of arson on Sunday
       night in which 58 pupils aged between 15 and 18 years were burnt
       beyond recognition in a school in south eastern Kenya;


  (2) notes that according to reports, both doors of the crowded dormitory
       were locked at the time of the fire;


  (3) expresses its sympathy and offers its condolences to families and
       friends and the people of that country; and


  (4) appeals to the government of Kenya and the Machakos police to leave
       no stone unturned, in order to bring the perpetrators of this heinous
       crime to justice.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Could members please keep their hands
raised until I indicate that I have noted them, if there are further
members.

   REFUSAL OF PERMISSION FOR SOCCER TO BE PLAYED AT NEWLANDS RUGBY STADIUM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes


        (a)      the Democratic Alliance-ruled unicity council decision to
              invoke a little-used bylaw to prevent soccer from being
              played at Newlands;


        (b)      that the decision to invoke the bylaw was made after
              objections from residents in the mainly white suburb;


        (c)      that no such objections were ever raised with regard to
              cricket and rugby crowds who stumbled drunken through
              Newlands after major games ...

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon member is
misleading the House, because her facts are not correct.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Ackermann, that is not a point of
order. Continue, Mrs Lubidla.

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I continue:


        (c)      that no such objections were ever raised with regard to
              cricket and rugby crowds who stumbled drunken through
              Newlands after major games, making a loud noise and urinating
              in public;


   (2)      believes the decision to invoke the bylaw was calculated to
        satisfy the whims of these racist objectors by excluding soccer
        fans, who are mostly African and coloured, from attending sports
        facilities in historically white areas;


   (3)      further believes that the decision smacks of the apartheid
        years, when blacks were required to carry ``dompasses'' and needed
        special permission to enter white areas; and


   (4)      calls on the Democratic Alliance and its mayor to repeal this
        offensive bylaw and to show that they are committed to nonracism.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr C ACKERMANN: Yes, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is an objection. The motion
therefore becomes ... [Interjections.] Order! I am not sure why members
have suddenly become very excited. The motion therefore becomes notice of a
motion.

                     CHAINING OF CRITICALLY ILL PRISONER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) though commending the Government's commitment to preventing crime
       whenever it occurs and to bring perpetrators and potential
       perpetrators to book, is against the attitude of the Department of
       Correctional Services towards Vusi Nxumalo's case;


  (2) is of the opinion that chaining a critically ill patient because he
       is a prisoner is very dehumanising and totally unacceptable;


  (3) notes the critical condition of Vusi Nxumalo and his long wait before
       a trial - according to a City Press reporter over a year now; and


  (4) therefore requests the Minister of Correctional Services and his
       department to review legislation concerning chaining of prisoners.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   CONDEMNATION OF RACIALLY INSPIRED MURDER IN WELKOM AND VIOLENCE AGAINST
                         FARMWORKERS AND FARMOWNERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) expresses its horror at the blatant racism in Welkom where Sgt
       Nkonyane was shot dead because he could not keep his dog quiet;


  (2) notes that even when he fled from his assailants, they followed him
       and shot him dead where he was hiding;


  (3) notes that to add insult to injury, not a single one of his Caucasian
       police colleagues attended his funeral, be it in private capacity or
       officially;


  (4) expresses its abhorrence at this outlawed action of racism;


  (5) continues to condemn the continued violence against and murders of
       farmworkers and farmowners, which in turn continue to harden
       attitudes instead of changing the hearts and minds of God's people;
       and


  (6) reiterates its commitment to the eradication of racism in all its
       forms of expression and encourages public protests and exposure of
       perpetrators of this evil.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That precedence be given to Order No 2 on the Order Paper.

Order No 2 will then be followed by Order No 1.
Mr P M MILLER (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, obviously under the
circumstances on this particular occasion we understand the reasons. I
must, however, place on record that it makes life for us who travel and who
make arrangements and flight bookings extremely difficult, and we ask that
these issues be taken into consideration before last-minutes changes to the
Order Paper are made. When I left this morning at 05:30 to attend the
sitting of this House, I had the clear understanding that Order No 1 was to
be the first item today.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Mr Miller, for your understanding.
I believe it is important that I comment in response and indicate that we
agreed to the Minister's request following quite a serious look at it. It
comes as the result of a bereavement, and, as you know, with bereavements
it is very difficult to plan.

The Minister asked us, therefore, given the situation that in her family
she has particular responsibilities, that we accord her this opportunity to
present her Bill first. We agreed on that understanding.

It is not the practice of the NCOP to amend its programme at will. I am
sure you will have noted that, since 1999, there certainly have been fewer
and fewer such changes. We would hope that they become even fewer, but on
the occasion of a bereavement, we believe that members must exercise some
tolerance and understanding.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                           HOUSING AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

THE MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Chairperson, hon members, comrades,
colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, in 1997 we promulgated the Housing Act of
1997 to provide a comprehensive regulatory framework for the effective
delivery of housing for the poor and disadvantaged households in South
Africa. The Act, among other things, defined the roles and functions of the
three spheres of government in housing delivery. It obliged the Minister of
Housing to phase out the housing subsidies of the previous dispensation,
and make provision for the establishment of the National Housing Code.

As we speak today, we are counting seven years since the democratic
dispensation laid the first foundation of housing for the poor. For the
last seven years of national housing delivery, we have made it our business
to constantly scan the housing environment, and to keep our fingers on the
pulse of the low-cost housing industry in all its relevant facets. This was
all to ensure that the national housing programmes match the expressed
needs of the poor majority, spelt out in the White Paper of 1994, while
maintaining a balance between executing our mandate, and protecting the
state's and taxpayers' fiscal interests.

The amendment to the Housing Act of 1997 that I am proposing to this House
today is the culmination of these seven years' worth of observing housing
development in the country. The Housing Amendment Bill of 2001 constitutes
our strategy to close gaps in our housing policy, to tie up loose ends and
to streamline our overall delivery operations, thereby improving access to
housing by all our people well into the 21st century.

The Housing Amendment Bill of 2001, therefore, seeks to rectify what we
have identified as inefficiencies of state institutional arrangements in
the Housing Act of 1997 by effecting the following: firstly, abolishing the
South African and provincial housing development boards; secondly,
transferring the powers, duties, rights and obligations of provincial
housing development boards to the MECs responsible for housing; and,
thirdly, providing for the establishment of advisory panels to advise the
Minister and the MECs. Both the Minister and the MECs will choose their own
advisers. Fourthly it will empower the Minister to determine procurement
policy in respect of housing development and put in place regulatory
measures to restrict the sale or alienation of state-subsidised housing.

Spelt out in detail, the amendments are as follows: Under section 1 of the
Act I firstly propose to insert two new definitions of the terms ``code''
and ``procurement''. According to section 4(1) of the Housing Act of 1997,
the Minister must ``publish a code called the National Housing Code''. The
code has now been published, hence the need for the additional definition.
As section 3 of the Housing Act is being amended to include the
determination by the Minister of a procurement policy, it is necessary to
include a definition of ``procurement''.

Secondly, with the abolition, by this amendment, of the provincial housing
development boards, the need to define ``provincial housing development
board'' falls away. We therefore propose that the definition be deleted.

I propose an amendment to section 3 of the Act by the insertion of an
additional subsection (c) A which compels the Minister to ``determine a
procurement policy", by no later than April 2002, which is consistent with
section 217 of the Constitution in relation to housing development.

Our investigations of the housing subsidy scheme have revealed that with
the exception of individual housing subsidies, procurement of goods and
services were not complying fully with the Public Finance Management Act of
1999. We need to ensure such compliance to facilitate equitable
distribution of the benefit of housing.

My department is currently working on a procurement policy, which will be
submitted to me personally for approval. This necessitates that such
ministerial power be incorporated in the Housing Act. Under section 3, I
propose that a new subsection 6B be inserted which compels the Minister to
publish, in the Gazette, updated lists of national housing programmes,
instituted, or deemed to have been instituted, under subsection 4(g), as
well as lists of national institutions established and financed, or deemed
to have been established or financed, under subsection 4(h), and must
indicate in such notice that details of such national housing programmes,
and of the role and functions of such national institutions, are contained
in the code.

The new subsection thus complies with the principles set out in section
2(1)(c)(iv) of the Housing Act, which requires all spheres of Government to
ensure that housing development is administered in a transparent,
accountable and equitable manner and upholds the practice of good
governance.

I propose to insert a new subsection 9 to reinforce section 100 of the
Constitution, which allows the national executive, that is the Minister, to
intervene when a province cannot or does not fulfil an obligation in terms
of the Act. Experience has taught us that owing to capacity-related and
other constraints, the need sometimes arises for the national executive to
intervene in the housing delivery processes at provincial level. The new
insertion thus provides for national intervention when provincial
circumstances so dictate.

Changes under section 4 of the Act relate to our previous references to the
National Housing Code. The ``Code'' referred to in section 4 of the Act has
now been published and distributed to the provinces. The amendment to this
section, therefore, deletes the phrase ``in this section referred to as the
Code'' in subsection (1), as the term ``Code'' is, per this amendment, now
defined in section 1 of the Act.

To enforce the application of the ``Code'', we have added a new subsection
(6) under section 4, which renders the National Housing Code binding on the
provincial and local spheres of government. This was previously not clearly
spelt out.

Under section 5 of the Act we deal with the SA Housing Development Board,
which we are abolishing by this amendment. We propose to replace the board
with a mechanism by which the Minister may establish a panel of persons to
advise her or him on any matter relating to housing development. The new
section deals with the qualification, the appointment and termination of
such panel members.

I must mention that since the coming into operation of the Housing Act of
1997, the SA Housing Development Board has not come into existence. We feel
that a board of 15 persons, which was the maximum allowed by the Act, is
too cumbersome for quick decision-making.

Experience over the last few years has taught us that such boards are
difficult to convene and attendance by members of the board is problematic.
Board members are usually busy professionals who find great difficulty in
attending meetings, much to the detriment of the housing programme that the
boards were set up to drive.

We therefore propose, in the place of the board, a panel of experts who can
be approached by the Minister on an ad hoc basis. We believe that this
would result in a more focused streamlined process, costing less and
resulting in greater efficiency in decision-making processes.

Regarding section 7 of the Act, we propose to amend the wording by adding
the words ``through its MEC'' after the word ``government'' in line 4(b) on
page 5 of the Bill. This means that a provincial government must act
through its MEC when promoting and facilitating the provision of adequate
housing in its province. Subsection (2) is amended by the addition of the
phrase ``through its MEC'' after the word ``must'' in line 54, for the same
reasons as above.

In the proposed amendment, new subsections (3), (4) and (5) are inserted.
Subsection (3) sets out the MEC's duties which are, briefly, to administer
every national housing programme; determine provincial housing development
priorities; apply procurement policy in respect of housing development
determined by the Minister; and administer the assets contemplated in
section 14.

Subsection (4) provides for the discretionary establishment of a panel of
persons by an MEC to advise him or her on any matter relating to housing
development. The subsection also deals with the qualifications,
appointment, termination and allowances of members of the panel. Subsection
(5) provides for the delegation and assignment of powers and duties
respectively by the MEC.
On the issue relating to the sale and alienation of state-subsidised
housing, we are inserting new clauses, ie 10A and 10B into the Act. We are
deeply concerned with the sale and       alienation of state-subsidised
houses that has come to our attention lately. Government has invested
billions of rands in subsidised low-cost housing for the poor, mainly
through the government's housing subsidy scheme. Yet, some beneficiaries
are selling or disposing of their houses at prices far below cost.

Municipalities have also been selling these houses in execution in
instances where beneficiaries have defaulted on payments for municipal
services. The houses are generally sold in execution at a fraction of their
building cost. We have received numerous reports to the effect that the
majority of the buyers of these houses are not the poor people for whom the
houses were built in the first place. We are also aware of houses purchased
for cash or bought at sales in execution by gangsters and drug lords, who
either use the houses for their unscrupulous deeds or sell them at great
profit.

Each time a subsidised house is sold or alienated, the pool of houses for
the poor is diminished at considerable cost to the state and the taxpayer.
The sale of state-subsidised houses in the manner outlined above goes
totally against the letter and spirit of the Housing Act, Act 107 of 1997.
It also goes against state policy as outlined in the National Housing Code.
We simply cannot allow this practice to continue.

We are therefore taking action to restrict the sale and alienation of state-
subsidised houses by inserting new subsections, ie 10A and 10B, to regulate
these houses throughout the Republic of South Africa.

This insertion deals with the restriction on voluntary and involuntary sale
of state-subsidised houses. It prohibits the sale or alienation of these
houses for a period of eight years from the date of acquisition. If a
beneficiary wishes to sell a state subsidised house within the eight-year
period, he or she must first offer the house to the relevant provincial
housing department. No purchase price or other remuneration would be paid
to the beneficiary. The beneficiary would be eligible to obtain another
housing subsidy if he or she qualifies for it.

In the case of involuntary sale of state subsidised houses, the
beneficiary's successors in title, or creditors in law, shall not sell or
alienate the state subsidised house unless it has first been offered to the
relevant provincial housing department, at a price no greater than the
subsidy amount. The new section also deals with the details of the offer
and acceptance by the provincial housing authority, and provides for a
mechanism, if there is a dispute regarding the purchase price. The section
further stipulates the duties of the Registrar of Deeds when dealing with
such properties.

By virtue of the abolition of the Provincial Housing Development Boards,
the entire section 8, on the provincial housing development boards, is
repealed. In terms of the amendments to section 7, which I dealt with
earlier, the functions, duties and powers of the previous boards will vest
in the MEC. Over and above the fact that boards are difficult to convince,
our experience has shown that board members are sometimes involved in the
housing industry themselves. This poses a potential conflict of interest.

In certain instances, members of the boards showed reluctance to implement
the housing policy in their decisions. This impacted negatively on delivery
rates. In addition, the boards were in many instances not following
constitutional and legislative imperatives when procuring goods and
services.

I am therefore convinced that with the abolition of the boards, MECs will
be able to access, on an ad hoc basis, experts on a panel of persons,
should they so wish. MECs will therefore take full responsibility for
national and provincial housing programmes. This will without a doubt,
expedite the housing delivery process.

The abolition of the provincial housing development boards and the vesting
of powers in the MECs simply means that we shall substitute MECs for
provincial housing development boards in all areas that make reference to
the latter. Examples of these are sections 14, 15, 16 and 17 of the Housing
Act, Act 107 of 1997. [Time expired] [Applause.]

Nksz P C P MAJODINA: Mhlalingaphambili, mandibulise kuMphathiswa
wezeZindlu. Lo Mthetho uyilwayo ufakelwa izilungiso siwamkela ngezandla
ezishushu kuba uchitha iBhodi yoPhuhliso lweZindlu kundlunkulu nakumaphondo
olithoba.
Lo Mthetho uyilwayo useka amaqumrhwana okucebisa uMphathiswa kwimicimbi
enxulumene nezezindlu. Le yindlela yokukhawulezisa uthatyatho lwezigqibo
kungalandelwanga ndlela inde enokulibazisa ulwabiwo lwezindlu. Sibonile
ukuba maxa wambi ezi bhodi bezilibala yimibhodamo, zixhentsa ubusuku nemini
zilibazisa inkqubela-phambili. Abaphathiswa bamaphondo baza kuthabatha
inxaxheba ngakumbi kuthatyatho lwezigqibo, bakhawulezise ukuphucula impilo
yabantu bakowethu.

Kungochulumanco ukuqaphela ukuba lo Mthetho uyilwayo ukhusela urhwebo
ngezindlu zesibonelelo ezithi zinikwe abantu abangathathi ntweni, iimpula-
kalujaca, oothina ke.

ILUNGU ELIHLONIPHEKILEYO: Ewe! Ewe! (Translation of Xhosa follows.)

[Ms PC MAJODINA: Chairperson and the hon the Minister of Housing, we
welcome this amendment bill with warm hands, because it is aimed at
abolishing the Housing Development Board in the national office and the
nine provinces.

This Bill establishes advisory committees to advise the Minister on issues
that have to do with housing. The intention is to speed up the decision-
making process without following long-drawn out processes that could delay
the provision of houses. We would sometimes notice that these boards were
involved in hair- splitting processes, thereby delaying development. The
provincial MEC's will participate particularly in decision-making, and
speed up the development of our people.

I note with joy that this Bill safeguards trading in houses that are
provided for people that have nothing, poor people, and that means us.

Hon MEMBER: Yes! Yes!

Nksz P C P MAJODINA: Ngale ndlela siza kuba negunya lokulawula izindlu
zesibonelelo singuRhulumente ukuze abantu bangashishini ngazo ngathi
bathengisa amagwinya.

ILUNGU ELIHLONIPHEKILEYO: Ewe! Ewe! (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Ms P C P MAJODINA: In this way we in Government will be able to take
control of these houses, so that people do not use them for business, as if
they are selling fat cakes.
HON MEMBER: Yes!Yes!]

Nksz P C P MAJODINA: Ukuba nendawo yokufihla intloko lilungelo lakhe wonke
ummi waseMzantsi Afrika, kwaye uRhulumente wabantu uyayingqina le nto
ngokunikezela ngezindlu mahala, felefele, oku kwenduku yomnquma, kuba uhoye
isidima sabantu.

Phaya kuSomqulu weNkululeko kukho umhlathi othi: ``Kuya kubakho izindlu,
ukhuseleko nobutofotofo kuye wonke ummi waseMzantsi Afrika.'' Izicwangciso
ezaneleyo zokuhlangabezana nolu xanduva zenziwe liSebe lezeZindlu ngakumbi
ngokubhekisele kumcimbi wezimali. Andiboni sikhwasilima ke.

Eli Bhunga leSizwe lamaPhondo maliwuseke ngokupheleleyo lo Mthetho
usayilwayo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Ms P C P MAJODINA: A roof over people's heads is every South African
citizen's right and the Government of the people supports this by giving
out houses for free, at no charge at all, because it cares about people's
dignity.

In the Freedom Charter there is a clause that reads: ``There shall be
Houses, Security and Comfort!' for every citizen of South Africa.''
Appropriate plans for carrying out the responsibility were made by the
Department of Housing, especially with regard to funding. I do not see
anything wrong with that.

The National Council of Provinces should support this Bill fully.
[Applause.]]

Mr B KOMPHELA (Free State): Madam Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members of
the House, comrades and friends, I am pleased to rise here in support of
the Housing Amendment Bill today.

I am participating in the joyous celebration of the tightening up on the
pillaging, plundering and abuse of Government by people who do not want to
acknowledge progress made by the ANC. [Interjections.]

I would like to reiterate a statement made by the President during his
opening address to Parliament. He stated that whereas in the past suffering
and degradation were the only things certain in the lives of millions of
our people, the African people, ``hope has now taken the place of
despair.''

I wish to focus on the steps taken by the Minister to close the gap to
ensure that the hopes of the people that were lost through despair return.
[Interjections.]

Millions of our people were robbed of their rights. The ANC is there to
ensure that their rights are realised, that they to acquire homes. That has
been the call of our forefathers since 1955 in Kliptown, namely that there
shall be houses for all. We are committed to that; we will not change.

During the first period of democratic government, the foundation was laid
for the restructuring and transformation of the housing system. Significant
policies and pieces of legislation were introduced and changes brought
about within the framework of the Constitution and the Reconstruction and
Development Programme.

The White Paper and a number of other policies, provide examples of policy
changes in housing delivery. Indeed, there have been sweeping changes that
have touched the lives of millions of our people in this country and that
is unquestionable.

However, touching the lives of the poorest of the poor is not enough. We
have to tidy everything up with the adoption of this amending Bill, which
the Free State totally supports. [Interjections.]

We have to ensure that the way we work and the way in which we are doing
some of these things does not lead to the further alienation and
marginalisation of the most vulnerable sectors of the communities. In our
province, for example, we have seen people ripped off by those who do not
see value in what the Government is attempting to do. In Bothaville a house
can be sold for R100 because the occupant cannot pay back the oomashonisa
[money milkers] his R100, and therefore the house is taken. In some other
instances in the Free State, houses are sold in exchange for food or a case
of beer.

This Bill is there to make sure that that kind of pillaging and disrespect
for the agenda of this Government come to an end. [Applause.]

Mr L NAZO (Eastern Cape): Madam Chair, hon Minister of Housing, hon members
of the NCOP and delegates from the various provinces, I rise to support the
Housing Amendment Bill as per the adopted mandate of the Eastern Cape
standing committee on housing and local government.

We accept that the Bill in its entirety is designed to rectify the current
inefficiencies of the institutional arrangements in the Housing Act of
1997. These include the abolishment of the Housing Development Board and
the provincial housing boards; the transference of powers, duties, rights
and obligations of the housing boards to the Minister and MECs; the
establishment of panels to advise the Minister and the MECs, empowering the
Minister to determine the procurement policy in respect of housing
development; and putting in place regulatory measures to restrict the sale
or alienation of state-subsidised houses.

Our mandate is to support specifically the proposed amendments by the
select committee and to further propose that, in terms of clause 5, the
Bill be specific regarding the number of panelists. We propose that the
panels should consist of not less than five and not more than eight
members.
We believe this amendment goes to the heart of our political desire to let
the people govern. It empowers the people to contribute at the cutting edge
of political decision-making. This is why we fully support the abolition of
both the national and provincial housing boards and the transference of
powers, rights and obligations of the boards to the Minister and MECs
responsible for housing.

The boards have been less accountable than we desired and, we believe, an
empowered panel with skills is vital in assisting both the Minister and
MECs in executing their political mandates. The present system locates the
administration of housing programmes in our province in the department of
housing and local government on behalf of the board. Our provincial
department of local government and housing has been executing this duty
satisfactorily. The new system will not be a major departure from the
existing situation.

We fully endorse the changes in the sale of subsidised houses, because it
has been experienced that such sales have not been in the interests of the
state and the protection of taxpayers' money used to subsidise such houses.
It is our view that such sales usually translate into corruption and
nepotism and flagrant abuse of the state subsidy. This subsidy is in the
interests of meeting the state's constitutional social obligation to house
our people.

As I said at the outset, our province supports all the aspects of the
Housing Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mr J P GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): Madam Chair, hon Minister, and hon
members in the House, the Housing Amendment Bill allows for the abolition
of the Housing Development Board and the provincial housing development
boards, and establishes advisory panels. The Bill allows for the
determination of procurement policy in respect of housing provision, makes
the national housing code binding on all spheres of government, provides
for the regulation of the sale of state-funded houses and amends the
Housing Consumers Protection Measures Act of 1998.

Die afskaffing van provinsiale rade vir behuisingsontwikkeling is weens die
volgende redes vir die provinsie van die Wes-Kaap onaanvaarbaar.

Ingevolge Bylae 4, Deel A van die Grondwet, het beide die nasionale
Regering en die provinsiale regerings konkurrente wetgewende bevoegdheid op
die funksionele gebied van behuising.

Artikel 104(1)(b) van die Grondwet lees soos volg:

(1)   Die wetgewende gesag van 'n provinsie berus by sy provinsiale
     wetgewer, en verleen aan die provinsiale wetgewer die bevoegdheid -


     (b)    om vir sy provinsie wetgewing aan te neem met betrekking tot -


        (i)      enige aangeleentheid binne 'n funksionale gebied in Bylae
              4 vermeld.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The abolition of provincial housing development boards is unacceptable to
the province of the Western Cape for the following reasons.

In terms of Schedule 4, Part A, of the Constitution, both the national
Government and the provincial governments have concurrent legislative
competence with regard to the functional area of housing.

Section 104 (1)(b) of the Constitution reads as follows:


  (1) The legislative authority of a province is vested in its provincial
       legislature, and confers on the provincial legislature the power -


       (b)  to pass legislation for its province with regard to -


           (i)   any matter within a functional area listed in Schedule 4

[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: You want independence.

Mr J P GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): No, sir, we are part of South Africa.

The Housing Act of 1997, in section 8(13), makes provision for a
discretionary right for provinces either to have a provincial housing
development board or another body dealing with housing matters. By
repealing this portion, national Government effectively deprives provinces
of their right to choose.

Die Wes-Kaap het 'n behuisingsontwikkelingswet, wet 6 van 1999, wat
voorsiening maak vir die instelling van 'n Wes-Kaapse raad vir
behuisingsontwikkeling. Dié raad is saamgestel uit mense met kennis van
behuisingsaangeleenthede. Die raad funksioneer besonder goed en
verteenwoordig almal uit verskillende politieke sfere.

'n AGB LID: Dit is nou onsin.

Mnr J P GELDERBLOM: Hierdie provinsie is nie ten gunste van die herroeping
van artikel 8 van die wet nie weens die feit dat dit inbreuk maak op die
funksies en magte van 'n provinsie om 'n provinsiale behuisingsraad in te
stel.

Die Wes-Kaap ondersteun in beginsel die bepaling ten opsigte van 'n
verkrygingsbeleid.

Daar moet egter gewaak word dat sodanige beleid nie vertragings veroorsaak
deur amptelike omslagtigheid nie. In beginsel word dit egter ondersteun.

Met verwysing na die behuisingskode net die volgende: die wysiging met
betrekking tot die behuisingskode word ook ondersteun. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The Western Cape has an Act on housing development, Act 6 of 1999, which
provides for the establishment of a Western Cape housing development board.
This board is composed of people with knowledge of housing matters. This
board functions extremely well and represents everyone from different
political spheres.

An HON MEMBER: Now that is nonsense.

Mr J P GELDERBLOM: This province is not in favour of the repeal of section
8 of the Act, because it interferes with the functions and powers of a
province to establish a provincial housing board.

In principle the Western Cape supports the provision with regard to a
procurement policy. However, we must be careful that such a policy does not
cause any delays due to official redtape. However, in principle, it is
supported.

With regard to the housing code just the following: the amendment with
regard to the housing code is also supported.]

As far as the regulation of the sale of state-funded houses is concerned,
this is a matter that we have been advocating ever since the inception of
state-subsidised housing. However, the amendment as it stands is
impractical. Beneficiaries will have to have direct access to provincial
housing departments. This implies that beneficiaries will have to find
their way from far-off towns to the provincial housing office in order to
register the fact that they wish to sell and to initiate the process.

Om hulle in staat te stel om hierdie wonings aan 'n volgende begunstigde
toe te ken, sal provinsiale departemente 'n databasis of waglys vir die
hele provinsie moet opstel. Op die oomblik hou elke munisipaliteit reeds so
'n waglys in stand ten opsigte van hulle munisipale gebied. Provinsiale
departemente sal hierdie huise moet beskerm teen vandalisme en onwettige
besetting en sal die kostes hieraan verbonde moet dra. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[To enable them to allocate these homes to a different beneficiary,
provincial departments will have to compile a data base or waiting-list for
the whole province. At the moment each municipality already has such a
waiting-list with regard to their own municipal area. Provincial
departments will have to protect these houses against vandalism and
unlawful occupation and will have to bear the costs in this regard.]

The total effect is that provinces would be increasing their housing stock
and this would have an impact on the administration and staffing of
provincial housing offices. The principal Act, like the Constitution, is
based on the sound principle that a function should not be performed at a
higher sphere of government if it can be performed at a lower sphere.

The principal Act furthermore seeks to entrench the role of municipalities
in housing delivery. We should recognise and reinforce this role and not
usurp it. Only if a municipality does not want to buy back a house should
it refer the matter to the province.

Municipalities should ideally perform this function because they are at the
coalface of housing delivery. Their offices are locally situated and easily
accessible to the public. They can more easily secure the property and
reallocate or resell it to persons on the local waiting list.

I would recommend the following amendments to the section through the
insertion of a section 10A in Act 107 of 1997.


The following section is hereby inserted after section 10 of the principal
Act:


     Restriction on sale of state-subsidised housing


     10A. (1) Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in another law,
     it shall be a condition of every housing subsidy, as defined in the
     Code, granted to a natural person in terms of any national housing
     programme for the construction or purchase of a dwelling or serviced
     site, that such person or his or her successors in title or his or her
     creditors in law shall not sell or otherwise alienate such dwelling or
     site within a period of eight years from the date on which the property
     was acquired by such person or from the date of registration of the
     mortgage bond, as the case may be, unless such dwelling or site has
     first been offered for sale to the relevant municipality concerned,
     and, if the municipality refuses to purchase, also to the provincial
     housing department.


     (2) When any dwelling or site is purchased by a municipality in terms
     of the aforementioned subsection, the provisions of the Code shall
     apply in respect of such dwelling or site as if it were a dwelling or
     site constructed in terms of the Code.

As regards the amendment to the Housing Consumers Protection Measures Act,
this Bill can only amend the Housing Act and should not be used as a
mechanism to amend a completely different Act such as the Housing Consumers
Protection Measures Act, Act 95 of 1998. This clause should therefore be
removed.

Dr P J C NEL: Geagte Voorsitter, ek neem baie graag aan hierdie debat deel,
want as dit oor behuising gaan, dan gaan dit oor die wel en wee van ons
hele bevolking. Die tipe behuising wat dié stuk wetgewing aanspreek, raak
die grootste deel van die bevolking en veral die arm mense wat afhanklik is
van staatsubsidies. Hierdie wetsontwerp poog om hierdie deel van die
bevolking te beskerm teen korrupsie en om te voorkom dat hulle hul huise as
gevolg daarvan verloor. Met hierdie beginsel het die Nuwe NP geen fout te
vind nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Dr P J C NEL: Hon Chairperson, it is a pleasure participating in this
debate, because when it deals with housing, it deals with the weal and woe
of our entire population. The type of housing which this piece of
legislation addresses affects the biggest part of the population and
especially the poor people who are dependent on the state subsidies. This
Bill aims to protect this part of the population against corruption and to
prevent them from losing their houses as a result of that. With this
principle the NP cannot find any fault.]

In the report of the Auditor-General on the accounts of the Free State
Provincial Board, many irregularities were revealed. It revealed, inter
alia, that property was transferred to beneficiaries without evidence that
the subsidies had been paid. In many cases it was found that houses were
not built on the properties for which the subsidy had been paid and happy
letters were signed for.

No evidence could be submitted that the board had inspected the completed
houses to ensure the existence, quality and validity of the subsidies paid.

In soverre dit die Vrystaat aangaan, wil dit lyk asof dit tot die voordeel
van die gemeenskap van die Vrystaat sal wees as die provinsiale
behuisingsontwikkelingsraad afgeskaf word. Ek het egter begrip vir ander
provinsies wat hulle rade graag wil behou omdat dit goed funksioneer en
goeie diens lewer. Dit sou beslis 'n beter opsie gewees het as hierdie
wetsontwerp voorsiening gemaak het vir die reg van ander provinsies om 'n
eie keuse uit te oefen. Die herroeping van artikel 8 van die hoofwet in
klousule 6 van hierdie wetsontwerp ontneem die provinsies hul reg om dit te
doen.

In klousule 7 word twee nuwe klousules, naamlik 10A en 10B in die wet
ingeskryf. Hierdie klousules handel oor die beperking op die verkoop van
staatsgesubsideerde huise deur eienaars. Die bepaling wat huiseienaars
verbied om eiendomme te verkoop voor 'n tydperk van agt jaar verloop het,
gaan tot 'n groot mate verhoed dat huiseienaars uitgebuit gaan word deur
kopers wat net een ding voor oë het, naamlik om geld te maak.

Dit word egter betreur dat subklousule 10A(9), wat in die oorspronklike
wysigingswet ingeskryf was, in die finale dokument geskrap is omrede die
regsadviseurs van mening is dat die belange van instansies soos banke wat
huislenings verskaf aan vir mense wat huise wil opgradeer, ondervang word
in ander subklousules. Dit is nie aanvaarbaar vir die Nuwe NP nie. Dit is
'n feit dat munisipaliteite voorkeurbesitregte op sommige munisipale
behuisingskemas het. Dit geld ook vir huise waarvoor banke lenings
toegestaan het. Subklousule 10A(9) het hierdie regte van banke en
munisipaliteite beskerm. Die skrapping van hierdie subklousule gaan
finansiële instansies ontmoedig om enigsins lenings aan huiseienaars toe te
staan.

[In so far as it regards the Free State, it looks as if it would be to the
advantage of the community of the Free State if the provincial Housing
Development Council is abolished. I, however, do have understanding for
other provinces who would like to hold onto their councils because they are
functioning well and providing good services. It would indeed have been a
better option if this Bill made provision for the right of other provinces
to exercise their own choice. The repeal of section 8 of the principal Act
in clause 6 of this Bill deprives the provinces of their right to do so.

In clause 7 two new clauses, namely 10A and 10B, are included in the Act.
These clauses deal with the restriction on the sale of state-subsidised
houses by owners. The provision which prohibits home owners from selling
their property before a period of eight years has elapsed, will to a great
extent prevent the exploitation of home owners by buyers who only have one
thing in mind, namely to make money.

It is, however, deplorable that subsection 10A(9), which was included in
the original amending Bill, has been scrapped in the final document,
because law advisers are of the opinion that the interests of institutions
such as banks, which provide home loans for people who want to upgrade
their houses, are being obviated in other subclauses. This is not
acceptable to the New NP. It is a fact that municipalities have
preferential ownership rights on certain municipal housing schemes. This is
also applicable to houses for which banks have granted loans. Subclause
10A(9) protected these rights of banks and municipalities. The scrapping of
this subclause will discourage financial institutions to grant loans to
home owners.]

Owners are encouraged to improve their houses and we do not want to chase
the money markets away, and, in doing so, redline certain areas. We
therefore cannot support the Bill as it stands. [Interjections.]

Ms G N SWARTBOOI (KwaZulu-Natal): Madam Chairperson, let me congratulate
the Minister of Housing on introducing an amending Bill that addresses and
corrects the current situation within the Department of Housing.

With the four minutes given to me, let me kick off by saying that KwaZulu-
Natal supports the principle of the Bill. I will only focus on clause 5 of
the Bill, which deals with the replacement of the boards by advisory
panels. It has been a great step that these boards have been abolished. The
boards had all the executive powers. They were responsible for
administering every housing programme and approving the financing of the
programme from money paid into the Housing Fund.

Secondly, these boards caused housing delivery to be developer-driven
instead of people-driven.

I am saying this because a registered developer is the person who
identifies housing needs and beneficiaries, and who submits projects for
approval to the provincial housing development boards.

Yiyo loo nto siye saba nengxaki kwiphondo laKwaZulu-Natal xa besixoxa ngalo
Mthetho uyilwayo, ungokupheliswa kweebhodi. Amalungu e-DP ngawo ebekukhaba
kakhulu ukupheliswa kwezi bhodi kuba esazi ukuba anonxibelelwano oluninzi
nezi bhodi. Kwakhona, abantu abangabaphuhlisi bezindlu abasetyenziswayo
ngabantu babo. Bambalwa abaphuhlisi abangabantu abamnyama. [Uwele-wele.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[That is why we had a problem in the province of KwaZulu-Natal, when we
were discussing this Bill, about abolishing these boards. Members of the DP
were the ones that objected to the abolishment of these boards because they
knew that they were very closely connected to these boards. Furthermore,
the people that are housing developers are their people. There are very few
black developers. [Interjection.]]

It is from this premise that we support the transfer of powers to the
Ministers or MECs. Being the executing authority, the Minister must
determine the policy direction and outcome of his or her department. As an
elected official entrusted with the housing portfolio, the Minister must
carry out his or her executing duties to ensure that houses are delivered
to the people who elected him or her to office. It is anomalous, therefore,
for a housing development to assume an executing role in housing delivery.
It is even worrisome when one realises that the members of the housing
board, once in office, are not accountable to the sectors which nominated
them, nor to the general public.

Secondly, sections 38 to 45 of the Public Finance Management Act defines
clearly the responsibilities of accounting officers. This includes
responsibilities relating to budgetary control; reporting responsibilities;
the safeguarding and maintenance of public assets and liabilities;
responsibilities relating to the delegation of powers and duties; and the
prevention of unauthorised, irregular and fruitless and wasteful
expenditure and losses resulting from criminal conduct. Also included is
the responsibility of managing available working capital efficiently and
economically.

The above shows that even the allocation of housing grants - conditional
grants from the national body - and approval of expenditure are the
responsibilities of the accounting officer, not any established body.

Lastly, the Housing department is the one which is accountable to
Parliament or legislature for the manner in which grants are spent. Above
all, the Public Finance Management Act provides for sanctions for financial
misconduct. Section 86 of the Act provides for an accounting officer to be
fined or sentenced to prison for a period of five years if he or she
wilfully or in a grossly negligent way fails to execute any of his or her
responsibilities.

Yiyo ke loo nto thina kwiphondo laKwaZulu-Natal sisithi siyawuxhasa lo
Mthetho uyilwayo njengoko unjalo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

[That is why we in KwaZulu-Natal fully support this Bill as it is.
[Applause.]]

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, hon Minister, hon MEC Peter Miller of KwaZulu-
Natal, hon special delegates and hon colleagues, the Housing Amendment Bill
of 2001 proposes to amend the Housing Act, Act 107 of 1997, so as to
streamline the modus operandi of the all-important housing development and
procurement policy of the state.

The Bill seeks to rectify certain salient features of the Act, namely by
proposing the abolition of the South African and provincial housing
development boards; by providing for the establishment of panels to advise
the Minister and the MECs; by transferring the powers, duties, rights and
obligations of the provincial housing boards to the MECs responsible for
housing; by empowering the Minister to determine procurement policy in
respect of housing development; and by putting in place regulatory measures
to restrict the sale or the alienation of state-subsidised housing.

Now just to dwell on one of these amendments: the DP has serious problems
with the abolition of the provincial housing development boards. In terms
of section 8(1)(a) of the Housing Act, Act 107 of 1997, the decision to
abolish the provincial housing development board is clearly the function of
the respective provincial legislatures. The amendment proposing the
abolition of the provincial housing development boards is in flagrant
contravention of section 8(1)(a). The Western Cape special delegate has
already underlined this important fact. [Interjections.]

The national Government's motives in seeking to do this, without the proper
knowledge or participation of provincial legislatures, is therefore
problematic for the DP.

While certain provinces may have experienced problems with their respective
boards, this is not the case in all provinces. The provincial housing
development board in KwaZulu-Natal, for example, has always operated in a
professional, transparent and exemplary manner. [Interjections.] So why
destroy that which works?
The DP does not believe that the time is right for the KwaZulu-Natal
provincial legislature to abolish its provincial housing development board.
This is one statutory body that has worked tirelessly to remove the
political controversy from strategic housing decisions. To destroy what
works well is not only politically naive, but extremely destructive for the
future of housing development in that province.

The DP, therefore, submits that the abolition of provincial housing
development boards is clearly a matter that falls within the legislative
competence of the provinces, and the future role of housing development
boards should fall within the ambit of provincial legislation and
regulation. My party sees this amendment as an undisguised attempt to
emasculate provincial powers, and therefore opposes it.

There are other concerns too. Will there be any provision for a national
housing data bank to prevent the abuse of housing subsidies? How does the
Bill intend to prevent applicants from applying and possibly receiving more
than one subsidy?

We need further elucidation on how the advisory housing panels will be
constituted. I know the Minister did mention that they would be panels of
experts. Will there be political appointments? What my party suggests is
that the panels be made up of only housing industry professionals, such as
civil engineers, members from the Institute of Town and Regional Planners,
as well as other role-players. [Interjections.]

In the light of these problematic areas of concern, the DP cannot support
the Bill as proposed. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I must say I am very
pleased to see the permanent delegates of the NCOP so active and awake.
[Laughter.] It is most exciting.

Mr T M SHABALALA (KwaZulu-Natal): Madam Chair, it is pity that I am going
to speak after my colleague, because I am boiling now. [Laughter.] People
have been calling me a whole lot of things for years. I feel like taking
off my coat. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

It is a pity that I have only a few minutes to talk. I think people must be
aware, when we talk about the boards, that we are talking about boards
which affect us, especially as black people living in our areas. We are not
talking about the board doing the work for people who live in luxurious
areas. [Interjections.] We are talking about our areas, especially for
squatters, where our people suffer. I am the leader of more than 200 000
people. We know what is happening there. So, to just say that you oppose
the abolition of the boards when you do not know what the boards have been
doing to us, really hurts us.

Madam Chair, hon Minister, chair of the select committee, special delegates
from other provinces, it is a great pleasure for me to take part in this
debate in this House on this amending Bill. In KwaZulu-Natal we had enough
time to look at this Bill, which is something that we appreciate a lot. We
even debated the Bill in the province. There were sharp differences towards
this Bill among certain parties.  I have just forgotten which parties they
were, because I am an old man now. I will remember them as we progress, but
I have forgotten them now just for a minute. Chair, please remind me if, at
the end of my speech, I do not mention them, because I think it is
important for the Chair to know who those people are who always oppose for
the sake of opposing. [Interjections.]
The differences were around the abolishment of the boards. Those are the
differences we had in Kwazulu-Natal: the power given to the MECs in all
provinces and the composition of the panels. There are people who want the
boards to remain because they benefit from these boards. We say loudly and
clearly that the boards must go: ``Hamba, hamba! [Go, go!] We do not need
you.'' [Laughter.]

We thank the Minister and we support her wise move of disbanding these
groups of sharks. Our people support her for being wise. She deserves
compliments from us. We wish her to go beyond the abolition of these
boards. We also wish her to investigate these former boards and their
members in their individual capacities, to see how truthful they were in
their activities as members of the boards. Maybe some of them have bought
8x8s, 4x4s or 20x20s - we do not know. [Laughter.]

But now this really hurts me, as I have said. Where I live in Lindelani, we
applied for that area to be developed at the time of the apartheid
Government seven years ago. Now that this Government has come to power, we
can see that progress is being made. So anyone who mentions a board to me,
or tells me about a board, is telling me about a monster. I just do not
want to see it again, because I live in a squatter area. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Fortunately, Mr Shabalala, your time has
expired, so I do not have to ask you to tell me about the parties you
forgot. [Laughter.] I will not put you through such a test.

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Madam Chairperson, hon Minister and honoured guests, I
must say immediately that some members of this House tend to forget that
South Africa is a unitary state and, as such, the provinces work in tandem
with the central Government. When we said that we would do everything in
partnership with the people, we meant that we would involve people in every
sphere of development, not only when it comes to petty issues.

Among the several amendments that this Bill seeks to bring about in the
Housing Act of 1997, the stipulations of the proposed section 7(4) are of
paramount importance in that these amendments touch on the crucial issue of
our interaction and partnership with the broader community.

The abolition of the housing development boards is indeed a bold step for
the transformation of housing delivery by Government. While it has been the
norm to bind such advisory boards to stringent regulations pertaining to
the frequency of meetings and other related matters, this Bill seeks to
some extent to acknowledge and encourage the sense of maturity and
accountability reached in some of our provinces. The panel of experts
advising the MEC for housing will therefore sit only if and when necessary.

This relaxation of regulation has the benefit of freeing the members of the
panel to pursue their respective occupations, instead of having to stick
around government offices, sometimes being exposed to all kinds of
temptations and human failures. These members will therefore not
necessarily rely on a government stipend for a living.

The fact that procurement policy will be laid down in terms of section 217
of the Constitution assures us that the possibility of nepotism,
favouritism and corruption will be kept under close check. [Applause.]

Kgoši M L MOKOENA: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo, ke tlabja ke go lemoga gore go
na le maloko ao a sa tsebego gore diphetošo tša Molaokakanywa di dirwa
neng, ka nako efe. Motho o tlo tlabega go lemoga gore maloko a mangwe a
tliša diphetošo tša Molaokakanywa lehono re le mo lekgeng la ngangišano. Go
leša dihlong bjang!

A nke ke thome ka go leboga mohlomphegi Tona ka matsapa ao a tšerwego go
kaonefatša maphelo a setšhaba sa gešo. E be e le la mathomo historing ya
mmušo wa Afrika-Borwa ge batho ba agelwa mengwako. Re re mohlomphegi Tona o
kgonne, re a mo leboga. [O tsenwa-ganong.] (Translation of Pedi paragraphs
follows.)

[Chief M L MOKOENA: Madam Chair, it is almost unbelievable that some hon
members are, even at this stage, not yet au fait with the processes of
amending a Bill. One may be surprised that some members are starting to
bring their amendments to the Bill while it is at the point of being
debated. That is utterly shameful!

May I at the outset thank the hon the Minister for the initiatives she has
taken so far to improve the standard of living of our people. It is for the
first time in the history of South Africa that a government has undertaken
initiatives in respect of housing people. We want to say to the Minister
that she has succeeded, and we are really grateful for that.
[Interjections.]]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, on a point of order: I would as as a matter of
courtesy like to listen to my hon colleague, but there is no interpretation
service, and the Order Paper, in fact, says the speech will be delivered in
another language. Perhaps we can correct this, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! As far as I am aware, members had not
alerted the parliamentary staff to the fact that they would require
interpretation services, so it is indicated to me that there are no staff
on standby at this time. We would have to look into whether, in fact, staff
were alerted. Members are fully aware that we need to indicate. As you will
see, with some members speaking there was an indication on the speakers'
list that more than one language or a particular language would be
utilised.

I understand there was no such indication in respect of Mr Mokoena, and the
rules are quite clear with respect to this, so I would ask that you proceed
in the language as indicated. Otherwise I will have to go to the
interpreting booth and translate on your behalf, which would leave the
House without a presiding officer. [Laughter.]

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, with due respect, I indicated even
yesterday during our meeting that I would be participating in Sepedi. I
even made the Whip on duty aware of my intention to participate in this
Chamber in my language, as a reminder. May I be allowed to participate and
enjoy myself in Sepedi, which I so love?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I believe you should continue, Mr Mokoena, but
I would ask that members do assist us because, as you know, Parliament
cannot provide simultaneous interpretation throughout the sittings. We need
to have staff available and clear times indicated. But, being persuaded by
the multilingual approach of the NCOP, I will allow you to proceed and we
will try to ensure that in the next minute or so, we do a have a staff
member available. But I must urge members to ensure that we do provide
notice, because we do have the staff available and the facility, but it is
important that we are made aware, well ahead of time, in order to provide
this service. Proceed, then, in Sepedi.
Chief M L MOKOENA: I am humbly grateful, Chairperson. Thank you very much.

Ka gona ke re mohlomphegi Tona o kgonne, re a mo leboga. Ka segagešo re re:
Mme o tlile, tlala e ... Ke tšhaba mediti! [Disego.] E no ba go hloka
mahlatse ka gore ge motho a šomela setšhaba, go fela go e ba le diphure
goba bona bomabina-go-solwa, elego bomasenya.

Mmušo o agetše batho mengwako. Gare ga bona bao go na le bao ba ratago go
buna moo ba sego ba lema gona. Molaokakanywa wo o leka go thibela bošaedi
bjo bo dirwago ke mafeela a. E be e se ka phošo ge Mmušo o hloma mekgatlo
yeo go thwego ke SA Housing Development Board le provincial housing
development boards. Mekgatlo yeo e be e swanetše go eletša Tona le
Molekgotla ka ditaba tša kabo ya mengwako. Efela e bile maswabi go lemoga
gore a mangwe a maloko a dibodo, go e na le gore a eletše mohlomphegi Tona,
a be a fepa malapa a wona le dimpa tša wona tše disehla.

Go na le gore ba šomele setšhaba, ba thomile go somiša seatla-kobong. Ke ka
baka leo re rego go botlhokwa gore dibodo tšeo di fedišwe, di hwe la
pitšana, gomme re di epele.  Ga re nyake le go di bona.
Ke rata go fihliša mantšu a ditebogo go tšwa Northern Province ka ge le
kgonne go bonela pele gore setšhaba se holege ka Molaokakanywa wo.
(Translation of Pedi paragraphs follows.)

[In my language we have a saying: Mme o tlile, tlala e ... [Mother has
arrived, so we will not be hungry any more ...] So far so good! [Laughter.]
It is just unfortunate that when one is serving the public, there are bound
to be a few characters who might well be worthless obstinates.

Government has assisted in housing people. Among them there are those who
are intent on reaping where they have not sown. This Bill attempts to
prevent the anomalies that might be caused by such rogues. The Government
was not wrong in establishing the SA Housing Development Board and the
provincial housing development boards. Those boards were initially intended
so serve as advisory panels to advise the Minister and the MECs. However,
it is unfortunate that some officials of those boards, who were supposed to
advise the Minister, have become unscrupulous sharks who indulge in
enriching themselves and their families.

Instead of working for the improvement of the public lot, those greedy fat
cats with no feelings for their fellow communities have resorted to
bribery. That is why we are saying that those boards should be abolished
forthwith. We do not want to have them any more.

I wish to commend the Northern Province on account of their farsightedness
with regard to this Bill because it will eventually benefit our nation.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Members can now use their interpreting
devices; interpreting is now available. Continue, Mr Mokoena.

Kgoši M L MOKOENA: Go na le bao ba rego ge ba filwe mengwako yeo, ba thoma
go e rekiša ka mašeleng a tlase. Ge ba bona gore mašeleng ao ba a nwele
gomme ba a feditše, ba thoma ba boela laeneng gomme ba re ga ba na
mengwako. Tšeo ka moka ke mošomo wo o bego o swanetše go dirwa ke seo re ka
rego ke maloko a dibodo tsa mengwako; efela ga ba kgone go lemoga mathata
ao. E no ba batho bao e lego gore ga na kelello, e bile ba palelwag ke go
gopola ge ba re ba nyaka gore dibodo tšeo di se ke tša fedišwa. Go swabiša
e le ruri!
Ke maswabi gape go lemoga gore bao ba rego ga ba thekge Molaokakanywa wo,
le ka letšatši le tee ga se ba ke ba ya go bona gore go direga eng ka
mengwako yeo Mmušo o filego batho bao.

Tšhipu e rile ke lebelo, mohlaba wa re ke nabile. Ka Molaokakanywa wo,
lešoba le re a le tswalela. Motho a ka se sa kgona go rekiša ntlo yeo a e
filwego ke Mmušo. Motho o tlo dumelelwa fela go rekiša ngwako woo ka morago
ga mengwaga ye seswai, le gona ka mabaka ao a kwagalago. Ge e ba ga a sa
nyaka ngwako woo, Mmušo o tlo o tšea. Lena dikalatšane, ihlobogeng ka gore
ngwedi o apogetšwe ke maru! (Translation of Pedi paragraphs follows.)

[Chief M L MOKOENA: There are those beneficiaries who, when allocated
houses, often put them on sale at recklessly low prices. After they have
spent every cent they got from the deal, they then go back onto the waiting
lists and apply for new subsidies. That anomaly was supposed to have been
detected by members of these so-called housing boards, but unfortunately
they do not even know that such problems exist. It is only those without
understanding, or those who fail to think, who would support the idea of
retaining those boards. That is really sad!
It is also sad to realise that those who are saying they do not support
this Bill have never gone out to see for themselves what is happening with
the houses that the Government has built for those people.

We have this proverb in Sotho languages: Tšhipu e rile ke lebelo, mohlaba
wa re ke nabile. [The law has a long arm.] With this Bill we are closing up
that loophole. This Bill prohibits the beneficiaries from voluntarily or
involuntarily selling their state-subsidised houses or alienating them for
a period of eight years from the date of acquisition. One has to give good
reasons for doing so. If one feels that one no longer needs that house, the
Government will take it over. Corrupt officials need to be cautioned to get
their acts together because their days are numbered!]

It is fine to lend a helping hand, but the challenge is getting people to
let go of it. There are some comments or proposals put forward by the
Western Cape which cannot be left unchallenged. For example, they want the
committee, Chamber or Council to define the provincial government. Really,
they cannot be serious. Perhaps they are like those people who say: Shoot
for the moon; even if you miss it, you will land amongst the stars.
[Laughter.] Oh my God! [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I must indicate that I am really sorry,
Mr Mokoena, that you did not have an interpreting service available when
you started speaking. I will look into why this happened, but sadly, hon
members have missed some very rich idiomatic expressions. Perhaps you can
elaborate those to them later. I am interested in the ``tlala m-m-m'' ...
[Laughter.] ... and hope we will get an explanation at some later time.

Ms J L KGOALI: Chairperson, hon Minister, comrades and members of the
Council, it is a great pleasure for me to be back in this Chamber and to
participate in this very important debate. I thought by this time we would
have put in place legislation to transform hon member Ackermann.
[Laughter.]

Housing is a right, not a privilege. The legislation in front of us shows
that Government is well awake and monitors the development of housing
around the country. Abolition of the housing boards shows the capability of
the department and the process that has to be followed in cutting the red
tape for quicker development.

Government has made housing free for the poorest of the poor, but there are
those who want to enrich themselves with what has been meant for the needy.
The department must continue to assist because one knows that there are
problems in other provinces. The department must continue to assist those
provinces in need of help, not those who feel that they are a government
unto themselves.

Those who rob the poor, must be jailed. Corruption must be stopped. We need
development to help for the poorest of the poor.

This brings me to the various political parties that we have in this House
and in all the provinces. If one goes back to the provinces, one will find
that various parties have different views, even though they are from the
same province. In Gauteng, unlike Kwazulu-Natal, the DP supports the Bill a
hundred percent. [Applause.]

Nksz N D NTWANAMBI: Mhlalingaphambili, mandiqale ngeyokugqibela. Egameni le-
ANC, nabo bantu basalindele ukuzuza izindlu, abo baziyo ukuba lo Rhulumente
uza kubalungiselela, ndiyasixhasa esi silungiso.

Kuluvuyo ukubona ukuba uRhulumente uzimisele ukuwuqwalasela ngokumandla
umcimbi wezindlu. Lo Rhulumente ukhokelwa yiANC wenze iinzame ezinkulu
ukubonelela abantu ngezindlu, nto leyo ebe inqabile kwiminyaka elishumi
eyandulela ukungena kwalo Rhulumente.

Eyona nto ibalulekileyo kukuguzulwa komhlathana owawulungiselelwe ukukhupha
abantu ezindlwini, ngakumbi abo bangakwaziyo ukuhlawula ngenxa yokungabi
nanto. Icacisiwe nguMphathiswa loo nto. Andifuni kuyiphinda.

Lo Mthetho ulungiselela ukususwa kweebhodi zezindlu. Loo nto iza kwenza
ukuba ithuba elide ebezilizichitha licutheke. Kwabo bathengisa utywala
neziyobisi akusayi kuphinda kube yinto elula ukuthenga ezi zindlu
zilungiselelwe abantu abahluphekileyo nabamivuzo iphantsi, ngamaxabiso
aphantsi.

Kwakhona, xa umphathiswa wephondo engawenzi umsebenzi wakhe njengoko
kulindelekile, esi silungiso sithi uMphathiswa wezeZindlu uza kungenelela,
kuba lilungelo lakhe ukungenelela ngenjongo yokuqhubela phambili umsebenzi.

Intetho yelinye ilungu ibisithi kukho inkcitho eninzi kuRhulumente yiyo le
ibangele ukuba uMphathiswa eze nesi silungiso. Kukuzama ukucutha kanye loo
nkcitho ingako ukuze kubonelelwe abantu ngezindlu ngokukhawulezayo.
UMphathiswa obekekileyo utshilo ukuba ususa ilungelo leebhodi, unika
abaphathiswa bamaphondo amagunya.

Kwakhona, lithe elinye ilungu xa ubani enokusweleka, abantwana bakhe okanye
abo abamele kuyifumana indlu yakhe abayi kuyifumana. Ayikho into enjalo. Xa
into enjalo ithethwa lilungu lale Ndlu iba ngumnqa, ngoba loo nto
yayicacisiwe. Loo mbuzo sawubuza kuba sasifuna ukwazi ukuba kwenzeka ntoni
na kubantu abamele ukuba bazuze indlu yakhe lowo uthe wasweleka. Impendulo
yathi kulandelwa indlela eyiyo ukuze ifunyanwe ngabo banelungelo le ndlu
leyo.

Ayilunganga into yokuba athi ubani xa etyhala iinjongo zombutho wakhe
ayenze ngokuphosisa loo nto. Okufanele ukwenzeka kukuba athi umntu xa
ezibona ekwinqanaba eliphakamileyo, akhangele indawo nendlu efanele
umgangatho wakhe nepokotho yakhe, ze anikezele ngendlu kulowo useseluhlwini
ukwenzela ukuba naye axhamle.

Inyani yeyokuba xa ubani eqhele ukuxhamla akasayi kusixhasa esi silungiso.
Kananjalo abo bakwezi bhodi, ixesha elininzi, ngabantu abawaziyo umthetho.
Bayaphakamisa, bayaxhasana, bakwangabakhi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
Xhosa speech follows.)

[Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, I am going to begin with the last issue. On
behalf of the ANC and all the people who still expect to get houses, those
that know that this Government is

going to provide for them, I support this amendment.

It is with great joy that one notices that the Government shows commitment
to look into the issue of housing. This ANC-led Government has made great
strides in providing people with houses, and that is something that did not
happen very often in the ten years before this Government came into power.

What is most important is the removal of the clause whose aim was to evict
from their houses in particularly those who could not afford to pay. The
Minister went into detail about that. I do not want to repeat it.

This Bill aims to abolish these housing boards and that is going to reduce
the time that they used to take. It will no longer be easy for those that
sell liquor and drugs to buy these houses that are provided for poor and
low-income people at a low cost.

Again, when the provincial MEC does not do the job that she/he is required
to do, this amendment says that the Minister of Housing will intervene
because it is her right to do that to ensure that the process is not
delayed.

A comment from another hon member that there is a lot of overspending in
Government is what caused the Minister to come up with this amendment. It
aims to address such expenses so that people could be provided with houses
quickly. The hon Minister said that she was taking away the right from the
boards and was giving authority to the provincial MECs.

Again, another hon member said that if one should die, one's children or
whoever had a right to the house would not get it. There is nothing like
that. When an hon member of this House says something like that, it comes
as a surprise because that was explained. We asked such a question when we
wanted to know who would get one's house if one died. The answer was that
an appropriate procedure would be followed so that those that had a right
to the house would get it.

It is not right that, when a person wants to push the interests of his/her
party, she/he should do that by lying. What should happen is that if one's
financial situation improve thereby putting one on a higher income level,
one should look for a place and a house that is in line with his/her new
status, and then give the other house to the person that is still on the
waiting list, so that that person could also enjoy the privileges.

The truth is that if one is used to enjoying privileges one will not
support this amendment. Furthermore, those that serve on these boards most
of the time are people who have a legal background. They work hard and
support one another and they are also the builders. [Applause.]]
The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, I thank everyone who participated in
the debate.

We understand very well why there are people who do not want us to abolish
the boards. Firstly, they do not want us to abolish the boards because they
are beneficiaries. Some people were sitting on the boards to serve their
own interests. Members of the boards were appointed by sectors, but they
never went back to report on the activities of the boards. Above all, in
the seven years that we are talking about, we discovered that the majority
of people who were sitting on the boards had financial interests.

In that instance, it was important for the Department of Housing together
with the provincial structures to go out and investigate further as to the
nature and character of the boards that had been established in the
provinces. The outcome of that investigation was that the boards had
assumed their nature nature and were growing in different directions. Every
board was doing whatever it wanted to do. [Interjections.] It was important
therefore ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! What is the point of order, Mr Durr?

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, it is not a point of order. May I ask the hon
the Minister a question, please?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are you prepared to take a question, Minister?
[Interjections.] No, the Minister is not prepared to take a question.
Please sit down, Mr Durr. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: It was therefore important that this Government, which is
responsible to the public and has been put in office by the public, ie the
voters, and which is utilising the taxpayers money, does something about
it. These amendments are actions driven by the concern of this Government,
because this is a government that cares.

Secondly, I do not know why hon members are bringing forward arguments that
are really not convincing. If beneficiaries can apply for subsidies at the
provincial housing department, our assumption is that sales would be an
exception rather than the norm. We also want to make sure that the co-
ordination between local and provincial government in submitting these
applications can be facilitated, and this does not need legislation.

I also want to state that it would be irresponsible for anyone who is aware
of the problem not to do anything about it. I would like to illustrate why
it was important for us to abolish the boards.

Firstly, there are national requirements and presidential instructions that
relate to issues of national interest. Secondly, there are provincial
programmes that the boards were not looking at for whatever reason. I think
we all agree that we would like this country to develop in a manner which
does not continue to perpetuate the practices and policies that have
separated our people for a very long time.

One of the problems we have had with the boards is that they never gave
enough consideration to the location of the projects that they were
contracting out. That is a problem for us. We also had to make sure that we
set up a structure that is going to be responsible and accountable to the
constituencies that have put those people in office.

If, for example, in Gauteng development was planned around a particular
economic nodal point, and then houses in that provinces were built out
there, far from where the people were, we would be perpetuating what we
have inherited and not solving problems. What we are saying now is that
people who sit in offices, such as officials and public authorities
appointed by the President and the premiers, are going to be accountable
for whatever goes wrong. The boards were not accountable. They were private
persons and did not really care about what went on in those areas.

I would like to appeal to those who are arguing for argument's sake to,
just for one moment, remember that all of this activity is on behalf of the
poor, not on behalf of the people who come forward, benefit from the
contracts, and disappear. We are doing this on behalf of the poor, and the
majority of the people in this country are the poor and, incidentally, the
majority of the poor are African and black. We are therefore saying that we
need to be sensitive on how we deal with this issue.

I would also like to say to the hon members that we in the Department of
Housing have taken this long to address this issue, not because we did not
care, but because we wanted to make sure that we understood the depth of
the problems. We are coming out with this decision as a collective effort
by hon members, MECs and the participation of heads of department,
including the Western Cape.

I am shocked to learn from that hon member that the provincial housing
board in the Western Cape was acting in a manner that was not biased or
discriminatory. As I stand here, I can tell hon members that the Provincial
Housing Development Board in the Western Cape has been cause for concern.
[Interjections.] I have in my office records of municipalities that have
complained that they had been given assurance by the board that they were
going to be afforded subsidies and would go on with the task of
construction in their areas. But because they happened to belong to certain
political parties, those assurances have been withdrawn.

I can tell hon members that as I stand here, I have made rounds during a
visit of the Western Cape. In those areas where we have the majority of the
black people, projects are not proceeding. Just round the corner in
Khayelitsha there is application that is more than four years old. Today
people are told that they are going to get their subsidies, and three
months down the line they are told the file has disappeared. When we try to
enquire about and search for the actual reasons the people have not
received their subsidies - and we do that up to the second year - yet we
never get to understand why certain communities are not being serviced by
the board.

One hon member was talking about what happened in the Free State, about
money that was paid out, but no houses were built. I am not going to defend
anybody here. But what I want to tell hon members is that this Government
is in the forefront of the war against corruption and nepotism, and against
whatever practices that are not acceptable and unconstitutional in our
environment.

These amendments are going to make sure that those kinds of activities do
not survive in the environment, be they by members of the NP or the ANC.
Anybody who will not observe the rules that apply shall not be supported by
this Government or department. This should not come as news, because we are
the people who have led this democratic Government by example. From the
first day we discovered that we had a problem, we made a public
announcement. We are proceeding with that action by making sure that if
whoever is in office becomes corrupt, the due process of the law takes its
course.

I would like to say to the hon members of the New NP that they should not
make claims that their boards have distributed resources equitably, because
they have not.

We have done a survey. I am saying this because we do keep a record of
information and a data bank, which indicate where the subsidies have been
allocated, who the developers are that are going to provide us with the
service and who the beneficiaries are.

During the campaign, I did some work here in the Western Cape. I just
cannot remember the name of the area which I went to. When houses were
allocated, no fewer than 100 houses were given to friends and relatives of
an individual who is a member of the council. The rest of the houses that
remain along that belt have been given to people on the basis of whether
the rooms are big or small.

I must state here that, unfortunately, also that activity was done on a
biased basis. There is a lot of discrimination that borders on racism. We
are therefore saying that if people are honest about transformation and
changing this country, we will go back to the appointed officials, the MECs
and the Ministers.

The Ministers will liaise and work very closely with their heads of
departments to try and make sure that whatever institution and whatever
instrument we put into place adheres to the constitutional requirements,
observes the Bill of Rights and observes the policies that have been
instituted in those line function departments. However, above all, whatever
services are provided, it is ``batho pele'' [people first] and other
interests at the back.

Whilst some members of the New NP are so worked up and irritated about this
thing, it is also because these boards are being introduced from the past.
This is an instrument of the past, which was functioning under the policies
and the principles of apartheid. It is time to change and transform, and
put into place democratic institutions.

I want to come back to the fact that anybody who has a problem with the
houses, with the implementation of the policy and with the instruments that
have been put into place will, at least, be able to go to an accountable
individual - in this instance it is the MEC - so that we can all begin to
be accountable to those people who voted for us, and not be accountable to
sectors, companies or industries that benefit from this housing policy.

Once more, to remind the House, this capital housing subsidy has been put
into place to provide homes and shelter for the poorest of the poor. I am
therefore saying that if, by being in this House, members want to claim
that they are coming in as a sector that cares for the poor, they are then
going to support this Bill, because if they do not, it is contrary to all
the things that they go about saying in public when it is election time:
saying that their parties have transformed and that they have changed. It
is about change and it is about dealing with the poor and the homeless.

If they want to prove their worth, then here is a Bill; it is an amendment,
it is work that has been observed over seven years and it has been done
with institutions that are independent and nonpartisan. The outcome of this
amendment is a report that says we really do not need the boards in our
environment because they are not serving our purpose.

I would like to conclude by saying that no amount of screaming or
protestation is going to divert us from the actual purpose of why we are
here. We are here to transform society. Whatever we do, whether it is a
board, whether it is a policy, whether it is a tool or an instrument that
is being put into place and relates to the people, to the public, it has to
be something that paves the way and indicates to all of us that we are
about change.

This board, to me, says we are about change. It is time that we stopped the
corruption and the bullying that comes with the drug lords. It is very
disturbing when somebody says: ``We have not had problems with the
boards''; ``the boards have been doing very well'', when, actually, members
from that party were sitting at MinMec with us and saw how the special task
team forces went out to investigate the damage that had been done by the
boards.

However, I also want to say that in one or two boards we have had an
activity and a service that was not that disastrous. As people have said,
the KwaZulu-Natal board has done a good job. Yes, they have done a good
job, but there also have been weaknesses in that board, weaknesses that
have to be solved by these amendments, unless somebody wants to tell me
that people who sit on these boards are perfect and are honourable people
that we can rely on.

We can give a list of cases of how people were sitting on the boards and,
at the same time, were making sure that whoever got the contract from
outside got back to them, and then their friendship and partnership would
continue.

We are therefore saying as responsible citizens that that has to stop here
and now. Hon members should support the Bill. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! The decision is to be dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution. We therefore need delegation heads
to be present in the Chamber to indicate the votes of their provinces.

I note that all delegation heads are present. We were missing the Northern
Province, but I see that the Northern Province is, indeed, back in the
Chamber.
In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces ... Ms Botha, is
there something that the Free State has mandated you to pursue with the
Western Cape? [Laughter.]

Mr C ACKERMANN: [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: She is disrupting the Western Cape, is that
right? I see. Ms Botha, please desist. We will allow provinces the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote. Is there any province
wishing to make a declaration of vote? We have debated the subject. We may
therefore proceed to voting on the question.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

              (Consideration of Bill and of Report of thereon)

Ms Q D MAHLANGU: Chairperson, Deputy Minister of Finance, MEC Miller -
thank you for attending - special delegates and also members of this
Council at large, the select committee had public hearings on 6 and 7 March
2001, in order to consider the Bill.

The following stakeholders participated: the National Treasury, the
Financial and Fiscal Commission, Salga, the Auditor-General and the
Departments of Health, Education, Water and Forestry, Housing, Public
Works, Social Development and Provincial and Local Government.

The reason we invited these departments is that all of them have
conditional grants in the provincial and local spheres of government. The
Minister of Health and the Deputy Minister of Finance were in attendance
and they really contributed a great deal.

The committee is mindful of the fact that South Africa's physical
environment and intergovernmental fiscal relations give priority to
servicing the national debt. The costs of servicing the debt are met before
resources are shared between the three spheres of government.

In addition, the committee observed that the fiscal system is maturing. The
vertical division of revenue between spheres is determined by Cabinet in an
extensive political process that takes place at the executive level, which
involves MECs for finance and organised local government in the form of the
Budget Council and the Budget Forum respectively. After debt servicing
costs and contingency reserves are deducted, the total to be shared between
the three spheres of government amounts to R208,1 billion over the Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework. The committee also noticed that the national
share increases from 39,4% in the 2000-01 financial year to 40,5% in 2001-
02, and declines marginally over the MTEF up to 2004.

The share dedicated to local government also rises from 3,0% to 3,3% over
the MTEF, the reason being that local government is going through
restructuring, through the new demarcation process that has just taken
place. The provincial share declines as a result of this from 57,6% to
56,4% in the year 2001-02.

The objectives of the conditional grants, in particular, are as follows:
one, to provide for national priorities at provincial and local government
levels; two, to promote national norms and standards; three, to compensate
provinces for cross-boundary flows; and, four, to provide special services
and to effect transition by supporting capacity building.

The combined conditional grants for provinces and local government amount
to R1,7 billion. Eighty-eight percent of the national transfer to provinces
constitutes equitable share while the remaining 11,3% flows through the
conditional grants. However, in the case of local government, conditional
grants constitute 60% of the total transfer.

It was the contention of the committee that the administration and
performance of conditional grants were in urgent need of review. This
urgent need prompted the committee to host public hearings on the Bill and
invite affected departments. While the administration of conditional grants
may have improved greatly, a huge underspending on a number of conditional
grants is common. The nonspending adversely affects the delivery of
important basic social services. There were key issues that the committee
raised in considering the report on the public hearings.

There are two forms of conditional grants, those that go to provincial
government and those that go to local government.

I will address the conditional grant that goes to provinces. In 2000 the
National Treasury conducted a review of the conditional grants framework.
The review identified the need to reduce the number of conditional grants
in order to rationalise the number of grants in the system. The Departments
of Health and Housing and the National Treasury administer the largest
proportion of the conditional grants to provinces.

Four small grants have been merged into the Supplementary Grant
administered by the National Treasury. They are the Financial Management
Grant of the National Treasury, the Capacity Building Grant of the
Department of Housing, the National Land Transportation Act Grant of the
Department of Transport and the R293 Grant of the Department of Provincial
and Local Government. All these come from these national departments'
Votes.

The R293 grant forms part of the Supplementary Grant in 2001-02, after
which it will go into the provincial equitable share. The Supplementary
Grant also includes R243 million over the MTEF period for a pilot project
to improve financial management in health departments as well as hospital
management.

I now come to the conditional grant that goes to the Government. The
following are the new local government grants. The first is the Local
Government Restructuring Grant, which is going to cease after a few years.
This will assist large municipalities to undertake complex institutional
and budgetary restructuring exercises. The costs imposed are deemed to be
short-term, but their yield is only realised in the medium term.
Municipalities with budgets over R300 million are eligible for this grant.

The second is the Local Government Support Grant. This will assist the
smaller municipalities. It is likely that this grant will merge with the
Local Government Restructuring Grant.

The third is Municipal Finance Management Grant. This will assist
municipalities to reform their financial management and budgeting
practices, in line with the national Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.
The fourth is the Municipal Systems Improvement Grant. It will have a five-
year lifespan and will be allocated in terms of a framework determined by
an interdepartmental committee.

The fifth is the Transitional Grant. It has been established to assist
municipalities to meet the one-off costs incurred as a result of the
merging of the municipalities. The lifespan of this grant extends over two
years. It will subsequently be incorporated into the equitable share.

Some of the issues that I am going to talk about were raised in public
hearings. Some of them also arose during the Budget Review process
conducted by the Ministry of Finance in February. One of the issues
concerns municipal borrowing.

The encouragement of municipal debt market is a new development for local
government financing. While an active debt market for municipalities will
promote greater responsibility, regulation will be in place to govern
municipal borrowing. This will establish requirements for raising loans and
put in place the framework unambiguously outlining the position of both
borrowers and lenders.

The committee will approach the Asset and Liability Management Division of
the National Treasury for clarity on the impact of additional activity of
municipalities in the bond market on interest rates and the level of state
debt.

Other issues raised during the deliberations include underspending on
conditional grants in the several departments I am going to talk about.

First of all, there is the Education department. One of the grants which
have been underperforming is the Financial Management and Quality
Enhancement Grant. Underspending has been noted for two consecutive years
on this grant. In the current year the report reflects that spending is
still very low, amounting to less than 5% nine months into this financial
year, which is about to end in the next few days.

During the public hearing we were also informed that only 37% of the total
allocation had been spent by 31 January 2001. The same applies to Health,
notably the integrated nutrition programme. The committee was also informed
that 68% of this grant has not been spent in the current financial year.
Underspending has been recorded for at least three consecutive years.

In addition, with regard to redistribution of specialised health services
conditional grants, trends up to the end of December 2000 show that
spending is still very low, at less than 40% of the allocated amount.
However, the construction of some of the hospitals is about to be
completed, such as the Umtata regional hospital, and that creates space for
the construction of the Pretoria Academic hospital and the Durban hospital.

With respect to the Housing Fund conditional grant, the committee learned
that underspending occurred in the financial year 1999, while current
spending is at about 52% of the budgeted amount.

With respect to the human resettlement development pilot conditional grant,
it is observed that underspending also occurred in the 1999 financial year,
and that by 31 December last year less than 30% of the money allocated had
been spent. The following explanations were given for this underspending.
Firstly, we were informed that originally inexperience with the conditional
grants mechanism, coupled with delays and uncertainty about the release of
funds, made proper planning very difficult.

Secondly, in subsequent years inexperience and uncertainty about how
exactly the mechanism was supposed to operate continued to present some
difficulties. In addition, the capacity of departments at provincial and
national levels was not fully geared for optimal conceptualisation,
management and implementation of conditional grants. This led to late
planning, as a result.

Thirdly, the delays also occurred as a result of further tendering or
procurement processes between the departments concerned and the respective
provincial tender boards.

Fourthly, moreover, the unanticipated difficulties associated with co-
ordination of projects are a major cause of underspending in respect of
conditional grants.

Most projects in respect of housing, education, social development and
health involve negotiations at school, municipal, district, provincial and
national levels, which is a major time-consuming factor. This is further
aggravated by the lack of capacity in some provinces and municipalities.

A crucial element of underspending is also the availability of donor funds
for similar projects, for example with regard to education. The process of
accessing donor funds is a lot simpler, and requires fewer administrative
hurdles, than the list of departments not spending the money allocated to
them.

The HIV/Aids grants were given later in the financial year, that is 2000-
01, and as a result of the late planning of the project, the spending could
not take place at an appropriate time.

One of the issues that the committee raised is that we should try and find
ways of clustering the conditional grants. There are too many conditional
grants in the social development system, for instance health, education and
social development have all received the HIV/Aids grants and these three
departments all do different things with it.

The perception that we got from the hearings was that these grants were not
properly co-ordinated, and as a result they lead to duplication in one way
or the other. There has to be much planning and clustering of these grants
if we want to see better effectiveness and the impact of this grant.

There were specific clauses in the Bill that were raised as being
problematic. I would like to deal with those. Clause 15(2), which refers to
the conversion of conditional grants to unconditional grants and transfers
to provinces and municipalities, weakens the financial monitoring of
grants. However, the National Treasury argues that this conversion is used
as an instrument to prompt national departments into compliance with the
reporting requirements of these conditional grants. I think one of the
things that members must note is that some departments do not even have
conditions attached to their grants. As a result, it becomes difficult to
monitor if we do not know what conditions are attached to these grants.
This clause is aimed at dealing with such issues.

The Office of the Auditor-General also alleged that clause 31(3) of the
Bill overextends its brief because the recovery of funds from negligent
individuals is not the responsibility of the Auditor-General. This
executioner function should reside with the NCOP or with the legislature.
The committee has recommendations that we have made to this effect. As a
result the committee amended the Bill to cover the concerns raised by the
Auditor-General, but at the same time tried to define mechanisms on how the
department can respond to this problem.

There are also the concerns raised by Salga and other stakeholders which
members will have to deal with. I just want to deal with the timing and
tabling of this Bill. I think in the past members have raised the concern
that the Bill becomes problematic if it is tabled at the same time as the
national Budget, because it does not give enough time to provinces to
participate. As a result, MECs' views tend to prevail more than those of
the legislatures and we think that the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations
Act of 1997 needs to be reviewed because it is one piece of legislation
that gives authority to this effect.

With regard to beneficiaries of social security grants and bank charges,
the committee was concerned that poor beneficiaries of the social security
grants are still burdened with banking charges when their social grants are
collected from the conventional banking sector. This question was raised
separately with the Department of Social Development and the National
Treasury. The response was that representations have been made to the
Banking Council with a view to excluding bank charges and minimum balance
requirements for accounts held by beneficiaries of social security grants.
Discussions on such service agreements continue and the Banking Council is
amenable to such arrangements, but these must be subject to the
transforming of the pension beneficiary system.

Our recommendations are as follows: We should review the conditional grant
mechanism. There are too many conditional grants in the system and they
must therefore be consolidated and rationalised to improve their
effectiveness.

The institution of nonfinancial monitoring mechanisms needs to be reviewed
so that the evaluation of grants is based not only on spending criteria but
also on the provision of services. We should be asking ourselves as MPs:
How many food parcels have gone from our nutrition schemes to children who
really need them? If not that many, what then are we going to do as MPs?
Also, in respect of housing: How many RDP houses that have been delivered
are going to real beneficiaries instead of going to people who are already
in possession of homes? The committee is of the view that all MPs and civil
society bodies must play a crucial role in exercising other oversight
responsibilities in this regard.

We also recommend that the timing and release of the Bill be explored. We
should also improve the design of grants, because that is crucial to the
functioning of the entire system of conditional grants. Clear and perhaps
simplified conditional requirements also have a bearing on the performance
of such grants.

Consideration should be given to the transfer of the primary school feeding
schemes from the Department of Health to the Department of Education,
because that department has the existing infrastructure. All communities
have schools, so if this project is given to the Department of Education,
we think that this will solve the problem. We raised it with the Minister
of Health when she was in the committee and she said that they would look
into it.

We should follow up on negotiations between the Department of Social
Development and the banking sector on the removal of the finance and
interest charges for the beneficiaries of social grants. We need to invite
the deputy director-general of the Asset and Liability Management Division
of the National Treasury to address the committee on the impact of local
government participation in the capital markets, because we think that
might pose certain problems.

We think that the legislation that is proposed in the Budget Review and the
discussion that the committee will host, will alleviate some of the
problems. We should also have further discussions on the conditional grants
and also further monitoring from time to time. The national departments and
provinces are expected to comply with the requirements of the PFMA, with
regard to the employment of the chief financial officers for the
administration of conditional grants.

One of the problems which were cited was that junior staff or public
servants are given the responsibility of managing grants. We think that
appropriate people should be employed.

In conclusion, the committee wants to thank all the participants in the
public hearing for their detailed and frank submissions. In addition, the
committee wants to thank all participants for their contributions and looks
forward to a long and beneficial association with them. More importantly,
the committee also conveys its special word of appreciation to the
directors-general of all the departments which I talked about earlier on,
and is also grateful for the substantial contribution of the Minister.
[Time expired.]

Mr P M MILLER (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, the speakers' list indicates
that I will be addressing the Council in English.

Bendicela Sihlalo, ukuba undivumele ndithethe isiXhosa kancinci ngoba
oosisi aba basithetha kamnandi yaye basithetha qho. [Uwelewele.] Kumnandi!
Kuvakala kamnandi, kundikhumbuza ekhaya. [Kwahlekwa.]

Kudala ndahlala nawo amaZulu njengabahlobo. Bendihamba ndigubha ngathi
ndingunogwaja. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to ask Chairperson, that you allow me to speak Xhosa a little
bit because my sisters here, speak very nicely and they speak it all the
time. [Interjections.] It is nice! It feels very good; it reminds me of
home. [Laughter.]

I have lived with the Zulus as friends for a long time. I would walk around
shaking like a rabbit. [Laughter.]]

I also do so in honour of the deputy captain of Team Finance, whom I know,
the hon the Deputy Minister.

To get back to the matters of the day, clearly I rise to support the Bill,
because, for all practical purposes, the Bill is a fait accompli.

As a member of the Budget Council, I can confirm that the Bill before hon
members is a product of long negotiation and compromise.

I do not say that that is a particularly pleasing state of affairs for a
council such as this, but I am afraid it is a reality, and thus I intend to
discuss with hon members today what we can do about the state of affairs. I
believe that the only material contribution I can make today is to
highlight issues which we will have to address before next year's Division
of Revenue Bill. For example, in the present Bill - I know it has been
explained, but it remains bad draftmanship in my view -there should be a
definition of ``Minister''. If an hon member can immediately tell whether
``the Minister'' in clause 5(1) or ``the Minister'' in clause 7(3) or ``the
Minister'' in clause 12(2) is the same Minister, then I would be surprised.
In two of those, at least, hon members would not be making a serious
mistake if they thought that they were speaking about the Minister for
Provincial and Local Government.

I also wish to draw attention to clause 8 in the Bill, which deals with the
framework for grants. I want to suggest that the information that was
required in terms of that clause was published far too late.

Provinces do not get an opportunity to engage on the issues which result
from the information that might or might not be published in terms of that
clause. In fact, I venture to suggest that the reasons given why such
allocations cannot be achieved via the equitable share are provided after
budgets are already law, precisely because such reasons cannot stand up to
scrutiny prior to the various budgets becoming law.
One of the interesting realities we must face here today is that I, and all
my colleagues in all provinces, have already tabled budgets based on this
Act, containing the information which is in this Act. In fact, in the
unlikely situation, for example, of this Act being rejected by this House,
it would create major constitutional and administrative problems for
provincial governments throughout the entire country. Quite clearly I think
there is validity in the hon chairperson of the select committee's
proposals that in fact the timing of this Act vis-à-vis the actual tabling
of budgets should be looked at again in the future.

I also want to draw attention to clause 10. I want to say, particularly to
the hon the Deputy Minister and the senior staff here from the Department
of Finance, that this clause could be described as being very patronising.
If the atmosphere in the Budget Council was not so good, and if the Budget
Council was not possibly the best example of co-operative governance in
this country, one could describe this particular clause 10 in much stronger
terms.

I pose the question, and I really mean this sincerely: Does this House
really suppose that the supplementary allocation would be withheld? I would
propose to the honourable NCOP that the sooner this allocation becomes part
of the equitable share, the better. Incidentally, I wonder how many
national departments could in fact comply with criteria similar to those
which provinces are required to comply with in terms of clause 10.

I turn briefly to conditional grants in the time available to me.
Conditional grants constitute nearly 15% of provincial budgets. One only
has to look at Schedule 1 to the Bill to see that figure. I submit that the
long-term objective should be to collapse most of these conditional grants
into the equitable share given to provinces. They are a remnant of a bygone
era. They actually reflect a distrust by national Government of provincial
capacity to deal with the money. I do not believe that this is justified
any longer.

The hon chairperson of the select committee spent some time indicating
underspending that was, or was not, caused by provincial inability or
incapacity to spend money. I want to record that it is my experience that,
in more cases than not, it is in actual fact the inability of the national
department to make it timeously available to the provincial department that
causes that particular underspending.

One of the interesting things about the division of revenue is that while
it sets out to divide income collected nationally among the three spheres
of government, it then goes on, except for Schedule 1, to really only deal
with the rules and regulations that pertain to the money that is allocated
to provinces, and the money that is allocated to municipalities. It simply
makes a statement as to the lump sum that is going to national departments.
I want to suggest that in a Division of Revenue Bill there should perhaps
be some attention given to exactly how some of the national departments
spend their allocations.

I am going to close with one example. One of the major spending priorities
of all provinces is in the field of welfare, namely social and child
support grants. I submit to this National Council that the best way of
getting poverty relief to the communities where it is actually needed is
via those particular grants. I would suggest, for example, that the R1,5
billion that is given to national Public Works for poverty alleviation
programmes would alleviate a lot more poverty if it was given to provinces
to add to the social grants that are given to the aged, to the infirm and
to children. [Applause.]

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Hon Chairperson, Deputy Minister, members of this House,
since the inception of our democratic dispensation, our Government had a
primary objective and goal to pursue, that is to promote co-operative
governance in all three spheres of government, as my hon colleague has
already mentioned, as well as to consolidate a concept of participatory
democracy.

While all this is being facilitated in many different forms of
consultations, one must exclusively appraise the public hearing process,
for it is through this process that we today have this balanced
distribution, with the already mentioned few amendments. Of course, a few
concerns have been registered. I need not repeat them.

The Division of Revenue Bill before this House today is a yardstick to
transform the various provinces, municipalities and communities. This Bill
is actually a well-prepared recipe for the translation of the state-of-the-
nation address by our hon President, especially in terms of transforming
the painful past that was never of our own making as a majority of this
country. No wonder the remnants of the past ruling class, which is now
called the DA, find it difficult to accept the allocation for addressing
the poverty and misery experienced by the majority of our people.

The North West province has been erecting a number of road infrastructure
projects, which have penetrated the rural areas. There are big plans to
pursue this project at a larger scale with the advantage of the current
allocation. May I further take this opportunity to encourage my colleagues,
members of this House, to interact with our provincial counterparts so as
to place as a priority the issue of improving infrastructure for our
elderly people, such as pensioners' paypoints and other associated issues.

The equitable share will be distributed directly to unicity metropolitan
authorities and the category B municipalities. The division of powers
between category B and C municipalities is crucial. While category C
municipalities' revenue base is largely the RSC levies, they will receive
equitable shares if there is no category B municipality in the district and
category C municipalities carry out the relevant functions.
However, the committee was informed by Salga that sufficient progress has
been made to ensure that category C municipalities are phased out within a
year. The officials of the National Treasury did not endorse this view.
They argued that much more time is required. The select committee will
observe progress in this regard.

Having mentioned all this, I must stress the point that the allocation of
this term has been found to be realistic across all disciplines.
[Applause.]

Mnr J L THERON: Mnr die Voorsitter, adjunkminister en kollegas, my tyd is
baie beperk en daarom wil ek by die probleme van hierdie wetgewing begin.

Die dienslewering of ``delivery'' van die ANC-regering is baie stadig. In
die eerste plek kan ons kyk na die voorwaardelike toekennings of
``conditional grants'' wat aan die provinsies gemaak word. Hier kan ons na
die onderskeie toekennings kyk waaronder bestee word. Na my mening het die
voorsitter ook baie objektief daarna verwys. Dié inligting is in die
Begrotingsoorsig, agb lede kan dit daar gaan lees.

Daar word onder sewe toekennings bestee. Dié kategorieë sluit in die
rehabilitasie van hospitale - daar word onderbestee; die herverdeling van
gespesialiseerde gesondheidsdienste - minder as 40% van dié toekenning word
bestee; geïntegreerde voedingsprogram - slegs 68% van die toekenning word
bestee; onderwys - onderbesteding van tot 50% kom voor terwyl agb lede weet
hoe beperk die getal klaskamers in dié land is en hoeveel onderwysers ons
nodig het om ons kinders op te voed; behuising - slegs 52% word bestee
terwyl ons net in die vorige debat gehoor het hoe belangrik behuising is en
sien hoe die plakkerskampe in die land al groter word. Tog word net 52%
bestee. Waarom? Minder as 30% van die toekenning aan die loodsprogram vir
menslike hervestiging en -herontwikkeling word bestee; subsidie vir die
funksionering van waterdienste - teenoor dié programme word swak
invordering van inkomste tot op datum aangedui.

Groot werk lê dus voor om die dienslewering op die regte standaard te kry
en aan Suid-Afrikaners die dienste te lewer wat hulle toekom.

Nou wil ek by 'n groter probleem kom waarna ons moet kyk. Dit is reeds
algemeen bekend dat die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie onderpresteer. Die Suid-
Afrikaanse ekonomie groei teen sowat 3% per jaar terwyl ons 'n potensiaal
van 6% tot 7% per jaar het. Waarom verwys ek hierna?

Ek wil graag die voorbeeld van 'n gemmerkoekie teenoor 'n lekker
sjokoladekoek gebruik. As die ekonomie teen sy potensiaal groei, het ons 'n
sjokoladekoek wat ons onder die provinsies kan verdeel, maar op die oomblik
kry ons 'n klein gemmerkoekie wat verdeel moet word. Dít is die probleem
wat ons ervaar.

In die MTBR, die driejaarraamwerk of ``MTEF framework'', word begroot dat
die ekonomie in dié tydperk van drie jaar teen 3,5% sal groei. Indien die
ekonomie veel vinniger groei as die inkomste wat verdien kan word, soveel
groter die koek en soveel meer wat verdeel kan word.

Ek meen die Minister behoort te verduidelik waarom die ANC-regering so
sukkel om die ekonomie aan die gang te kry, waarom die ekonomie so
onderpresteer en waarom die toekenning aan provinsies dus so beperk is.

Ek moet egter ook sê daar is baie positief in hierdie wetgewing en daarom
ondersteun die DP dit. Daar is meer positief as negatief en daarom wil ek
ook graag daarna verwys. In die Begrotingsoorsig van 2001 staan op bladsy
141, en ek wil dit graag vir agb lede aanhaal:


  In order to improve service delivery, provinces are now targeting
  spending on infrastructure rehabilitation, construction and maintenance.
  Challenges include enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of spending
  in education and health ...

En so gaan dit aan. Hiermee stem ons saam, dat dit voorrange moet wees
waaraan hard gewerk moet word. Verder word daar, in klousule 27 van die
wetsontwerp waarin funksies aan die provinsies en plaaslike owerhede
oorgedra word, bepaal dat die gepaardgaande geld na dié sfere moet vloei.
Dit sal tot 'n groot mate die kwessie van onbefondse mandate besweer.

Dan is daar ook klousule 21 van die wetsontwerp wat voorskryf dat die
ouditeur-generaal verslag sal doen in watter mate die direkteur-generaal,
die provinsiale tesourie en verantwoordelike amptenare uitvoering aan die
voorskrifte van die wetgewing gegee het.

Indien ons kyk na die beleidsraamwerk van die wetsontwerp op die verdeling
van inkomste, is daar ook 'n hele paar positiewe aspekte, naamlik die
provinsiale belastingmagte wat uitgebrei word, provinsiale magte wat
uitgebrei word sodat lenings aangegaan kan word vir kapitaalprojekte,
munisipale lenings wat ondersteun word met belasting- en
wetgewingshervorming, munisipaliteite wat ook nou in siklusse van drie jaar
moet begroot, hervormings aan toekennings, ``grants'' wat gemaak moet word
en agentskapsbetalings wat in voorwaardelike toekennings omgeskakel moet
word.

Dit is alles positiewe beleidsaspekte waarmee ons ons kan vereenselwig. Ons
ondersteun ook die doelwitte wat in die wetsontwerp gestel word vir die
verdeling van inkomste aan provinsies. Dit sluit in die belang van
belegging ... [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J L THERON: Mr Chairman, Deputy Minister and colleagues, my time is
very limited and I therefore want to start with the problems relating to
this legislation.

The ANC Government's delivery is very slow. In the first place we could
look at the conditional grants that are made to the provinces. Here we
could look at the various grants under which expenditure takes place. In my
view the chairperson also made reference to this very objectively. This
information is in the Budget Review, hon members can go and read it there.

Expenditure is divided into seven grants. These categories include hospital
rehabilitation - where there is underspending; the redistribution of health
services - less than 40% of this grant is spent; an integrated nutrition
programme - only 68% of the grant is spent; education - where there is
underspending of up to 50%, while hon members know how limited the number
of classrooms is in this country and how many teachers we need to educate
our children; housing - only 52% is spent, while we heard in the previous
debate how important housing is and can see how squatter camps in the
country keep growing. Nevertheless only 52% is spent. Why? Less than 30% of
the grant for the pilot programme for the human resettlement and
redevelopment is spent; subsidies for the functioning of water services -
next to these programmes poor recovery of revenue is reflected to date.

Significant work therefore lies ahead so as to get service delivery in line
with the correct standard and to render to South Africans the services that
they deserve.

I now want to come to a bigger problem which we should look into. It is
already common knowledge that the South African economy is underperforming.
The South African economy is growing at about 3% per annum, while we have a
potential of 6% to 7% per annum. Why am I making reference to this?

I would like to use the example of a ginger biscuit as opposed to a
delicious chocolate cake. If the economy grows at its potential, we have a
chocolate cake that we can divide among the provinces, but at the moment
there is a little ginger biscuit that must be divided. That is the problem
that we face.

In the MTEF framework, the three-year framework, it is budgeted that the
economy will grow at 3,5% in this three-year period. If the economy does in
fact grow faster than the revenue that could be earned, the larger the cake
and the more that could be divided.

I think the Minister should explain why the ANC Government is struggling so
to get the economy going, why the economy is underperforming and why the
grants to the provinces are therefore so limited.

I must, however, also say that there is much that is positive in this
legislation and that is why the DP supports it. There is more that is
positive than negative and therefore I would also like to refer to that. In
the 2001 Budget Review it says on page 141, and I want to quote this to hon
members:


  In order to improve service delivery, provinces are now targeting
  spending on infrastructure rehabilitation, construction and maintenance.
  Challenges include enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of spending
  in education and health ...

And it continues in this vein. We agree with this, that there should be
priorities at which we should work hard. Furthermore, in clause 27 of the
Bill in which the functions are transferred to the provinces and local
authorities, it is provided that the concomitant funds should flow into all
these spheres. This will combat the question of unfunded mandates to a
large degree.

Then there is also clause 21 of the Bill, which prescribes that the Auditor-
General will report to what extent the director-general, the provincial
treasury and responsible officials have given effect to the prescriptions
of the legislation.

When we look at the policy framework of the Division of Revenue Bill, there
are also quite a number of positive aspects, namely the provincial powers
of taxation that are extended, provincial powers that are extended so that
loans may be made for capital projects, municipal loans that must be
supported by taxation and legislation reform, municipalities that must now
also budget in cycles of three years, grant reforms that must be made and
agency payments that must be converted into conditional grants.

All of these are positive policy aspects with which we can associate
ourselves. We also support the objectives of the Bill for the division of
revenue to provinces. This includes the interest of investments ... [Time
expired.]]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, hon Minister, I rise on behalf of the Western
Cape to also support the Bill. I have some of the problems raised by the
chairman and also by my hon colleague the MEC from KwaZulu-Natal. I cannot
claim that there has not been a process of consultation. I think the
consultation process has been far-reaching, comprehensive and excellent.

I want to thank the Ministry of Finance and Treasury officials for their
courtesy, co-operation and sensitivity. They never at any stage tried to
bulldoze us. Their door was always open and they were ready to advise and
to delay, if necessary. We thank them sincerely. I have to say that it
fills me with some confidence when I see the quality of the people that are
being sent to our committees, and we want to thank them.

Nevertheless, we have a problem, and that is if we look at sections 214 and
215 of the Constitution - time will not allow me to go too deeply into them
- members will see that what the Constitution requires of us is a
consultative process, and that after certain things have happened, ie after
the Financial and Fiscal Commission has been consulted, for example,
certain other things happen.
We were doing things before those consultations took place. One can argue
that we are now on a rolling cycle of three years and that it is therefore
understandable, but I am still not convinced that it is constitutional.
That is my problem. Therefore I think we should look at that.

There are a few other matters of detail that I want to raise. One, in
particular, is that I think we are trying to do too much in this Division
of Revenue Bill. I think it is the root cause of many of our problems. All
we should be doing is the division of revenue, and nothing further. The
Bill provides for financial management issues such as procedures, norms and
standards and due dates which should rather be taken up in the PFMA - the
Public Finance Management Act - the NTRS and the Treasury instructions to
ensure legal certainty.

This Act is repealed each year. Therefore, for us to build these norms,
standards and procedures into this Bill is, to my mind, not doing the wrong
thing, but doing the right thing in the wrong place. This Bill should only
seek to deal with the division of revenue.

The Bill could be improved considerably, or marginally, by being given a
provision for delegating powers which would imply that not only the
director-general and the MEC for finance in the province may deal with all
the powers and responsibilities contained in the Bill, but that the powers
can be delegated. It does not appear to me that there is any provision for
delegation.

May I also say that we also have to take account of the fact - I think the
Minister of Finance said, this before I did, so all credit to him - that we
build fiscal division, this Division of Revenue Bill, on a whole
statistical base. That statistical base is very suspect, I have to say. It
is extremely suspect and, like a curate's egg, I think it is good in parts,
but there are parts that are not good. To do this really equitably, we at
least have to define the problems correctly and that we can only do if we
have a proper statistical base.

I want to implore the Minister to encourage his colleague the Minister of
Finance, since that department is now under his jurisdiction and
surveillance, to see to it that the necessary reforms and improvements are
brought about so that we can be certain, as we stand here today, that we
are making assumptions off a good statistical base. I cannot say that we in
the Western Cape are always certain that we are achieving that.

In the Western Cape we are determined to place as much emphasis as possible
on economic growth, because that is where we have any discretion of money.
We raise only about 6% of our income ourselves, which gives us some 37% of
discretionary income. This comes from our own income. Nevertheless, we are
placing the emphasis on economic growth because of the spin-off benefits
for all in our society. We are trying to get a virtuous circle going.
Economic growth and capital expenditure suck in further development, also
possibly from abroad.

Capital expenditure is growing. I am genuinely most impressed by the
national Budget and also by the provincial budgets generally. I think they
are fine documents, and a product of a consultation process we have never
seen in this country before. I think that in most respects they are quite
outstanding.

The good news after years of privation, which was the right thing for the
Minister to do, is that we now find we can let go a little. He called it
``the fruits'' of the Budget. That money is being directed also by us into
capital expenditure, which is good news for the efficient delivery of
services and for economic and socioeconomic stability. It will boost the
creation of jobs without putting any strain on the balance of payments.

Dit is vir ons baie belangrik, want in die Wes-Kaap woon 88% van ons mense
in stedelike gebiede. Die Wes-Kaap se bevolking is grootliks verstedelik en
beboude gebiede is dus vir ons baie belangrik.

Kapitale uitgawes, as persentasie van ons totale uitgawes, sal vanjaar in
die Wes-Kaap van 3% tot 6% groei en daarna 8% per jaar tot 2003-04.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[That is very important to us because in the Western Cape 88% of our people
live in urban areas. The Western Cape's population is largely urbanised and
built-up areas are therefore very important to us.

Capital expenditure, as a percentage of our total expenditure, will grow
from 3% to 6% in the Western Cape this year, and thereafter by 8% per year
until 2003-04.]

For us this is the key element in future growth. We look forward to working
with the national Treasury in doing more about that and reaching agreement
on a provincial framework for borrowing. If we want to maintain and build
our infrastructure, we will have to borrow for capital enhancement. We look
forward to developing and giving definition to those talks. We are at the
foothills of those discussions at the moment.

We continue to look forward, I hope not in vain, to developing our own
sustainable tax base. As I have said, we are currently raising about 6% of
our own income, but it does constitute 37% of our discretionary income and
expenditure. We look forward to the day when the national Government gives
us the tax room to institute provincial taxation, as envisaged by section
228 of the Constitution.

I understand that what we need now is to develop the procedures before tax
can be instituted, and then from there we will go on to an allowed list for
raising revenue. It is my hope that when we get to such an allowed list, it
will go beyond what we have now. For example, I would have thought that
sales tax would not form part of an allowed list. It is something the
Minister could well look at as an efficient form of taxation which is
suitable for a local, provincial, or even a city tax.

I would like to say that we are very blessed in the Western Cape.

Tot datum het ons 'n groeikoers 4% hoër as die res van die land. Volgens
prof Kantor het kleinhandelverkope in die Wes-Kaap sedert November verlede
jaar met sowat 15% gestyg. Ons is, soos hy dit stel, amper in 'n ``boom''-
situasie. As 'n mens egter na die publiek luister, kan 'n mens dit nie glo
nie. Mense kla met die witbrood onder die arm.

Die Wes-Kaap se groeikoers is omtrent 1,7% hoër as die nasionale syfer. Dit
bly egter 'n uitdaging om bykomende werkgeleenthede te skep. Ons genereer
tans bykans 13,7% van die nasionale ekonomiese groei. Dit is interessant,
aangesien ons bevolkingsyfer byvoorbeeld heelwat laer is as dié van KwaZulu-
Natal.

Hoewel ons hoofsaaklik klem lê op gemeenskapsveiligheid en ekonomiese
groei, is dit nogtans waar dat sowat 82% van ons begroting vanjaar weer
bestee gaan word aan die instelling van maatskaplike dienste, hoofsaaklik
tot voordeel van die lae- en middelinkomstegroepe.

Ons bly optimisties, hoopvol en positief en dit is ons erns om die
diepgewortelde probleme van ons tyd doeltreffend en doelmatig te benader.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[To date we have a growth rate 4% higher than the rest of the country.
According to Prof Kantor retail sales in the Western Cape have risen by
approximately 15% since November last year. We are, as he puts it, almost
in a boom situation. However, if one listens to the public, one cannot
believe it. People complain with a loaf of white bread in their hands.

The Western Cape's growth rate is approximately 1,7% higher than the
national rate. However, it remains a challenge to create additional jobs.
We are currently generating approximately 13,7% of the national economic
growth. This is interesting, as our population figure is significantly
lower than that of KwaZulu-Natal, for example.

Although we primarily emphasise community safety and economic growth,
approximately 82% of our budget this year will once again be spent on the
introduction of social services, primarily to the benefit of lower and
middle-income groups.

We remain optimistic, hopeful and positive and we are serious about
approaching the deep-rooted problems of our time efficiently and
effectively.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member.

Mr K D S DURR: Are you speaking to me, Chairperson?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Your time has expired, hon member.

Mr K D S DURR: With those few words, I say that we support the Bill.
[Applause.]

Mr A MARAIS: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, it is unfortunate that
the hon MEC for KwaZulu-Natal is on his way now. I would like to caution
him that before making utterances to the extent that he has done, he must
take into consideration the horizontal disparities that currently exist. He
must also ask himself whether what he is advocating is not perhaps too fast
for some provinces, taking into consideration the historical reasons for
such disparities.

On Wednesday 24 February 1999, the MEC for Finance announced that the
province had applied to the national Government for national supervision of
provincial administration in accordance with section 100(1)(a) of our
Constitution. At that time an assurance was given that such an arrangement
was essential to deal effectively with the structural provincial debt
overhang. This assurance was based on the fact that fundamentals remained
sound. Several initiatives were implemented effectively to reduce the debt,
that is, without impacting negatively on service delivery, a bold
undertaking indeed.

It gives me great pleasure to report to this House that we have gone full
circle in establishing the financial position of our province. Not only did
we manage to stabilise the budget of the social sector, but all spending
departments now have credible budgets. This allows for greater functional
mandate execution and greater predictability. A surplus was recorded on the
1999-2000 budget and it is projected that the 2000-01 financial year will
also be closed with a surplus.

Today, however, we are faced with new challenges. The modernised system of
local government, and the fact that our province has now been classified as
the second poorest province in the country, are among those. The intention
is not to provide or inundate the hon the Deputy Minister with a check list
of challenges, but to draw to his attention the current realities and to
implore him to reconsider such strategies. The division of revenue is an
appropriate mechanism through which such considerations can be effected.

In the eastern Free State the poverty level stands at 85%. This means that
85 persons out of every 100 are basically poor. The aspect of latent penury
has become a reality. Many people are entirely dependent on the social
security grants for the elderly and the disabled. In the event of the
passing away of such beneficiaries, their dependants become further
distressed.

The dialectical link between poverty and impaired health, and between
poverty and moral degradation, is well recorded. The high levels of poverty
place an inordinate responsibility on municipalities and the province as a
whole to effectively deliver quality services in a sustainable way. Some
revitalisation of these distressed communities is of paramount importance.

The national Government needs to further assess whether the holistic
conceptualisation of poverty as it relates to the Free State is an advance
on the earlier concentration of poverty lines, both analytically and in
terms of policy decisions.

More than 60% of our schools are situated in the rural areas.
Strategically, this affects the budget for education negatively. As a
result of this, our ability to become a national as well as global
competitor is temporarily stymied. It is a common fact that education-
related costs in areas with higher than average poverty trends tend to be
greater. Furthermore, cities and provinces can help to relieve poverty only
by creating opportunities.

The potential of public and capital investments is of two kinds. Firstly,
it might greatly improve the economic conditions of individuals. By raising
productivity, they can increase their income from working or investing.
Secondly, they can reduce the time they spend travelling from point A to B,
for instance.

It is our contention that, in line with the urban renewal and other similar
economic restructuring programmes, especially the rural strategies, a need
exists to reassess the capital investment plan.

Travelling to Parliament daily, I have observed a steady increase in the
number of cars from outside the Western Cape. I am concerned that this
observation will further be justified if patterns of ownership relating to
property markets were to be studied.

Depopulation, expatriation of skills and expertise, expatriation of
finances, and a decline in mining activities as well as agricultural
activities have resulted in the province experiencing a negative growth in
gross domestic product. This is a cause for concern, not to mention the
impact of globalisation and the cooling down of the global economy.

It is our considered opinion that the facts that I have tried to present
here today, also taking into consideration that provinces offer a veritable
cornucopia of the infrastructure and economic growth data that allows for
critical analysis, constitute an intelligible enough rationale to revisit
and revise the provincial equitable share formula.

Particular attention should be paid to the poverty index, education,
infrastructure backlog and economic activity components, especially the
manner in which they relate to our province.

I think it is also incumbent on me as a representative from the Free State
to reflect on some of the concerns which stem from our interaction with the
Bill. During this process nobody could supply me with a definitive answer
as to whether a junior official in one organ of state can cause that organ
of state to take another organ of state to court without complying fully
with the prescripts of the Public Finance Management Act. It would seem
that such animation would occur automatically. We may want to ascertain
whether the internal procedural arrangement of organs of state are
commensurate explicitly with those of the Public Finance Management Act.

Fruitless and wasteful expenditure is replacing unauthorised expenditure.
The former phrase is closely associated with criminal misconduct. It begs
the question: Do these two acts of impropriety weigh the same, and are the
recovery processes the same or do they differ? I think that this needs to
be looked at very carefully. It also needs to be clarified in a very
unambiguous manner in the imminent prescribed procedures.

Finally, on behalf of the province I would like to commend the hon the
Deputy Minister, the Minister and all the staff of his department who work
so diligently to ensure that the fundamental transformation of the South
African society takes shape in an open, transparent and accountable manner.
For us in the Free State the Division of Revenue Bill in this context
remains focused on Batho Pele. [Applause]

Mr T B TAABE: Hon Chairperson, Deputy Minister, officials from the national
Treasury, hon members, it is my pleasure to address this august House on
behalf the province of Mpumalanga, particularly in the wake of Comrade
Trevor Manuel and his extremely able Team Finance's ``sweeter fruits of
liberty'' Budget.

The point, I think, has to be made, on the basis of what I have just said,
that all of us must begin to understand the very nature and character of
budgets, in that they are about choices, hard and somewhat difficult
choices. They are choices about allocating finite resources to the infinite
and often competing multiple and complex needs of our people.

In making these choices we should all be informed about the social,
economic and political contexts in which our people find themselves. Above
all, these choices have to be guided by our vision, a vision to build a
better life for all our people.

Therefore, such budgets must always represent the ongoing and continual
effort on our part to meet the overwhelming priorities of Government, which
seeks to address and meet the socioeconomic needs of all our people, and,
in particular, those in abject poverty.

Looking back on the past six years of our democratic rule, there is general
consensus that we have made great strides as a country in our quest to
translate this very vision into reality. Although we have made serious
advances in the realisation of the goals of a better life for all, our
complex challenges as a country are still far from over. We are still
confronted with, among other things, sluggish economic growth, rampant
poverty and colossal unemployment in our country. Therefore, as a country
we need to consolidate our gains and add momentum to the process of change.

Before outlining the proposals for the upcoming fiscal year, I believe that
it would be appropriate to make a few remarks on the performance of the
2000 Budget. Our province, Mpumalanga, has allocated 40% of our total
budget to education in the current financial year. Given the backlog
prevalent in this sector, we know and are conscious of the fact that the
resources allocated were, basically, inadequate, but this was the best
Mpumalanga could do in the circumstances. The point has to be made that
despite the limited resources we have as a province relating to our
equitable share, we must genuinely seek to make improvements in critical
areas of work, particularly in the area of education.

The major social services departments, namely health, social services and
population development, were allocated the largest slice of our budget; 75%
of the budget was allocated to these departments.

A number of poverty alleviation projects were also funded during the 2000
financial year. Obviously including the services of NGOs, these services
were able to assist social services, population and development areas to
accelerate service delivery.

Looking at the Division of Revenue Bill for the coming fiscal year,
Mpumalanga has been given an equitable share of R7,2 billion. Conditional
grants amount to R599 million. In total, Mpumalanga receives R7,9 billion
from the national Government. This also includes the housing subsidy that
has since been devolved to the province.

In the coming financial year Mpumalanga will shift the resource allocation
ratio from 75:25 to 83:17. This demonstrates, beyond any doubt, our
unwavering commitment as a province to enhancing living standards and
providing basic services, as provided for in the Constitution of our
country. However, despite this quantum leap, one must point out that we
have not as yet reached the national benchmark ratio of 85:15. What is
encouraging, though, is that in the province we have committed ourselves to
improving the current ratio in the later years of the medium-term
expenditure framework.

In the coming financial year education will receive an increase of R340
million, health will receive an increase of R89 million, while social
services and population development will receive an increase of R355
million. Mechanisms have therefore been put in place to ensure that these
earmarked funds will reach their intended beneficiaries. This represents a
decisive departure from past practices in the provinces. Departments are
expected to account regularly for these funds and submit monthly reports to
the provincial treasury, obviously in line and in compliance with the
provisions of the Public Finance Management Act.
The province is therefore on course with regard to the establishment of
internal audits and internal audit committees. Some departments will share
an internal audit in a clustered format, whilst the bigger departments are
in the process of establishing their own internal audits.

The province is also migrating from the Newfin financial system, which has
created serious problems in the past, to the basic accounting system,
widely known as Bas, with effect from 1 April 2001. This again represents a
genuine departure from past accounting practices which led to all sorts of
problems in the province. The move to the Bas system will help the
province, and is obviously in line with the provisions contained in this
Bill and will, to a very large extent, help the province improve
accountability and responsibility for public funds and therefore contribute
to overall sound financial management through cost savings, revenue
enhancement and cost avoidance.

With these comments, I wish to thank the Chair for the time given to me to
address this House on the Division of Revenue Bill. Our province,
Mpumalanga, supports the Bill with the necessary amendments. [Applause]

Dr E A CONROY: Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and colleagues, the
principle of the Bill we are debating today is referred to by section
214(1) of the Constitution, and by the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations
Act of 1997, to provide for the following: the equitable division of
revenue raised nationally among the national, provincial and local spheres
of government; the determination of each province's equitable share of the
provincial share of that revenue; and any other allocations to provinces,
local government or municipalities from the national government's share of
that revenue, and any conditions on which those allocations may be made.

In addition, section 214(2) of the Constitution requires that the Bill may
be enacted only after the provincial and local spheres of government and
the Finance and Fiscal Commission have been consulted, and after any
recommendations of the FFC have been considered.

The role of the FFC in particular requires the provision of technical data
and information, to better inform the political process, including
considerations of the Budget Council, the Budget Forum, Minmecs, Cabinet
and Parliament. The FFC confirmed its commitment to provide recommendations
and criteria for the determination of the delivery of basic services.

Gauteng is of the opinion that it was a very good idea that the FFC had
begun to develop an approach to basic services. We are awaiting with
interest the outcome of this process.

The Constitution, in essence, sets out the necessary prerequisites for an
equitable division of revenue based on broad intergovernmental fiscal
arrangements within the principles of co-operative governance.

The Bill furthermore requires that the following issues be taken into
account: the national interest; any provision that must be made in respect
of the national debt and other national obligations; the needs and
interests of the national Government, determined by objective criteria; the
need to ensure that the provinces and municipalities are able to provide
basic services and perform the functions allocated to them, the fiscal
capacity and efficiency of the provinces and municipalities; developmental
and other needs of provinces, local governments and municipalities;
economic disparities within and among the provinces; obligations of the
provinces and municipalities in terms of national legislation; and the
desirability of stable and predictable allocations of revenue share and the
need for flexibility in responding to emergencies and other temporary needs
and other factors      based on similar objective criteria.

The province of Gauteng has satisfied itself that the Bill addresses the
constitutional requirements for an equitable division of revenue, taking
cognisance of economic disparities and addressing the fiscal capacity and
efficiency of provinces and municipalities. In its deliberations, it was
also noted that the Bill complies with the requirements of the Public
Finance Management Act.

With respect to shortfalls and excess revenue, it is clear that the
national sphere of Government is more capacitated to manage risks from
shortfalls. There also seems to be no reason why provincial and local
governments should not benefit from the excess of revenue that may arise.

There may be a need to consider a legislative review of the existing fiscal
framework, taking into account revenue escalation arising from increases in
inflationary forces which also impact on expenditure. This view is informed
by the principle of co-operative governance, equity, efficiency and
effectiveness.

The cost of servicing all grants impacts directly on the vertical
allocation of nationally raised revenue, and further distorts the
horizontal equitable division of revenue.

Given that provinces have limited revenue-raising capacity, attempts to
incorporate such costs into equalisation formulas would contribute to the
fiscal equity and efficiency of the three-sphere system of governance.

The differences in demography and geography, as evidenced in the 1996
census, have added a further complexity and have opened the way to diluting
fiscal integrity which is evident in the infrastructural backlogs and an
incapacity, in some areas within provinces, to utilise the allocated
financial resources.

There is a need for norms and costs to be factored into the allocation of
grants to provinces. As far as the so-called costed-norms approach is
concerned, we made it clear last year that it is excellent as an analytical
tool. We, however, are still of the opinion that, at this stage, we should
not develop the division of revenue on that particular basis.

In terms of section 10 of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act of
1997, each year, when the Budget is introduced, the Minister of Finance
must introduce in the National Assembly a Division of Revenue Bill for the
financial year to which the Budget relates.

Gauteng, however, remains concerned, as was mentioned in previous years,
about the timing of the Division of the Revenue Bill after the tabling of
the national and provincial budgets. It is once more suggested that the
timing of the division of revenue be reviewed and a mechanism be devised
whereby the division of revenue can be considered prior to the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement which occurs in September, preceding the
forthcoming financial year.

That will enable provincial legislatures and this House to make a better-
considered input and play a greater participating role. It will also make
the legislation more relevant and give it the status it warrants. It might
also enable civil society to play a greater participatory role in the whole
process of dividing the cake on a fair and equitable basis.

Gauteng is not of the opinion that departments have not been given every
opportunity, within the Act, to comply with the PFMA. Any special cases
which they believe would hinder their compliance, or alternatively their
stated delivery, would in fact be captured in clause 29, which is a kind of
exemption clause, allowing departments to come forth. So, for example,
under the national Budget Review, it is quite clear under the conditional
grants that existing obligations will be met. It is also clear that if, in
order to meet those existing obligations, it may be necessary to apply for
an exemption, the Act includes such an eventuality.

Gauteng is therefore firmly of the view that there is no need to further
dilute any of the other compliance clauses, because the opportunity to get
an exemption does exist.

A difference between this and previous divisions of revenue is that
previous ones gave an almost blank cheque on the expenditure of certain
money. However, this time around, and because it has been developed within
the Public Finance Management Act, the strong sanctions of the PFMA apply
with the result that moneys are not simply handed out without procedures or
reports being submitted, which will of course effectively contributed to
accountability.

As far as the Auditor-General is concerned, Gauteng wishes to assure the AG
that we respect his constitutional competency and that of the office of the
Auditor-General and its authority and wishes to see that it is exercised
vigorously. We do not think that the legislatures, and that includes
Gauteng, should in any way try to perform the Auditor-General's functions.
However, with respect to clause 21 of the Bill, we are of the opinion that
this was a very valid concern raised by the AG's office. There was not a
party in the Gauteng finance standing committee that disagreed on that.

Chairperson, allow me for a moment to put on my hat as a member of the
Audit Commission.

Hon members are aware of the desperate financial situation of
municipalities in particular and that there are various provinces and
municipalities that owe the Auditor-General substantial amounts in unpaid
audit fees. The AG is required in terms of the Constitution to audit these
bodies on an annual basis and cannot refuse to audit them if they are in
arrears with the payment of audit fees. This has placed the office of the
AG in an untenable and unenviable situation. It would, however, now appear
that relief for the tight situation in which the AG finds himself is at
hand, in terms of clause 23 of the Bill, which enables the National
Treasury to withhold an allocation or portion thereof to a municipality or
a province if they commit a serious or persistent material breach of the
measures contemplated in section 216(1)of the Constitution.

A failure to meet its statutory financial obligations, including the
payment of audit fees, can be seen as such a serious breach and the AG will
therefore be able to apply for the withholding of payments in extreme
circumstances.

On that concluding note, it is my pleasure to declare that Gauteng supports
the Division of Revenue Bill. [Applause.]

Mr N MATHEBE (Salga): Modulasetulo, ntumelle ke dumedise Deputy Minister wa
Finance, ntate Mpahlwa, [Chairperson, allow me to greet Deputy Chairperson
Minister of Finance, Mr Mpahlwa,Deputy Chairperson in absentia, special
delegates and distinguished members of the NCOP. Salga embraces this
opportunity to speak on the occasion of the debate of this important piece
of legislation, the Division of Revenue Bill.

It is indeed our constitutional obligation that we speak to the NCOP on
this particular Bill. We at Salga are very delighted that we have been part
of the formulation of this particular piece of legislation and that we were
consulted throughout the processes and debates that took place around the
Division of Revenue Bill.

We have indeed participated in major forums of the division of revenue,
including the workshop on the division of revenue, the Budget Forum and
public hearings on the Bill organised by the Select Committee on Finance.
We have used these occasions effectively and we are even looking forward to
a constructive engagement with the National Treasury and other stakeholders
in preparation for the 2001 and 2002 budget cycle.

It is in this regard that we sincerely support this particular piece of
legislation, as amended by the committee. It is also our belief that there
is no piece of legislation that can satisfy everybody all at once. With all
the challenges currently facing our country and local government in
particular, it is necessary that we join hands and begin to engage
seriously over the challenges facing us.

The 1998 White Paper on Local Government initiated an extensive process of
change in order to enhance municipal accountability, improve developmental
impact, streamline systems and improve the delivery of services.

In 2000, the number of municipalities was reduced from 843 to 284; the
categories and types of municipalities have changed; powers and functions
are under review; and new systems, resource allocations and functional
orientations will be introduced. After demarcation, five municipalities
have operating budgets in excess of R5 billion; one in excess of R1,5
billion; four in excess of R700 million and 13 in excess of R200 million.
In total, together these municipalities account for over 80% of operating
expenditure in the local sphere of government.

New local governments face considerable challenges. Many councils
experience financial problems, management practices are inadequate and
institutional systems are often dysfunctional. Service delivery is often
inefficient and operating costs, especially wage bills, are
disproportionately large.

The new demarcations pose particular transitional challenges.
Municipalities will incur relocation costs related to consolidation,
integration, staff rationalisation and redeployment, asset and liability
alignment, the alignment of agreements, contracts, bank accounts,
investments, insurance, and IT systems integration. Furthermore,
restructuring exercises typically impose significant costs on a
municipality in the short term and only deliver benefits in the medium to
long term.

Government has introduced a number of local government grants to meet these
challenges. These include the local government restructuring grant, the
local government support grant, the municipal finance management grant, the
municipal systems improvement grant and the transition grant. The
Constitution of the country guarantees local government an equitable share
of nationally raised revenue. The division of the equitable share is based
on a formula which, among other things, looks at poverty indicators,
institutional capacity, population size, etc.

The local government equitable share has always been less or more than 1%
of nationally raised revenue, and certainly not more than 2%. Given the
mammoth task of transforming local government, the equitable share of local
government has never been sufficient to meet at least the basic needs of
our communities.

Although it is loosely assumed that local government generates a better
part of its income, experience has shown the opposite. One notes that there
is potential, but taking into cognisance various factors, it becomes
unrealistic to assume that local government can generate its own funds.

With special reference to recent developments, a call for massive funding
has dominated policy-setting forums, with the Local Government Budget Forum
being a classic case. The motive for establishing additional funding is
loosely based on the envisaged new system of local government provided for
by the various legislations mentioned above.

The process of institutional restructuring of the system of local
government is nearing completion. The promulgation of the demarcation and
structures Acts established a framework for the realisation of
institutional arrangements for a developmental local government system.
These reforms are necessary to ensure that local government can deliver
services efficiently to all its constituents.

One of the most important tasks of transformation is the drawing up of new
municipal boundaries. Of course, new boundaries will not suddenly solve all
the problems that municipalities face. Much needs to be done in addition to
demarcation to ensure that municipalities have administrations that are
properly organised, have stable and adequate sources of income, etc.
Demarcation will set the structural conditions within which these other
processes of transforming and developing local government can occur.

Almost all municipalities will have their boundaries redrawn or demarcated.
Therefore local government will be completely restructured from its current
format. New municipal boundaries will result in the reorganisation of
service networks in different ways, the transfer of staff, the integration
of administrations, the division of assets and liabilities, and the
bringing together of different systems of budgeting, planning, development,
etc.

The above-mentioned local government reforms will enable the creation of
viable and sustainable local government in the long term. However, enormous
pressure will initially be placed on municipalities during the
restructuring process. The complexities of transformation will require
massive efforts and resources from local government role-players. It
becomes imperative to reposition local government through a conducive study
policy environment to implement the broader mandate of local government and
ensure a smooth transition to the new local government system.

We therefore wish to reiterate the following policy recommendations to the
NCOP.

Firstly, with special reference to local government conditional grants,
Salga recommends that the Division of Revenue Bill make provision for
departments with grants to local government to furnish Salga with a fiscal
framework which, among other things, will include, one, the rationale
behind the grant framework; two, the amount dedicated for a particular
function in local government; three, the implementation programme and
spending timetable for monitoring purposes; four, conditionalities
associated with grants; five, national and provincial accounting officers;
and, six, principles of transparency in grant design.

Secondly, Salga effectively supports the rationalisation of conditional
grants to local government and the proposed three-year allocations of
grants to municipalities based on the National Treasury Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, in order to effect proper planning of municipal
services.

Thirdly, Salga supports the concept of cross-subsidisation in tariffs,
including a lifeline tariff for some of the services, especially water.

Fourthly, Salga recommends that the rendering of free basic services to the
poor becomes a joint process between bulk suppliers of services and local
government, and that strong links be formed between the parties concerned
to address this urgently.

Fifthly, Salga further recommends that a national study with regard to free
basic services to the poor be undertaken within all municipalities to
determine the extent of the costs thereof.

Salga fully supports the Division of Revenue Bill. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I now call upon the hon Ms
Lucas from the Northern Cape.

Mr G A LUCAS: Chairperson, I am Mr Lucas, not Ms Lucas.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I beg your pardon, Mr Lucas.

Mr G A LUCAS: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon permanent and special
delegates, I just want to express a word of caution regarding Mr Theron's
remarks. Mr Theron is a member of our committee, and he did not raise all
these issues that he raised today in the committee. I think that is a bit
disturbing, because if we want to get our fiscal issues into perspective,
it is not appropriate to use our economy as a political point-scoring game.
The impression that is being created is that we do not agree. But Mr Theron
was quite satisfied with all the deliberations that took place in the
committee and did not object to anything. I am therefore surprised that he
is behaving in this way today.

The second issue I would like to raise is that the MEC from KwaZulu-Natal
raised some very serious issues. I am surprised that he is not here to
listen to what the Deputy Minister has to say in response to those issues.
Either he disregards this House, or the issues that he has raised are not
as important as he says they are. [Interjections.] Those are issues that we
must really address.

Coming to what I have come here to say, our country, immediately after the
1994 democratic elections, broke through. The democratic Government elected
by our people embarked on an ambitious economic recovery plan. This plan
was, at times, sore and painful. Our people, at times, also felt that it
was a harsh but necessary policy requirement to get our economy on a
correct footing.

Out of that bitter past, we have begun to reap the rewards of the correct
economic fundamentals that we set ourselves in 1994. We can say, without
any fear, that we are on the correct path. A solid economic foundation has
been laid. Accordingly, our province, which was neglected in the past by
the apartheid regime, is also beginning to reap the rewards of our sound
economic foundations.

We have been able to record economic growth, especially after the floods of
last year. As all members will know, our major economic sectors in the
province are agriculture and mining. These sectors, therefore, after this
period of decline in the past, are beginning to recover.

Currently, farmers in the Benede Oranje and the mine owners around the
diamond fields and other parts of the province, are grateful to our
Government. They are grateful because, for the first time, they are able to
market and sell their products internationally, without any major stumbling
blocks. Especially grape farmers in the Benede Oranje, as Mr Van Niekerk
would know because they have lost elections there again. [Laughter.]

Accordingly, our capacity to raise our own revenue at provincial level is
also not very impressive. The reason is that, firstly, we are supposed to
collect certain amounts from hospital fees, but patients are sometimes
unable to pay because they cannot afford the payments of hospital fees.

We should also know by now that those with privileged medical aids prefer
to use private hospitals instead of state hospitals, hence the dwindling of
the resources of our public hospitals. I am not sure how many of our
members here do use state hospitals.

An HON MEMBER: Where do you go to when you are ill?

Mr G A LUCAS: I do make use of public hospitals. One can go to Galeshewe.
Secondly, due to the delays in the processing of the gambling licences, the
three casinos earmarked for the province will only start to operate in the
near future and, therefore, part of our revenue-raising capacity and part
of the revenue intended for our province will begin to increase.

Therefore, our only major revenue-collecting activity in the province is
motor vehicle licensing and, to a greater extent, the hospital fees. This
collectively amounts to about 2% of the total provincial revenue. Given
this situation, it really means that our equitable share and the
conditional grants that we are getting from national funding account for
97% of our provincial revenue.

As these allocations make it possible for our province to carry out its
constitutional mandate in the struggle to create a better life for all and
redress the inequalities of the past, we are grateful to the national
Government for what it is giving us.

The MTEE cycle reflects that our equitable share allocations will continue
to increase over this period. This is commendable, as it will ensure that
we move speedily in the struggle to improve the living conditions of our
people, especially the poorest of the poor.

Furthermore, the creation of a provincial infrastructure grant will greatly
enhance our agenda to improve and address the infrastructural backlog
currently experienced in our province. We have already started addressing
this problem of the active participation of the private sector and local
government. Therefore, this additional allocation is enthusiastically
welcomed by our province.

Our continuous area of concern which, as a province, we have raised in
previous engagements, is the difficulty we are experiencing with regard to
conditional grants and especially their untimely allocation to the
province.

We have, however, been given a guarantee during the public hearings that
the respective departments managing these grants will be able to make sure,
this financial year, that they are dispatched on time. We do hope that the
situation will be corrected, for us to be able to use these conditional
grants much more effectively.

Of concern also continues to be the existence of numerous grants at times
having different conditions attached to them, thus making it quite
difficult to access these conditional grants. It is our view that we should
strive for the uniformity of the conditional grants, but also that we
should move to a stage where some of these grants can be clustered,
especially those whose aims are of a similar nature.

We are looking forward to the introduction of the provincial taxation Bill.
Our province will seek to make a constructive input in the process of the
development of such a provincial taxation Bill because, in a sense, it will
give us the powers to raise more revenue for our province and, therefore,
make us less dependent on national Government, but also so that our
provincial financial situation is so sound that we are able to make real
commitments with regard to capital expenditure and be able to make
provincial borrowing in respect of the question of capital expenditure, in
particular the improvement of our roads in the province, understanding the
distances in between.

The last issue is the issue of municipal borrowing. We think that it is an
issue that we need to sort out quite urgently, to make sure that our
municipalities are key agents of delivery, are able to have the capacity to
deliver and are able to access the necessary funds required to be able to
deliver the basic services that we, as the ANC, have continuously said we
will continue to deliver.

In conclusion, the voices of the prophets of doom and despair are
deafening. They are ashamed because our fiscal position is quite strong.
Their prediction of a bleak future for South Africa is no more. Therefore,
they have made a very serious miscalculation. Like cowards, they are
ashamed to openly credit the good work that our Government has done thus
far. What a shame on their part.

We know that, silently, they are wishing that we should fail, so that they
can start making noise again. [Applause.]

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, although there is still room for improvement,
one has got to start by mentioning the fact that the budget process in
South Africa, as many people would agree, is one of the most open and
transparent budget exercises one can find, and is equalled in very few
countries around the world.

One needs also to mention the fact that, as a vehicle to promote co-
operative governance and intergovernmental fiscal relations as well as to
encourage proper financial management by both provincial and local
governments spheres, the Division of Revenue Bill goes a long way in
meeting most, if not all, of its objectives.

While there may be grounds for the argument that the timing of the passing
of the Bill, which is after the provinces have tabled their budgets, may be
inappropriate, we should also keep in mind that budget allocations are,
more often than not, estimates of anticipated income which, in the event of
unforeseen shortfalls, are provided for in clause 6 of the Bill.

As for consideration of inputs from stakeholders, it should be recognised
that the participants in bodies such as the Budget Council and the Budget
Forum, as well as in the FFC recommendations process, are essentially
representatives of stakeholders whose inputs can be made before the process
in the above bodies has run its course.

The allocation of grants to address the infrastructure backlogs at
provincial and, especially, local government level is appreciated, as it
represents recognition of capacity-building and the need to eliminate
unfunded mandates, as provided for in clauses 14 and 27 of the Bill.

While conditional grants like those for HIV/Aids and those for the
provision of infrastructure are somewhat overlapping and sometimes even
appear to duplicate across departments, and while the role played by each
department is recognised, there nevertheless appears to be a need to
improve co-ordination of programmes as well as consolidating and
streamlining the grants, so as to enhance the achievement of maximum
results while improving support for provinces and local government, in
terms of their administration-monitoring capacity.

As the Northern Province, we feel that the 2001-02 allocation will go some
way towards enabling the province to realise its objective of embarking on
a wide-ranging series of programmes to alleviate poverty among the majority
of its people.

It is hoped that the tendency of national departments to leave their
planning late, thereby aggravating the situation of non-spending and,
therefore, roll-overs at lower levels, will be looked into and improved -
not forgetting to appreciate the fact that the provincial tax base may, in
the near future, be widened by the introduction of the anticipated
provincial tax regulation Bill, which is meant to give effect to section
228 of the Constitution.

In conclusion, lest we forget, a budget is a political tool for the
government of the day to give effect to its aims and objectives, as
contained in its policy statements. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mr Makoela, you had a lot of minutes
which you put aside. Perhaps you will utilise them sometime in the future.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, I do welcome the
opportunity to deal with some of the issues that have been raised by hon
members in the course of the debate. Maybe I should, first of all, thank
hon members for their participation, and particularly those hon members
that have commended the work we do in the National Treasury.

Of course, we are now the National Treasury. We have just had a successful
transition from a situation where we had two departments, the Department of
Finance and the Department of State Expenditure, to a situation where we
now have the National Treasury. Of course, there are advantages to that
because there is now greater co-ordination of the work that we do.

What became clear over time was that as we were reforming the budget
process, putting in place new structures and new processes, some of the
issues migrated to one department or the other. So there was a bit of a
disjuncture and we are, therefore, happy to report that we had a successful
transition in the establishment of the National Treasury and we have
appointed all of the senior managers, in terms of the structure of the new
department. Mr I Momoniat, who is sitting over there, is now the Deputy
Director-General for Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations. [Applause.]

Precisely because we are dealing with the Division of Revenue Bill, it is
important in this context that one does not downplay or dismiss the issues
that have been raised, particularly on the timing of the tabling of the
Division of Revenue Bill.

However, I do want to draw our attention to some of the related issues.
There can be no suggestion that what we are doing currently is not
constitutional, because it flows precisely from the Constitution. The
Constitution, in section 214, actually says that an Act of Parliament must
be enacted to provide for all of these issues that we are dealing with
here.
But, in addition to the Constitution, there is legislation in place, namely
the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, which also outlines the
procedures that are to be followed. So I think that firstly we need to
locate properly what we are doing: that it is in terms of the Constitution
as it exists, and that it is also in terms of legislation as it exists.

If hon members are raising the issue of us reviewing that, that is fine.
That is something we can talk about, that is something that can be looked
at by the Budget Council. But there must be no suggestion that what we are
doing may be illegal or unconstitutional.

An additional point that does need to be made is that while the Division of
Revenue Bill gets tabled when the national Budget is tabled in Parliament,
it is not the first opportunity for members of Parliament to have some
sense of how the nation's resources are going to be allocated. We do, three
or four months ahead of tabling the Budget, table the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement. In that budget policy statement there are very good
indications of how we are going to allocate the nation's resources.

A additional issue that does arise is the issue of how we, as Parliament,
together, of course, with the executive, engage around the budget policy
statement. I know that there is work that is going on to try and improve
the way Parliament deals and engages with the budget policy statement. Last
year was an unfortunate year because it was a short year. We had the local
elections and a lot of things had to be done within a short space of time.

In addition to the work that is being done by the budget reform task team,
of which, I think, the chair of the committee is a member, namely to look
at how Parliament engages with the budget and how we get to meet the
constitutional requirements for Parliament to pass legislation that enables
it to amend the Budget, one would hope that one of the things that we would
be able to do is to have really have meaningful interaction once we table
the budget policy statement.

Concerning the issue that has been raised about the Division of Revenue
Bill perhaps doing too much - perhaps this is valid - one of the things
that we are going to be doing later this year is to accommodate some of the
financial management-related issues in the Public Finance Management Act so
that largely, one is dealing with allocations in the Division of Revenue
Bill.

With regard to the issue raised by the hon the MEC for finance in KwaZulu-
Natal, I think that the language used is rather strong. I think to use the
term ``patronising'' fails to recognise why we have these provisions. When
we are beginning to be successful in what we are trying to do, we must not
forget where we come from. So these provisions are a recognition of some of
the difficulties that exist. Therefore we are trying to put in place
mechanisms that ensure that in cases where certain provisions, which are
either in the Constitution, in legislation or in the decisions of the
Budget Council, are not honoured, one does not continue to pump resources
into an environment where there is no proper financial management and where
there is no compliance with the Constitution or legislation that is in
place or the decisions and resolutions of the Budget Council.

This is the reason, I think, that a province that has made substantial
progress - and KwaZulu-Natal has made a lot of progress over the past few
years - may be justified in feeling that a provision like this is not
necessary from their vantage point. But if I were to come to the address by
the hon Taabe here, it is an address that we welcome, given the
difficulties that were there in the Mpumalanga province. There were very,
very serious problems there, and it is, therefore, quite pleasing to hear
this kind of an update, something that says: ``These are the things that we
are doing in order to improve the situation in Mpumalanga.''

While KwaZulu-Natal may feel that it no longer needs these kinds of
provisions, we have got to recognise that our provinces are not all moving
in step. We have provinces that are lagging behind. So these are the kinds
of issues we can deal with in a forum such as the Budget Council, which is
a forum that functions very, very well.

I think that the Budget Council is, really, a testimony to the maturing of
our democracy, because we are able to come together there as all the
provinces and the National Treasury. As hon members know, not all provinces
are under the same political party in terms of leadership, but we are able
to come together in that forum and agree on most issues.

That sentiment, as was raised by the hon Miller, is acknowledged, but I
think that it is a matter that we can grapple with in the Budget Council.

The issue that I will agree on with the hon Miller is the whole approach to
poverty alleviation. He raised the issue of whether we cannot rationalise
the resources at our disposal in order to strengthen the most effective
mechanisms that we have to alleviate poverty. Quite clearly, child support
grants and the welfare grants are some of the most effective instruments in
our hands to alleviate poverty, because these are moneys that support
families, that take children to school and are therefore effective social
safety nets. I think that our effort has got to be that we need to make
sure that we are able to strengthen it in terms of the amount of resources
that we are able to allocate for those social safety nets. This is the most
effective instrument in alleviating poverty, but also in terms of an
approved mechanism for disbursing those grants.

Indeed, if we say that the welfare grants and the child support grants are
an effective instrument, I think it is inexcusable that up to this day we
cannot have a good system of disbursing these amounts. I think that one of
the greatest challenges facing all of us, national and provincial
government alike, is to improve the situation at the paypoints, precisely
because, if for no other reason, it is elderly people that go there.

In the Eastern Cape there have been more arrests and prosecutions in the
welfare department of people who are involved in fraud and corruption. One
of the things that has been done in the case of Bizana, for example, is
that they have brought in the police to play a role at the paypoints. It is
a good initiative, but the unfortunate thing about it is that the police
are not used to administering the system. Our delays tend to be longer, so
we are indeed challenged to make sure that we can improve the functioning
of our payment system.

In relation again to the issue of poverty alleviation and the
rationalisation of resources, one of the things under way currently as an
initiative of the national Government is a comprehensive social security
review that is going on right now. It is led by the Minister of Social
Development, whom we have always known as the Minister for Welfare and
Population Development. The Minister of Social Development is leading this
process of a comprehensive social security review. The idea is that we must
have a full picture of all of the programmes, the funds and the resources
that we have at our disposal. We will then be able to see where there might
be gaps such that our social safety net is unable to protect some sections
or members of our society. I think it will also go a long way towards
trying to come up with a much more streamlined poverty alleviation process.

The issue around spending capacity in the provinces is one of the
discussions that we had in the Budget Council. In recognition of the fact
that we now have greater resources in real terms, from this year going
forward, we have got substantially more resources that are going to the
provinces. One of the things that we spoke about in the council was that
the provinces should begin to consider hiring some high-level skills that
are needed in the provinces and which they could not fill in a constrained
environment. With more resources going the way of provinces, it should be
possible for provinces. We cannot prescribe to the provinces, especially in
terms of the equitable share that goes to the provinces.

We do discuss the infrastructure grant, for instance, and we do try to say
what the areas are where we think the infrastructure money can be utilised,
such as schools, roads, health facilities. This is in support of the
integrated rural development strategy. Broadly, those are the areas that we
agreed upon as the areas for which we need to prioritise the use of the
infrastructure money. We also discussed the issue that as a possibility,
provinces can begin to hire some of the high-level skills that they need,
for example in the management of hospitals, which we identified that as a
particular example. Some of the issues around spending capacity could be
met in that particular way.

The improvement of our economic performance as mentioned by Mr Theron is
also important. One of the questions asked as we went on a variety of
speaking engagements after the budget was: In the budget there is a
projected growth rate of 3,5% this year and over the next two years. Is
this not in conflict with the expressed view of the President that we
should work towards achieving a growth rate of six per cent? What I really
want to draw attention to is that one would have heard from the tone of the
President and the tone of the Minister of Finance, just in which direction
we are going. That direction really arises from our having managed to put
in place an integrated economic programme that will see us overcoming a lot
of the problems that face our economy.

It is an integrated framework that sees us looking at areas where we can
intervene as Government, in order to improve the competitiveness of our
economy. We identified energy, transport and telecommunications. These are
areas where we have the ability to make certain interventions as
Government, whether it is by way of policy initiatives or legislative
initiatives or practical programmes. One such initiative is work that is
going to be done this year to revamp the rolling stock which has been
dilapidating over the past few years.

These are very specific interventions in areas where we can intervene as
Government. We also identified a number of crosscutting issues that can
support our programme for improved economic performance. We looked at
issues of technology, as well as issues of human resource development,
which is a key constraint in the South African economy. We also went
further to identify growth areas. We identified exports as a growth area
and within that we were able to focus on four key areas, namely agro
processing, mining technology, automobiles and components, and clothing and
textiles. In these are areas we intend to intensify our efforts towards
greater and more diversified exports.

Another growth area that we have identified is the area of cultural
industries such as our music and film industries, ensuring that we can
market our country in an effective way as an attractive destination for
foreign film shooting.

We also need to improve the quality and the marketing of our crafts. There
are lots of crafts often made by rural people in South Africa. We need to
provide the opportunity for them to access markets. We need to look at that
in relation to our efforts in another growth sector, namely tourism. We
will be investing in critical infrastructure for tourism, investing in
training of people for service excellence and a whole range of other
initiatives. These include entrepreneurship and the development of the
growth of tourism enterprises, particularly black-owned tourist
enterprises.

The other area that we have identified as a growth area is that of
agriculture, where hon members are going to see substantial disposal of
state-owned land for purposes of farmer settlement, etc.

We thus have this integrated framework, and the desired outcomes are to
ensure that we can realise competitiveness, growth, job creation, black
economic empowerment and the growth of small, medium and micro enterprises.
These are the outcomes that we are looking for, and these are the things
that we are putting up as key performance indicators against which our
integrated economic programme will be judged.

While we may be saying that we project growth at 3,5%, we have higher
levels in mind. But we also recognise that in order to reach those higher
levels of growth, there are a lot of things that we need to do. For
example, one of the constraints regarding investment in the
telecommunications sector is that our policy environment does not provide
certainty to a foreign investor who wants to come in and invest in this
sector. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AFFAIRS -
                      CONSTITUTIVE ACT OF AFRICAN UNION

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND RECREATION -
                 PROTECTION OF CULTURAL PROPERTY CONVENTION

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND RECREATION -
               CULTURAL PROPERTY (ILLICIT TRANSFER) CONVENTION

Order disposed of without debate.
Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND RECREATION -
                               ICCROM STATUTES

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Consitution.

The Council adjourned at 18:02.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 22 MARCH 2001

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of Mines and Works Compensation fund for
         1999-2000 [RP 10-2001];


     (b)    Accounts of the Transkei Electricity Supply Corporation for 1994-
         95, 1995-96, 1996-97 and for 1 April to 31 December 1997 [RP 184-
         2000].

                            FRIDAY, 23 MARCH 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 23
         March 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Supreme Court Decree, 1990 (Ciskei) Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2001] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Justice and Constitutional Development - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 22156 of 19
              March 2001.]

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance. The Report of the
         Auditor-General contained in the following paper is referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
         report:


         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
         Service for 1999-2000, including Reports of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements of the South African Revenue Service:
         Administered Revenue and Financial Statements of the South African
         Revenue Service: Own Accounts for 1999-2000.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         (a)     Framework Agreement for the creation of a Free Trade Area
              between Mercosul and the Republic of South Africa, tabled in
              terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Framework Agreement.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolo Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government and the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statement of the Board for Municipal
              Accountants for 1998-99.


         (b)     Report and Financial Statement of the Board for Municipal
              Accountants for 1999-2000.


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises and the Select
         Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         24 - Public Enterprises for 1999-2000 [RP 133-2000].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation:


         (a)     Government Notice No 1195 published in Government Gazette
              No 21783 dated 22 November 2000, Education Laws Amendment Act,
              2000 (Act No 53 of 2000).


         (b)     Government Notice No 1196 published in Government Gazette
              No 21784 dated 22 November 2000, Higher Education Amendment
              Act, 2000 (Act No 54 of 2000).


         (c)     Government Notice No 1355 published in Government Gazette
              No 21783 dated 13 December 2000, Adult Basic Education and
              Training Act, 2000 (Act No 52 of 2000).


         (d)     Government Notice No 73 published in Government Gazette No
              22002 dated 22 January 2001,    Amendment of Statute of the
              University of Venda, made in terms of section 32 of the Higher
              Education Act, 1997 (Act No 101 of 1997).


         (e)     Government Notice No 74 published in Government Gazette No
              22003 dated 22 January 2001,    Amendment of Statute of the
              Technikon Free State, made in terms of section 32 of the
              Higher Education Act, 1997 (Act No 101 of 1997).


         (f)     Government Notice No 75 published in Government Gazette No
              22004 dated 22 January 2001,    Amendment of Statute of the
              Technikon Natal, made in terms of section 32 of the Higher
              Education Act, 1997 (Act No 101 of 1997).


         (g)     Government Notice No 121 published in Government Gazette
              No 22031 dated 9 February 2001, Item for inclusion as an
              addendum to the National Policy on the Conduct of Senior
              Certificate Examination: Supplementary Examination, made in
              terms of section 3(4)(1) of the National Education Policy Act,
              1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (h)     Government Notice No 122 published in Government Gazette
              No 22031 dated 9 February 2001, Item for inclusion as an
              addendum to the National Policy on the Conduct of Senior
              Certificate Examination: Memorandum, made in terms of section
              3(4)(1) of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27
              of 1996).


         (i)     Government Notice No 123 published in Government Gazette
              No 22031 dated 9 February 2001, Item for inclusion as an
              addendum to the National Policy on the Conduct of Senior
              Certificate Examination: Meetings of Examiners and Moderators,
              made in terms of section 3(4)(1) of the National Education
              Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Refugee Relief Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 12-2001].


     (b)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         High School Vorentoe Disaster Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 13-2001].

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter, dated 14
     March 2001, to the Chairperson informing Parliament of the employment
     of the South African National Defence Force:


     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN COMPLIANCE
     WITH THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE FOR
     HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE DURING WIDESPREAD FLOODING.


     This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
     authorised the employment of South African National Defence Force
     (SANDF) personnel to fulfill the international obligations of the
     Republic of South Africa towards the Government of the Republic of
     Mozambique in providing humanitarian assistance during widespread
     flooding in the Zambezia and Sofala Provinces.


     This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
     Section 82(4)(b)(ii) read with Section 227(1)(d) of the Constitution of
     the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act No 200 of 1993), [which
     Sections continue to be in force in terms of Item 24(1) of Schedule 6
     to the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
     of 1996)], read further with Section 3(2)(a)(iv) of the Defence Act,
     1957 (Act No 44 of 1957).


     (a)    Personnel


     A total of 83 personnel have been be deployed to Mozambique: 1X Mission
     Commander; 5X Mobile Air Operation Team (MAOT) Personnel; 3X Command
     Post Personnel; 4X Translators; 8X Protection Personnel; 16X Air Crew;
     16X Ground Crew; 5X Telecommunication Personnel; 1X Logistical Officer;
     1X Media Liaison Officer; 1X Doctor; 6X Medical Personnel; 1X Petroleum
     Oil and Lubricant Officer; 1X CJ Ops Liaison Officer and 6X Divers.
     (b)    Aircraft


     4X Oryx Helicopters; 2X BK117 Helicopters; 2X C130 Transport aircraft;
     1x C212 Light Transport Aircraft.


     The SANDF members were initially deployed for a total of fourteen days
     over the period 24 February 2001 to 09 March 2001. Due to the fact that
     the actual deployment was only rendered on the 01 March 2001, the
     period employment was extended until the 15 March 2001.


     FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS


     The estimated financial implications are as follows:


     (a)    Direct Cost required for the periodR 2 632 659,46


         (i)     Personnel Cost (allowance, accommodations, etc)R 1 266
                 194,10


         (ii)    Medical CostR11 732,95


         (iii)   Diesel, petrol and fuel filtersR32 076,72


         (iv)    MapsR3 500,00


         (v)     Aircraft fuelR1 319 155,69


     (b)    Flying hour cost (excluding fuel)R11 392 599,00


     (c)    Total Marginal CostR14 025 258,46


     The cost indicated above does not include landing, parking,
     navigational ground support equipment and lighting surcharge fees.


     The National Treasury is responsible for the costs of this Deployment.


     I will also communicate this report to the Members of the National
     Assembly, and wish to request that you bring the contents of this
     report to the notice of the National Council of Provinces.


     Regards


     T M MBEKI

                            MONDAY 26 MARCH 2001

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of the Independent Development Trust for
         1998-99 [RP 6-2001];


     (b)    Financial Statements of the Temporary Employees' Pension and
         Provident Fund for 1997-98 and 1998-99 [RP 9-2001];


     (c)    Financial Statements of Refsa (Pty) Ltd for the period ended 14
         July 1998 [RP 22-2001].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
     National Council for Library and Information Services Bill [B 44B -
     2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 20 March 2001:


         The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having
         considered the subject of the National Council for Library and
         Information Services Bill [B 44B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
         75), referred to it, reports the Bill with proposed amendments, as
         follows:
                                  CLAUSE 5


         1. On page 4, in line 23, after ``members'' to insert:


              , nine of whom must be representative of the different
              provinces,
                                  CLAUSE 9


         1. On page 6, in line 19, to omit all the words after ``for'' up
              to and including ``appointment'' in line 20 and to substitute
              ``a period of three years''.


                                  CLAUSE 14


         1. On page 8, in line 29, after ``Technology'' to insert:


              and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Housing
     Amendment Bill [B 7 - 2001] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76),
     dated 26 March 2001:


         The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
         subject of the Housing Amendment Bill [B 7 - 2001] (National
         Council of Provinces - sec 76), referred to it and classified by
         the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 7A - 2001].

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Division of Revenue
     Bill [B 11B - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 26 March 2001:


     The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
     Division of Revenue Bill [B 11B - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 76),
     referred to it, reports the Bill with amendments [B 11C - 2001].


     The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


     A. Introduction


         The Committee held public hearings on Tuesday 6 March and
         Wednesday 7 March 2001, in order to consider the Bill. The
         following stakeholders participated: National Treasury; the
         Financial & Fiscal Commission; the South African Local Government
         Association (SALGA); and the Auditor-General. In addition, the
         following national departments participated: Health; Education;
         Forestry; Housing; Public Works; Social Development; and
         Provincial and Local Government.


         The Minister of Health and the Deputy Minister of Finance were in
         attendance.


         The Committee is mindful of the fact that South Africa's fiscal
         environment and intergovernmental relations give priority to
         servicing of the national debt. The costs of servicing debt are
         met before resources are shared between the three spheres of
         government. In addition, the Committee observes that the fiscal
         system is maturing. Although the vertical division of revenue
         between spheres is determined by the Cabinet (a political
         decision), a process of extensive consultation within the
         executive was adhered to, which included the MECs responsible for
         Finance, organised local government, the Budget Council, the
         Financial and Fiscal Commission, and the Budget Forum. After debt-
         servicing costs and contingency reserves are deducted, the total
         to be shared between the three spheres of government amounts to
         R208,1 billion, R223,6 billion and R238,5 billion over the three
         MTEF years, respectively.


         The Committee also noted that the national share increases from
         39,4 per cent in 2000-01 to 40,5 in 2001-02 and declines
         marginally to 40,0 per cent in 2003-04. The share dedicated to
         local government also rises from 3,0 per cent in 2000-01 to 3,3
         per cent in 2003-04. The provincial share declines
         correspondingly, from 57,6 per cent in 2000-01 to 56,4 per cent in
         2001-02 and increases marginally to 56,7 per cent 2003-04. It is
         important to note that this amount includes both equitable shares
         and conditional grants. Equitable shares refer to the allocation
         of revenue to the national, provincial and local spheres of
         government, as required by the Constitution, while conditional
         grants are transfers from the national budgets to subnational
         governments. They are determined by the national government and
         are earmarked for specific priority programmes. They are listed in
         the Bill, which also stipulates the monitoring and reporting
         requirements for all conditional grants. Conditional grants were
         introduced into the intergovernmental system in 1998. The
         objectives of conditional grants are as follows:


         1. To provide for national priorities in provincial budgets.


         2. To promote national norms and standards.


         3. To compensate provinces for cross-boundary flows.


         4. To provide specialised services and to effect transition by
              supporting capacity building.


         The combined conditional grants for provinces and local government
         amount to R1,7 billion rands. 88,7 per cent of national transfer
         to provinces constitute equitable shares, while the remaining 11,3
         per cent flows through conditional grants. However, in the case of
         local government, conditional grants constitute 60 per cent of the
         total transfer. It is the contention of the Committee that the
         administration and performance of conditional grants are in urgent
         need of review. This urgent need prompted the Committee to host
         the public hearings on the Bill and to invite affected national
         departments. While the administration of conditional grants may
         have improved, huge underspending on a number of grants is common.
         This non-spending adversely affects the delivery of important
         basic social services.


         The division of resources between the three spheres is determined
         primarily by the initial baseline allocation in the 2000 budget,
         together with additional priorities identified for the additional
         resources. New priorities identified over and above the existing
         priorities are the following:


         (1) Increasing child support grants.


         (2) Counteracting the HIV/Aids epidemic;


         (3) Poverty alleviation programmes, including social security and
              provision of basic services to the poor.


         (4) Additional costs arising from new demarcation of
              municipalities.


         (5) Increasing infrastructure spending in order to redress the
              backlogs in maintenance; rehabilitate and to promote the
              development of infrastructure.


         (6) The need to improve the efficiency of the criminal justice
              system.


     B. Key issues for committee consideration


         1. Conditional grants


              (1) Conditional grants to provinces


                  In 2000 the National Treasury conducted a review of the
                  conditional grant framework. The review identified the
                  need to reduce the number of conditional grants in order
                  to rationalise the number of grants.


                  The Departments of Health and of Housing and the National
                  Treasury administer the largest proportion of conditional
                  grants to provinces.
                  Four small grants have been merged into the supplementary
                  grant administered by the National Treasury. These grants
                  are the Financial Management Grant on the Treasury
                  Budget, a capacity building grant on the Department of
                  Housing's Budet Vote, the National Land Transport
                  Transition Act Grant on the Department of Transport's
                  Budget Vote, and the R293 grant on the Department of
                  Provincial and Local Government's Budget Vote.


                  The R293 grant forms part of the Supplementary Grant in
                  2001-02, after which it will go into the provincial
                  equitable share. The Supplementary Grant also includes
                  R243 million over the MTEF period for pilot projects to
                  improve financial management in health departments and
                  hospital management.


                  New conditional grants introduced in the 2001 budget are
                  the Infrastucture Grants, the Pretoria Academic Hospital
                  Grant and the Early Childhood Development Grant.
                  Provinces required to repair flood damage and supplement
                  infrastructure expenditure in social services such as
                  roads, schools and health facilities, will use
                  Infrastructure Grants. The Pretoria Academic Hospital
                  Grant will support the construction of new buildings,
                  while the early Childhood Development Grant will fund
                  pilot projects in relation to early childhood and pre-
                  primary schooling. Previously the Department of Education
                  used donor funding to finance these projects. In
                  addition, these new grants were proceeded with much
                  sooner, considerable advanced planning and policies being
                  in place already. The availability of funds through
                  conditional grants is commensurate with the
                  implementation phase of the programme.


                  The Department of Health administers eight conditional
                  grants, the Department of Provincial and Local Government
                  five and the Department of Social Development two. The
                  Health grants comprise over 42 per cent of the total
                  conditional grants to provinces.


                  Gauteng raised the concern that conditional grants are so
                  conditional that they are extremely constraining and are
                  encouraging roll-overs.


              (2) Conditional grants to local governments


              The following are the new local government conditional grants:


                  (a) Local Government Restructuring Grant


                       This will assist large municipalities to undertake
                       complex institutional and budgetary restructuring
                       exercises. The costs imposed, are deemed to be short-
                       term but their yield is realised only in the medium
                       term. Municipalities with budgets of over R300
                       million are eligible for these grants.
                  (b) Local Government Support Grant


                       This will assist the smaller municipalities. It is
                       likely that this grant will merge with the Local
                       Government Restructuring Grant.


                  (c) Municipal Finance Management Grant


                       This will assist municipalities to reform their
                       financial management and budgeting practices.
                       Allocations are made for each year of the MTEF
                       period.


                  (d) Municipal Systems Improvement Grant


                       It will have a five-year lifespan and will be
                       allocated in terms of a framework determined by an
                       interdepartmental committee.


                  (e) Transition Grant


                       It has been established to assist municipalities to
                       meet the one-off costs incurred as a result of
                       merging of municipalities. The life-span of this
                       grant extends over two years; it will subsequently be
                       incorporated into equitable shares.


         2. Municipal borrowing


              The encouragement of a municipal debt market is a new
              development for local government financing. While an active
              debt market for municipalities will promote greater
              responsibility, regulations will be in place to govern
              municipal borrowing. This will establish requirements for
              raising loans and put in place a framework unambiguously
              outlining the positions of both borrowers and lenders.


              The Committee will approach the Asset and Liability Management
              Division of the National Treasury for clarity on the impact of
              additional activity of municipalities in the bond market on
              interest rates and on the level of state debt.


         3. Issues raised during deliberations


              (1) Underspending of conditional grants


                  Department of Education: With regard to education
                  conditional grants in respect of Financial Management and
                  Quality Enhancement, underspending has been noted for two
                  consecutive years. In the current year, reports reflect
                  that spending is still very slow, amounting to less than
                  50 per cent for the nine months into the financial year.
                  The public hearing was informed that only 37% of the
                  total allocation was spent as at 31 January 2001.


                  Department of Health: The Committee has observed that
                  serious underspending is being recorded in respect of the
                  Hospital Rehabilitation Grant, Redistribution of
                  Specialised Health Services Grant and the Integrated
                  Nutrition Programme Grant. The Committee was also
                  informed that at least 68 per cent of the Integrated
                  Nutrition Programme has not been spent in the current
                  financial year. Underspending has been recorded for at
                  least three consecutive years. In addition, with regard
                  to the Redistribution of Specialised Health Services
                  Conditional Grant, trends up to the end of December 2000
                  show that spending is still very low, at less than 40 per
                  cent of the allocated amount. However, the construction
                  of the Umtata Regional Hospital is proceeding as
                  scheduled and the national Department of Health has
                  already shouldered its share of the construction costs.


                  Department of Housing: With respect to the Housing Fund
                  Conditional Grant, the Committee learnt that
                  underspending occurred in the 1999 financial year while
                  current spending for is only about 52% of the budgeted
                  amount. With respect to the Human Resettlement
                  Redevelopment Pilot Conditional Grant, it is observed
                  that underspending also occurred in the 1999 financial
                  year, and that by 31 December 2000 financial spending was
                  less 30 per cent of the allocated amount.


                  The following explanations were offered for the poor
                  performance of conditional grants:


                  (a) We were informed that originally inexperience with
                       the conditional grants mechanism, coupled with delays
                       and uncertainty about the release of funds, made
                       proper planning very difficult.


                  (b) In subsequent years, inexperience and uncertainty
                       about how exactly the mechanism was supposed to
                       operate, continued to present some difficulties. In
                       addition, the capacity of the Department (both at
                       provincial and national level) was not fully geared
                       for optimal conceptualisation, management and
                       implementation of the conditional grant mechanism.
                       This led to late planning.


                  (c) Delays also occurred as a result of the
                       tender/procurement process (Departments of Housing,
                       of Education and of Health).


                  (d) Moreover, the unanticipated difficulties associated
                       with co-ordination of projects are a major cause of
                       underspending of conditional grants. Most projects
                       (Housing, Education, Social Development and Health)
                       involve negotiations at school, municipal, district,
                       provincial and national level, which is a time-
                       consuming factor. This is further aggravated by the
                       lack of capacity in some provinces and
                       municipalities.


                  (e) A crucial element of underspending is also the
                       availability of donor funds for similar projects
                       (Department of Education). The process of accessing
                       donor funds is a lot simpler and requires fewer
                       administrative hurdles.


                  (f) Some grants (for example HIV/Aids) were introduced
                       late in the financial year. Such grants were
                       introduced in the Supplementary Budget for 2000-01,
                       which was tabled in Parliament on 14 June 2000. The
                       transfer of funds was gazetted as late as 28 August
                       2000. These projects commenced in late 2000. However,
                       spending for such grants will increase substantially
                       in 2001.


                  (g) Natural phenomena such as floods and tornadoes
                       resulted in under-utilisation of conditional grants
                       (Department of Housing in the Eastern Cape, Northern
                       Province and Mpumalanga). Although the duration of
                       natural disasters was short, the periods of delay
                       were logically beyond the incidence of the disaster
                       itself. In addition, since municipalities and local
                       governments undertake construction of homes in the
                       Eastern Cape, the recent local government election
                       had an adverse effect on delivery of houses.


                  (h) In some provinces junior public servants without
                       appropriate skills are given the responsibility of
                       administering huge grants.


                  Key steps are taken to improve the management of these
                  grants.


                  (i)  The participation of senior leadership (for example
                         HEDCOM - Head of Education Committee - and CEM
                         (Council of Education Ministers) in determining
                         priorities right through the sector.


                  (ii)       A dedicated capacity and institutional
                         mechanism at Ministry level for realistic planning
                         and co-ordination at national and provincial level
                         have been established. These changes and greater
                         clarity on the part of the National Treasury and
                         national Departments on how the conditional grant
                         mechanism is to function, have created conditions
                         that should enhance performance.


                  The Committee and other relevant select committees in the
                  NCOP will closely monitor this spending pattern of
                  conditional grants, which has serious consequences for
                  delivery of services.


              (2) Accountability requirements of conditional grants


                  Accountability concerns, with regard to conditional
                  grants, were raised by the Department of Water Affairs
                  and Forestry and the Office of the Auditor-General. The
                  Auditor-General argued that Part IV, V and VI of the Bill
                  could be more appropriately contained in long-term
                  legislation like the Public Finance Management Act,
                  instead of an annualised Bill. The Office of the Auditor-
                  General also argued that municipalities do not properly
                  disclose conditional grants in their financial
                  statements. Disclosures by municipalities and government
                  departments are inadequate because the prescribed format
                  of financial statements are inadequate to address them.
                  In addition, it is highly unlikely that municipalities
                  and departments will be able to comply with the
                  requirement of conditional grants since internal audit
                  functions are not functional yet. The Auditor-General may
                  not be in a position to conduct a full audit, especially
                  when audit fees are still outstanding. We were informed
                  that the transfer of provincial funds to suspense
                  accounts is also unconstitutional.
              (3) Clustering of conditional grants


                  There are too many conditional grants in the system. For
                  example, there are three HIV/Aids grants which are
                  allocated to the Departments of Health, of Education and
                  of Social Development. While the purposes of each of
                  these grants are different, substantial opportunities
                  exist for the reclustering of conditional grants. The
                  purpose of the Health grant is to improve access to
                  voluntary HIV counselling, testing and community
                  mobilisation; the purpose of the education grant is to
                  deliver life skills and HIV/AIDS education in schools;
                  the purpose of the Social Development grant is to develop
                  home-based care programmes in communities. Similarly, the
                  Provincial Infrastructure Grants and the Consolidated
                  Municipal Infrastructue Programme could also be
                  reorganised.


              (4) Specific clauses of Bill


                  Discussions on the following clauses are aimed at further
                  improving the Bill:


                  (a) Clause 15(2), which refers to the conversion of
                       conditional grants to unconditional transfers to
                       provinces and municipalities, weakens the financial
                       monitoring systems of the grants. However, the
                       National Treasury argues that this conversion is used
                       as an instrument to prompt national departments into
                       compliance with the reporting requirements of
                       conditional grants. The National Treasury further
                       argues that the conversion of grants to provincial
                       equitable shares do not compromise financial
                       oversight responsibilities because the Auditor-
                       General would still have to audit provincial
                       financial records.


                  (b) The Office of the Auditor-General also alleges that
                       Clause 31(3) of the Bill over-extends its brief
                       because the recovery of funds from negligent
                       individuals is not the responsibility of an external
                       auditor. This executioner function should reside with
                       the NCOP or the Legislator.


                  The Committee is of the view that, while the intention of
                  this clause is noteworthy, the Bill is not an appropriate
                  place for such a clause. The Committee is further of the
                  view that this must be dealt with in the PFMA. In
                  addition, if the government or the department has
                  intentions of extending the powers of the Auditor-
                  General, it must be undertaken in accordance with section
                  188(4) of the Constitution.


              (5) Concerns of Salga


                  A concern was raised by Salga that, although the national
                  Executive issues proclamations on free basic services, no
                  consideration is given to -


                  (a) prior consultations with Salga;


                  (b) additional provisions of financial resources to this
                       sphere of government for the purposes of providing
                       free basic services. The National Executive
                       proclamation is tantamount to an unfunded mandate.


                  In addition, Salga alleges that -


                  (i)  2001 increases in equitable share are misleading,
                         because they were not new allocations but a mere
                         redistribution of grants from provinces and/or old
                         black local authorities;


                  (ii)       equitable shares should not be used to provide
                         free basic services, but a specific fund should be
                         made available just to render this service.


                  Salga argues that the cost for the provision of basic
                  services was 300 per cent higher than the equitable share
                  made available to municipalities. However, this view was
                  strongly contested by the National Treasury, the
                  Department of Provincial and Local Government and the
                  Financial and Fiscal Commission. They all argued that the
                  increased equitable share of local government and an
                  internal subsidy system should be designed in such a way
                  that local government and municipalities should be able
                  to play their constitutional role in the provision of
                  basic services to the poor.


                  Since Salga receives its allocation from the Department
                  of Local and Provincial Government, instead of provision
                  being made for it in the Division of Revenue Bill, the
                  question raised is: To whom will it be accountable, and
                  when will it give clarity on utilisation of government
                  transfers?


              (6) Timing and tabling of Bill


                  The contention is that, if MECs must release their
                  provincial budgets at least within two weeks after the
                  national Budget, it would suggest that the vertical
                  division, as stipulated in the Bill, has been accepted
                  prior to it having been passed by Parliament. This
                  questions the value of hosting public hearings on a Bill
                  whose contents have received acceptance by provincial
                  Legislatures without formal acceptance by the NCOP and
                  the National Assembly. The Intergovernmental Fiscal
                  Relations Act, 1997, provides the legal basis for the
                  simultaneous tabling of the Division of the Revenue Act
                  with the National Budget. This legal requirement should
                  be reviewed!


              (7) Three-year allocation of conditional grants to
                  municipalities


                  The Department of Provincial and Local Government
                  understands the need to have predictability and certainty
                  in the allocation of grants to municipalities, and shares
                  their understanding with the National Treasury that a
                  movement to a three-year allocation for municipalities
                  will enhance planning. However, it will be extremely
                  difficult for the Department to provide three-year
                  allocations before the next financial period, but it will
                  honour its obligation to submit its report to the
                  National Treasury by 15 May 2001.


                  In addition, the Department expresses reservations about
                  instituting fixed allocations to municipalities whose
                  conditional grant needs may change over the MTEF period.


                  The Committee welcomes the Transitional Grant for the
                  purposes of restructuring municipalities. The life-span
                  of these grants is two years.
              (8) Reporting by provinces and municipalities


                  Provinces and municipalities are expected to report to
                  the national department, which would then be able to
                  assess the performance of conditional grants. However,
                  little feedback is received from affected institutions.
                  Some departments (like Provincial and Local Government)
                  resort to drastic measures by withholding funds from non-
                  reporting provinces and municipalities. The National
                  Treasury is subsequently informed of such measures.


                  Without these reports, no assessment can be made of
                  whether objectives of grants have been met or whether
                  targets have been reached. The inappropriate use of funds
                  designed for re-registration of social security
                  (Department of Social Development) beneficiaries in the
                  provinces is a good example.


              (9) Beneficiaries of social security grants and bank charges


                  The Committee was concerned that poor beneficiaries of
                  social securities are still burdened with bank charges if
                  their social grants are collected from the conventional
                  banking sector. This question was raised separately, both
                  to the Department of Social Development and to the
                  National Treasury. The response was that representations
                  have been made to the Banking Council with a view to
                  excluding bank charges and minimum balance requirements
                  for accounts held by beneficiaries of social security
                  grants. Discussion on such service agreements continues
                  and the Banking Council is amenable to such arrangements,
                  but these must be subject to transforming the pension
                  beneficiaries system.


              (10)Classification of municipalities


                  Although the equitable share will be distributed directly
                  to ``unicity'' metropolitan authorities and category B
                  municipalities, the division of powers between category B
                  and category C municipalities is crucial. While category
                  C municipalities' revenue base is largely RSC levies, it
                  will be in receipt of equitable shares when there is no
                  category B municipality in the district and when that
                  category C municipality carries out the relevant
                  functions.


                  However, the Committee was informed by Salga that
                  sufficient progress has been made to ensure that category
                  C municipalities are phased out within a year.
                  Nevertheless, the Committee is of the opinion that this
                  transition may take much longer, and we will observe the
                  progress in this regard.


     C. Recommendations


         The Committee recommends the following:


         1. Review of conditional grant mechanisms


              Consideration must be given to the following:


              (1) There are too many conditional grants in the system, and
                  they must therefore be consolidated and rationalised to
                  improve effectiveness.


              (2) The institution of non-financial monitoring mechanisms, so
                  that the evaluation of grants are based not only on
                  spending criteria but also on provision of service.
                  Questions such as whether each undernourished child in a
                  school receives a food parcel and whether each RDP-funded
                  house is received by the very poor and needy rather than
                  those already in possession of homes in a another area,
                  are good examples of non-financial monitoring. Members of
                  Parliament and civil society bodies must also play a
                  crucial role in exercising oversight responsibility.


              (3) Timing and appropriate release of grants. Grants should be
                  promptly released by the original source so that all
                  spheres of government may work in a single continuum.
                  This would result in a constant flow of funds through the
                  intergovernmental system, as required in Clause 27 of the
                  Bill.


              (4) Improving the design of grants is crucial to the
                  functioning of the entire system of conditional grants.
                  Clear, and perhaps simplified, conditional requirements
                  also have a bearing on the performance of grants.


              (5) The tabling of the Division of Revenue Bill together with
                  the National Budget on Budget Day should be further
                  explored.


              (6) Consideration should be given to the transfer of the
                  primary school feeding scheme to the Department of
                  Education, because it has the necessary infrastructure to
                  provide such a service.


              (7) Follow-up on the negotiations between the Department of
                  Social Development and the banking sector on the removal
                  of finance and interest charges for beneficiaries of
                  Social Security grants.


              (8) Invite the Deputy Director-General of the Asset and
                  Liability Management Division of the National Treasury to
                  address the Committee on the impact of local government
                  participation in capital markets.


              (9) Host further discussions on conditional grants and local
                  government financing.


              (10)National Departments and provinces are expected to comply
                  with the requirements of the PFMA, with regard to the
                  employment of Chief Financial Officers for the
                  administration of conditional grants.
     D. Conclusion


         The Committee congratulates the participants of the public hearing
         on their detailed and frank submissions.


         In addition, the Committee thanks all participants for their
         contributions and looks forward to a long and beneficial
         association with them.


         More importantly, the Committee also conveys its special word of
         appreciation to the Directors-General of the following national
         departments for their active participation in the deliberations:
         Health; Education; Water Affairs and Forestry; Housing; Public
         Works; Social Development; and Provincial and Local Government.


         The substantial contributions of the Minister of Health and the
         Deputy Minister of Finance are also appreciated by the Committee.


         The Committee would make the monitoring of conditional grants and
         local government financing one of its key features of activity
         during the forthcoming financial year. We will continue with our
         engagement with affected stakeholders in this regard.

                           TUESDAY, 27 MARCH 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Public Enterprises on 22 March 2001 submitted a
         draft of the Eskom Conversion Bill, 2001, and a memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Labour
         and Public Enterprises, respectively, in accordance with Joint
         Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 27
         March 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Eskom Conversion Bill [B 16 - 2001] (National Assembly -
              sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises -
              National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              22116 of 2 March 2001.]

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 27 March 2001 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (i)    Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Amendment Bill
         [B 9B - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75).


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    The Chairperson:


     Correspondence received from the Minister for Justice and
     Constitutional Development in response to a resolution of the National
     Council of Provinces on 17 May 2000.


     Copies of the correspondence are available from the office of Clerk of
     the Papers.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of the President's Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 7-
         2001];


     (b)    Financial Statements of the State President's Fund for 1997-98,
         1998-99 and 1999-2000 [RP 14-2001].

2.    The Minister of Social Development:


     (a)    Report of the Ministerial Committee on Abuse, Neglect and Ill-
         treatment of Older Persons, Volume 1 (Main Report).


     (b)    Report of the Ministerial Committee on Abuse, Neglect and Ill-
         treatment of Older Persons, Volume 2 (Provincial Reports).


