---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 March 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-03-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 MARCH 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy caused by the resignation of Chief N
Z Mtirara had been filled, in accordance with item 6(3) of Schedule 6 to
the Constitution, 1996, by the nomination of Mr G D Mkono with effect from
26 March 2001.

                                    OATH

Mr G D Mkono, accompanied by Mr S Abram and Ms Anneliz√© van Wyk, made and
subscribed the oath and took his seat.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the
ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with sadness the death of Sonia, the wife of Brian Bunting, a
       former ANC Member of Parliament;


  (2) expresses its heartfelt condolences to the Bunting family; and


  (3) joins them in mourning the death of this patriot and comrade.

[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) affirms the well-established legal principle that accused persons are
       entitled to be presumed innocent until their guilt has been proved;


  (2) believes that when serious allegations are made about the honesty of
       an hon member, this has the effect of placing a cloud over Parliament
       until the matter is resolved;


  (3) also believes that for parliamentary democracy to succeed, it is
       necessary that members of the public should have full confidence in
       the integrity of their MPs; and


  (4) therefore calls upon the hon Mr Tony Yengeni to make a simple
       statement ...

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Mr Gibson, will you please take your seat? You will
resume.
Mr D H M GIBSON: Certainly.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I cannot allow notices of motion that relate to
the manner in which Mr Yengeni acquired a car or other allegations. I will
explain the basis.

Parliament has specifically created the Joint Committee on Ethics and
Members' Interests as a mechanism to consider breaches of the Code of
Conduct for Members. The DP has requested the committee to look into this
matter. I understand from the chairperson that the committee is meeting
tomorrow and has sought further clarification, in terms of its procedures,
about the substance of the complaint.

The committee will be reporting to this House. I wish to advise you that I
intend to request the committee to try and make a report before we adjourn.
At that point, this House will, in fact, have an opportunity to debate the
report, whatever it is.

I had intended to make another statement which I will now add to this,
because the two are linked. I have noted, via the media, that members have
been using the media to ask the Speaker to take action in respect of
certain allegations against members on the basis of evidence submitted to
me. I want to state that no member has, in fact, submitted any evidence at
all to me about any actions or misdemeanours, whatever they are, of
members.

The only information I have to hand is that which I received from the hon
Dr Woods, as submitted to Scopa. That was limited in terms of the Rules
which require that, where charges against members are made to a committee,
that committee should refer the evidence to the Speaker who would then
decide whether to take it to a disciplinary committee or how to proceed
with it. In terms of that Rule, which I believe is Rule 136, Dr Woods did
submit a package of documents to me. I looked through those documents and,
as I informed Scopa when I met with them, I found that there was nothing of
any substance. This, in fact, confirmed what Dr Woods himself had indicated
to me.

But, in view of what is being said, and in particular with reference to Mr
Yengeni, I want to inform you that the only evidence in that package - and
I am not making allegations with regard to any other package - was an
extract from the motor vehicle register, which shows that the vehicle in
question was registered in Mr Yengeni's name on 22 October 1998, so that
he, therefore, had registered that car on that day. That is the only
evidence that was submitted to me.

I want to request hon members who have any substantive evidence on such
issues to submit it directly either to the joint committee or to Scopa for
consideration, or to me, in which case I would refer it, in any case. I am
saying this because we need to understand that acknowledging the integrity
of members should go beyond referring to each other as ``hon members''. We
should not succumb to the temptation to reinforce the view that, when it
comes to members of Parliament, there is no presumption of innocence. I am
very glad to hear the early part of Mr Gibson's notice of motion, which
says the same thing.

There seems to be an impression that there is an assumption of guilt. If we
buy into that process, we run the danger of undermining our democracy. So,
this is an appeal to members: Take the evidence to the bodies that have
been set up, and let them deal with whatever your evidence is. It is on
that basis that I do not wish us to entertain here either discussion or
notices of motion on this matter.
Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, naturally, I abide by your ruling. I
wondered, however, if you would allow me to read the last three lines of
the motion, and then rule it out of order if you think it is out of order.
[Interjections.] I got as far as:


  (4) therefore calls upon the hon Mr Yengeni to make a simple statement
       disclosing the details surrounding the acquisition of his motor
       vehicle, rather than waiting for enquiries and investigations that
       might prolong the current crisis for months or even years.

The SPEAKER: I will allow that notice, but further notices will not be
allowed because we are then just going to continue this debate, and I have
already ruled on that matter.

Mr J H SLABBERT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) appreciates the Be Legal  initiative, a programme partnered by the
       national Department of Transport and minibus-taxi operators to allow
       minibus-taxi operators who operated before 30 June 1997, to become
       legal operators upon application for a licence;


  (2) recognises that this initiative may solve many unresolved car thefts
       and deal expeditiously with any potential future tensions in the taxi
       industry; and


  (3) requests the Department of Transport to speedily deal with bad
       elements that will at all costs try to derail this noble gesture by
       not lodging applications and submitting authentic documentation to
       the registering body timeously.

Mrs R R JOEMAT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Mayor of Cape Town, Peter Marais, is still trapped by
       the laws of his apartheid masters;
  (2) further notes that Mayor Marais blames apartheid laws for not
       allowing Bafana Bafana to play at Newlands Rugby Stadium;


  (3) calls on Mr Marais and the DA to stop hiding behind apartheid laws
       and to step into the new South Africa by overriding racist views and
       making it possible for the national soccer team to play at Newlands.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr F BEUKMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New  NP:


  That the House -


  (1) acknowledges our Constitution as our highest law, in which freedom of
       expression and political rights are entrenched;


  (2) notes the unacceptable and shocking situations in which sections 16
       and 19 of our Constitution were violated, in that -
       (a)  a journalist was refused access to a HNP annual congress because
           he was not white;


       (b)  two reporters from the SABC offices were assaulted in Thabazimbi
           and had their camera seized yesterday when they tried to film a
           protest march at a farmers' rally; and


       (c)  a group of ANC supporters attempted to disrupt a political
           meeting in which Mr Tony Leon, the leader of the DA, was
           addressing a crowd in Crossroads; and


  (3) calls on all political parties to respect and uphold the Bill of
       Rights, which forms the foundation of our democracy, and to encourage
       their respective supporters to exercise tolerance and to adhere to
       the rule of law.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that a free and responsible media is a cornerstone of a healthy
       democracy and, as such, the institution enjoys the protection of our
       Constitution;


  (2) realises that the Government and public representatives are open to
       public scrutiny and that they are responsible to the electorate, and
       therefore calls on the media to stay diligent in investigating and
       reporting on matters of importance and public concern even in the
       face of hostile comments and traps and, in that way, to contribute
       towards a mature and responsible government;


  (3) notes with trepidation the repeated attempts by public officials to
       cover up the revelations of corruption linked to the controversial
       arms deal;


  (4) acknowledges that it is a matter of grave concern that much emphasis
       has been put on the nature of the gift to the hon Mr Yengeni, rather
       than the attempts of a cover-up, which the media has commendably
       exposed ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, will you please take your seat. That motion is out
of order, as I indicated at the beginning. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: On a point of order, Madam Speaker, here I did not say
anything which is against what you ruled out. All that I am saying is that
...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I said there should be no reference. But, you were
already over your 60 seconds. Would you please ...

Mr B H HOLOMISA: You should have said so rather than confusing the House.

The SPEAKER: Will you let me finish? Will you take your seat?

Mr B H HOLOMISA: All right, I have finished.

The SPEAKER: You will submit that notice and I will look at it.
[Interjections.]

Mr M T GONIWE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the three agencies investigating allegations of corruption
       in the arms-procurement deal met yesterday;


  (2) also notes that these agencies have agreed to hold certain aspects of
       their investigations in public;


  (3) welcomes the commitment by the Public Protector, the National
       Director of Public Prosecutions and the Auditor-General to
       transparent investigations;


  (4) calls on them to work with a sense of urgency to ensure a speedy yet
       comprehensive resolution of the investigation in order to bring an
       end to the current trial-by-media; and


  (5) also calls on all individuals and institutions who might have
       information that may assist the investigation to forward it to the
       investigating agencies.

[Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that celebrations were held in many places in South Africa and
       overseas in places such as Jakarta, Indonesia to mark 21 March,
       Sharpeville Day;


  (2) regrets that some people commemorate this day without reference to
       the historic and tragic event in Sharpeville, in an attempt to erase
       this event from our national memory;


  (3) further regrets that this day is still commemorated separately in a
       manner that is divisive of the Sharpeville/Langa people and of the
       nation as a whole;
  (4) calls on this Parliament to restore Sharpeville/Langa to 21 March in
       line with the United Nations and the whole world, and is commemorated
       this day together as a nation; and


  (5) further calls on the President to ensure that the dedication of the
       Sharpeville monument is a national, and not a party event, and should
       be commemorated with appropriate dignity in such a way that it is
       indelibly imprinted in our hearts as a symbol of reconciliation,
       human rights and national unity.

Mr G E BALOI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House notes -


  (1) with acclamation that the Minister of Transport, the honourable
       Dullah Omar, will release plans today for the sale of public shares
       in the Airports Company South Africa (ACSA), which is the majority
       state-owned operator of the country's biggest airports;


  (2) that the Minister will release details of the sale of shares to the
       public at a press briefing in Cape Town this afternoon;


  (3) that Italy's Airporti Di Roma, which manages Rome's airport, bought a
       20% share in the firm for R819 million in March 1998, and also has an
       option to buy another 10% at the same price, and that the sale valued
       ACSA at R4,1 billion; and


  (4) that the Minister of Finance in his Budget Review last month said
       that 10% of the firm was set aside for black shareholders who had
       paid R173 million√ø.√ø.√ø.

[Time expired.]

Mr S B NTULI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the racial attack on a journalist by people attending a
       conference organised by the Herstigte Nasionale Party in Akasia,
       Tswane;


  (2) condemns the brutal and racist behaviour of the supporters of the
       Herstigte Nasionale Party;


  (3) calls on the residents of Akasia to distance themselves from this
       barbaric behaviour; and


  (4) urges them to work for a truly nonracial, nonsexist and democratic
       South Africa.

[Applause.]

Mrs G M BORMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the gathering of 50 000 Christians at Newlands on Human Rights
           Day for the purpose of praying for the leaders of South Africa,
           the unity of the city of Cape Town, and an end to crime,
           violence, poverty, bombings, gangsterism and drug trafficking;
           and


       (b)  the fundamental right of all people in South Africa to exercise
           freedom of association according to the Constitution;


  (2) strongly condemns the attack by the Minister of Education, Kader
       Asmal, on the gathering, and, in particular, his unjustified
       categorisation of the event as sectarian and divisive;


  (3) warns the Government that it should refrain from interfering in the
       religious freedom of South Africans; and


  (4) calls on the Minister to make a public apology to the Christian
       community for his injudicious attack.

[Applause.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) empathises with the family of Ms Ngwahlandei Lungwani, who was killed
       by an elephant while walking in the fields of Matiane village near
       the Kruger National Park; and


  (2) requests all bodies charged with the responsibility of putting back
       the fence of the Kruger National Park, after the floods that swept it
       away, to do so at their earliest convenience to prevent further loss
       of life.

Ms D M MOROBI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -
       (a)  a four-year-old boy, Lebo Ramushu, who was kidnapped from his
           home, has been found alive; and


       (b)  the district surgeon has since diagnosed that the boy has been
           molested;


  (2) congratulates members of the community for ensuring the safe return
       of this boy to his parents; and


  (3) calls on the police to bring the perpetrators of this horrendous act
       to book without delay.

[Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the flouting of the law by the former ANC-led Cape Town City
           Council and the Western Province Football Union by failing to
           follow the necessary legal procedures regarding applications for
           alternative events to rugby at Newlands Stadium, has damaged the
           reputation of sport as a cornerstone of nation-building in South
           Africa; and


       (b)  the DA-led council has requested the Western Province Football
           Union to apply for the necessary rezoning in order to make it
           possible for other events to take place at Newlands; and


  (2) resolves that this is not a racial or political issue, and that SAFA
       must show its continued commitment to sport in South Africa by
       refraining from making hasty decisions regarding the City of Cape
       Town as a venue for important soccer matches.

[Interjections.]

              CONGRATULATIONS TO BAFANA BAFANA AND THE PROTEAS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C H F GREYLING: Mev die Speaker, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van die uitstekende prestasies van twee van ons nasionale
       spanne wat hul opposisie in die stof laat byt het, naamlik -


       (a)  die Bafana Bafana-sokkerspan wat hul kwalifiserende wedstryd in
           die Afrika-beker-toernooi met 3-0 gewen het; en


       (b)  die Protea-krieketspan wat hul wedstryd in die vyfdag-toetsreeks
           teen Wes-Indi√´ gewen het;


  (2) ons sportspanne gelukwens met hul uitmuntende prestasie; en


     3) kennis neem van Suid-Afrika se bod om die W√™reldbeker vir Sokker in
        2010 in Suid-Afrika aan te bied en sy volle steun aan hierdie poging
        gee.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr C H F GREYLING: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the excellent achievements of two of our national teams that
       caused their opponents to bite the dust, namely -


       (a)  the Bafana Bafana soccer team which won the qualifying match in
           their Africa Cup Tournament by 3-0; and


       (b)  the Protea cricket team which won their match in the five-day
           test series against the West Indies;


  (2) congratulates our sports teams on their excellent achievements; and


  (3) notes South Africa's bid to host the Soccer World Cup in 2010 in
       South Africa and gives its full support to this endeavour.]

Agreed to.

                DEFERRAL OF QUESTIONS TO THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I move the draft resolution printed on the
Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party as follows:



  That, notwithstanding the provisions of the interim questions procedure,
  questions to the Deputy President that have been set down for oral reply
  on 28 March 2001 be deferred until and given precedence on Thursday, 29
  March 200l.

Agreed to.

    RECOMMITMENT OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON FILLING OF VACANCIES ON
                       COMMISSION FOR GENDER EQUALITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I move the draft resolution printed on the
Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party as follows:



  That, notwithstanding Rule 214(6), the House recommits the Report of the
  Ad hoc Committee on Filling of Vacancies on Commission for Gender
  Equality (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 218) to the Ad
  hoc Committee for further consideration and report, the Committee to
  report by tomorrow.

Agreed to.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON FILLING OF VACANCIES ON
                       COMMISSION FOR GENDER EQUALITY

The SPEAKER: Order! This Order falls away in view of the decision of the
House to refer the report back to the Ad hoc Committee on Filling of
Vacancies on Commission for Gender Equality.

 MISMANAGEMENT OF COMMUTER RAIL SERVICES AND INCIDENTS AT PRETORIA AND PARK
                             STATIONS IN GAUTENG

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr S B FARROW: Madam Speaker, let me first say how grateful I am that this
important debate has been allowed to take placed. It is important for a
number of reasons. Over the past six weeks we have witnessed the loss of
human life and valuable state assets at various metrorail locations.

The portfolio committee recently visited Pretoria station and a number of
main-link stations, to see for ourselves. We talked to as many of the
commuters who rely on rail transport to get to and from their homes and
places of work as possible. During the visit, one could sense in these
commuters a feeling of frustration which was building up around delays,
access to platforms and a general fear of violence and disruption
associated with train hooliganism.

This is not only a phenomenon peculiar to South Africa, but is something
that has occurred in a number of other countries. We may well be able to
learn from some of those experiences. It was evident that many of these
frustrations were caused by a series of breakdowns in communication between
Metrorail on the one hand and commuters on the other. But with due respect
to Metrorail, many of their efforts have been affected by circumstances
beyond their control.

Let me highlight some of these problems. Firstly, insufficient funding has
resulted in more of the frequently used stations not having proper
facilities to manage large numbers of commuters at peak hours. Secondly,
they are unable to provide adequate security to commuters who choose rail
as a mode of transport. In this regard, many carriages have been sealed off
between the footplates to avoid access by would-be ticket evaders to the
coaches. Many of these ticket evaders are the very persons responsible for
criminal activities on the trains. Therefore, circumstances make it
difficult to manage without incurring excessive costs in respect of
walling, fencing and so on.

Coupled with these aspects is the continuing vandalism of train windows,
doors and fittings, including the very large speakers which could be used
as an effective means of communication on the platforms and inside the
coaches, to advise passengers of delays and problems that might be
encountered during the day. Overhead connections and coach cabling have
been the cause of stoppages and delays in many instances, disrupting the
service and, needless to say, incurring unnecessary costs.

These problems have contributed to 17% of Metrorail's train delays and 43%
of their train cancellations. When one takes into account that these
coaches have to be brought in for regular inspection and repair, then the
average fleet availability is reduced to 70% - that is 1 300 coaches are
out of service at any one time.

Metrorail carries 491 million commuters per annum, and this represents 19%
of all public transporters. Recent figures indicate that if the road
infrastructure maintenance backlog is met, it will cost some R65 billion,
whereas for the rail infrastructure and assets to be upgraded to an
acceptable standard, would cost only R22 million. Certainly, a matter that
should be considered if the Minister is serious about levelling the playing
field.

At the present level of funding of approximately R350 million per annum,
the SA Rail Commuter Corporation Ltd has indicated that it will take 15
years, on a declining basis, for the Metrorail assets to be depleted to the
point of no return. Unless the rolling stock is upgraded or replaced, their
signalling improved to keep up with modern-day standards and their stations
reconstructed to accommodate increased commuter flows, the safety of
passengers will be at greater risk than is at present the case.

I am aware of the Minister's plan to introduce a policy and legislative
framework for the establishment of a rail safety regulator which will guide
and regulate our railways. Hopefully, the process will also help in the
restructuring of both the SARCC and Spoornet. However, right now our rail
passengers and the operator, Metrorail, are faced with enormous challenges
as more and more frustrated commuters have to deal with violence,
destruction and delays on their only means of transport.

What can be done? The DA believes, firstly, that the SARCC must be put in a
position to raise funds through the private sector in order to put their
assets into an acceptable and workable state. If we are serious about
looking at rail as a major affordable public commuter service in our cities
and reducing the high road traffic congestion, then the Minister must
reconsider the postponement of concessioning as an option.

There are many ways to improve the efficiency of rail and the private
sector can play a major role in this regard. The interest saved as a result
of the Department of Finance taking over the loan obligations of R2,2
billion from the SARCC can go a long way in strengthening the run-down rail
infrastructure that we have. But, much more is needed to ensure that our
rail services meet international safety standards and the increasing demand
for rail travel.

I am sure that what I am saying will not gain the support of the
chairperson of the portfolio committee, the hon Jeremy Cronin. However,
unless the private sector can get involved in concessible or permissioned
rail networks in our country, in order to inject much-needed capital which
the state obviously cannot provide, then we can wave our urban railway
networks goodbye.

Prolonged lack of maintenance will continue to be the cause of commuter
frustration. Accidents will continue to be a regular occurrence and those
areas which are unserviced by rail will continue to be undeveloped.
Concessioning routes to the private sector is becoming less and less
attractive to investors as the fleet becomes older and older and the
infrastructure less manageable under the present state funding
arrangements.

Secondly, the Minister must immediately make additional funds available to
improve the security of commuters and their assets alike at all main
stations in conjunction with the SA Police Service, even if this means the
reintroduction of railway police with special powers of arrest. Thirdly, a
massive education and communication drive must be instituted to inform all
rail commuters of the problems faced by Metrorail.

Clearly, it is a small minority of our community who are bent on violence
and destruction. This can no longer be condoned or accepted in our
democracy. Once again, we call on these commuters to become the eyes and
ears of our nation in combating this growing scourge. Rail commuters,
through their commuter forums, must start taking ownership of and protect
their assets. Dignity in using this system will result in respect for the
system. I am saying to the Minister that they should become part of
rescheduling peak hour traffic and off peak usage, even if this means that
we might have to consider free travel for those people outside peak hours.
Fourthly, serious account must be taken of the investigation conducted by
Prof Le Roux, which revealed vital information in respect of a number of
fatal accidents and the unsafe conditions of Metrorail train controllers
and systems. Driving trains is a stressful and risky business on our
railways with high rates of railway line suicides. The recent shocking
revelation that five to 20 people per week take their lives by standing in
front of trains thus causing derailments and loss of life needs serious
investigation and action. In addition to this, many drivers are exposed to
unsatisfactory working conditions. This, too, needs the Minister's urgent
attention. [Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Speaker, Minister of Transport and colleagues, in the
early 1980s, about 20 years ago, PW Botha - then president of our then
unfortunate country - took a helicopter ride from Cape Town and flew out
over the Cape Peninsula and the Cape Flats. Apparently, after some 20
minutes of being up in the helicopter, he lifted his notorious index finger
and pointed downwards to a bare stretch of barren land some 30 km or more
outside Cape Town city centre. So it was that Khayelitsha was conceived
from on high. It is now the home of about 350 000 Capetonians.
The idea, of course, was to locate the growing African population far away
from white suburbs and white amenities - including Newslands Rugby Stadium
- but close enough to ensure that there was a cheap supply of gardeners,
domestic workers, labourers and a poor but large clientele for the retail
sector. Thus, today, here in Cape Town, those members' own unicity
municipality is confronting a situation in which we spend more in Cape Town
as Government. [Interjections.] We spend R470 million on subsidies for
transport - bus and train subsidies - which is more than twice what we
spend on housing subsidies as a result of this dispersal of our city. One
can find the same pattern throughout every city and town in South Africa.
Not only do we have PW Botha, his party and those that are now sucking up
to them to thank for this physical location of Khayelitsha, but it was the
very same individual, PW Botha and his party, who presided over the major
diversion of funds from infrastructure into the increasing militarisation
of our society and away from domestic infrastructure into the
destabilisation of Southern Africa. [Interjections.]

Since the late 1970s, there has been no serious investment in rail
infrastructure or rolling stock in South Africa. [Interjections.] I do
agree that there has been massive mismanagement of railways in South
Africa. These are problems that are symptoms of a deep underlying problem.
The ANC Government has battled to reverse this particular investment
decline. Last year, we passed legislation in this House which enabled the
Treasury to take over the SA Rail Commuter Corporation's debt of some R2,3
billion, which releases R300 million a year on debt repayment.

President Mbeki's state of the nation opening of Parliament address this
year envisaged a major and enhanced focus on infrastructural spending,
urban renewal - including Khayelitsha - integrated rural development and
the lowering of import costs throughout the economy. We believe that these
perspectives begin to set the scene for an important focus on, amongst
other things, rail commuter transport.

We need to encourage this development. But, of course, there are also
immediate things that can be done. I agree with the hon Farrow as regards
some of the issues that he has raised. When, as a portfolio committee, we
went out to Mabopane and travelled in third class carriages with ordinary
commuters towards Pretoria, we spoke to them. They all told us how much
they relied on the train. It cost them R4,50 to travel from Mabopane to
Pretoria compared to the R7 that they pay on the minibusses.

However, many of them expressed grave frustrations with delays and service
disruptions. They were especially exasperated by the failure - frequently,
but not always - on the part of the operators to communicate effectively
with them about the cause of these disruptions.

The torching of Pretoria station was absolutely unacceptable. In fact, it
was a mindless act. But it occurred, we should note nonetheless, after the
build-up of some 7 000 commuters on platforms over a period of nearly an
hour. The delay of the trains was caused by the breakdown of a fibre
optical cable. Was this communicated, we asked, to the passengers who were
building up on the platforms? Well no, we were told by the managers.

The problem was that the fibre optical cable also services the intercom on
the platform. And so, we said, surely there was some attempt to walk
amongst passengers to explain to them, by word of mouth if not by other
means, the problems. It seems that this did not happen. So there are
problems of this kind which need to be addressed and addressed immediately.
I agree with the hon Farrow that better communication is one of the most
important immediate priorities from the side of the rail operators.

Two weeks ago the portfolio committees on public enterprises and transport
met with the senior management of Metrorail, Transnet and Spoornet. I
believe that most of us were quite impressed with the calibre and strategic
seriousness with which the senior cadre of key public sector enterprises
are approaching their work. However, if one listened carefully to what they
were saying, I think that it was evident that sometimes the mandate under
which they are operating is not that clear. I do not blame them for this. I
think that constant media pressure and diverse political and economic
pressures are responsible.

For instance, we are often asking these sector managers to make their
enterprises more profitable. As a means, perhaps, of ensuring greater
efficiency, compelling greater financial transparency, removing hidden or
sometimes wasteful practices, this kind of injunction to be profitable
might have its place. But public enterprises are not private enterprises.
Their great value is precisely that they are able to go where the market
dare not go or where the market fails.

We need to be careful not to mindlessly apply private-sector performance
targets that are entirely unsuitable for the kind of social and economic
service that we expect from public enterprises. Making Transnet, Spoornet
or Metrorail profitable can easily lead to the fragmentation of services
and the shutting down of branch lines or critical social services, to the
overall detriment of the private sector economy itself, which depends on
workers getting to work or moving around the country effectively.

The Department of Transport thinks that something like 35% of South
Africans are stranded as they simply have no access whatsoever to any kind
of transport. Those of us who use cars are lucky to have access to some
form of transport. Some 20% of us rely on trains. We need, I think, to
understand that it is important to increase the number of people who are
commuting by rail. We have to hold onto those figures that we already have.
We need to make their trips safer, better and a more efficient experience.
But we also need to expand the number of people using rail.

Rail is environmentally much better and more friendly than any other mode
of transport. It is much more economical, especially in a country that has
to import oil using dollars in a situation where the rand, in any medium
perspective, is not likely to increase its value against the dollar.
Enhancing rail travel is also the answer to city freeways that are
increasingly clogged up and gridlocked. When it works as it should, rail
travel is the safest, most reliable mode of mass transport.

However, to move towards the rail commuter system that our country deserves
and desperately needs requires serious funding commitments. Even in the
most developed countries there is a recognition that sustained public
subsidies for commuter rail are essential for the overall productivity and
competitiveness of the economy. Our own Government's recent commitments to
major infrastructural development, attention to the microeconomy and to
reducing input costs throughout the economy are important, if still
general, steps in the right direction.

Hopefully this debate will contribute to focusing much better public
attention and public commitment throughout South Africa on having an
effective public sector commuter rail system. We need to get commuter rail
back on track. [Applause.]

Mr J H SLABBERT: Madam Speaker, although the issue under discussion has
been building up for a while, the IFP wishes to make its position very
clear: The IFP condemns the Pretoria and Park or Johannesburg station
vandalism in the strongest possible terms. The perpetrators lacked
patriotism and respect for law and property. They should be apprehended and
punished severely.

In the same breath the IFP wishes to say that there must be something
terribly wrong in the state of Denmark which has caused these criminal
acts. Therefore, a thorough investigation is needed. Those in management
should also not be spared: their actions should be carefully scrutinised.
The new South Africa cannot tolerate management that lacks sensitivity to
the needs and problems of the people.

There are two problems. Firstly, human unwillingness to deal with the
sudden crowds waiting to catch the last train. We continue to want to
control instead of engaging. It is a shame that we still do not see the
positive results of negotiations. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Madam Speaker, is the hon member prepared to take a
question?

Mr J H SLABBERT: Madam Speaker, I only take questions from normal people.
[Interjections.]

At Park Station the steps leading to the platform were totally inadequate
for the volume of traffic. Yet it was said that Park Station was a model
station. Metrorail even suggested that they have been giving attention to
the smooth flow of people. It is clear to us that consumers' needs were not
being met. Bureaucracy, operating at a level removed from the lives of the
daily commuters, prevented the right step being implemented timeously.

So what have we learned from this very unfortunate issue. Firstly, that
public transport is not sensitive enough to the needs of commuters. Public
transport has not been transformed to the level where it ought to be.
Secondly, a commission of inquiry should hear the inputs and direct
participation of commuters through their representatives. Planning for
commuters without their direct involvement is not the South African way and
is definitely not in the spirit of the African Renaissance.

The IFP supports the proposal that we do things in the spirit of the new
South Africa: transparency, accountability and involvement must prevail.
That is the way forward.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, your voices are too loud. Please,
hon members, the member is trying to address us. Please continue, hon
member.

Mr J H SLABBERT: Madam Speaker, I want the House to take what I am going to
say now as very constructive criticism. National public transport in South
Africa has too many masters. There are too many bulls in one ring. It may
be that a single line of authority needs to be established to achieve a
sharp focus on all relative matters concerning national transport. National
public transport, as such, needs to be placed under the authority of only
one Minister. All national transport problems of whatever nature need to
receive undivided attention. That is why a single line of authority is so
necessary.
Dr W A ODENDAAL: Madam Speaker, the Mbeki Government is riddled with
corruption and rotten with fraud. One only needs to read the weekend
newspapers to come to this conclusion. The latest statistic leads to the
logical deduction that transformation simply means nepotism and cronyism,
resulting in plush jobs for the fortunate elite in the circle of the ANC
only. The Minister of Transport is leading the way in these unacceptable
labour practices. The point is: To what extent does this kind of nepotism
and corruption occur within the transport system, including Metrorail? We
in the DA plan to find that out and root it out. I think that the DA must,
from now on, also withdraw its support for black economic empowerment.

Also as far as commuter rail services are concerned, I am informed that not
a single tender in the passenger bus industry is awarded on merit any
longer. Tenders are now to be negotiated. Can you believe it? It must
include some or other version of black economic empowerment which will
enrich some or other member of the elite in the circle of the ANC. The
tragedy is that the poor always get neglected, and the question is whether
the same thing happens to tenders awarded within Metrorail. The DA intends
to find that out and to root it out.
Die ANC regering het sedert 1994 die spoorstelsel van Suid-Afrika sodanig
verwaarloos dat 'n agterstand van R25 miljard reeds opgebou is in die
instandhouding van die bestaande infrastruktuur van die spoorstelsel
alleen. Wat nog gepraat van nuwe ontwikkeling. Binne 15 jaar is alles
vernietig as iets nie dringend daaraan gedoen word nie.

Waar is al die geld heen? Dit is gebruik om die elite binnekring van die
ANC verder op die soustrein te laat ry, en vir die President van Suid-
Afrika 'n nuwe straler te koop wat strate beter, luukser en groter is as
enige-iets anders waarmee ander Afrikahoofde ooit sal kan
spog.[Tussenwerpsels.]

Waarom is daar skandalig min geld aan die instandhouding van die
spoorstelsel te bestee? Die voorstedelike treinstelsel is reeds so vervalle
dat geen treindrywer vandag meer seker is dat sy mankoliekige trein betyds
sal kan vertrek nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit maak dat mense gereeld laat kom,
en dat hulle hul werk verloor. Metrorail kan nie meer 'n betroubare diens
aan sy passasiers lewer nie.

Vandalisme vier ook hoogty. Selfs die luidsprekerstelsels op die stasies
word afgesteel sodat spoorgebruikers maar moet raai waarom hulle treine
laat is, en indien wel, wanneer hulle sal vertrek. Geen wonder hulle raak
gefrustreerd nie. Die vraag is ook of Suid-Afrika se spoorgebruikers nie
iets vir die Mbeki regering wil s√™ nie. Is die afbrand van die Pretoriase
stasie die skrif aan die muur vir die ANC? Verstaan hulle wat daar geskryf
staan?

Die DA sal, wanneer ons aan bewind kom, onmiddellik die nodige
rekapitalisasieprogram in werking stel om die ganse vervoerstelsel in Suid-
Afrika weer vlot op dreef te kry, insluitende die voorstedelike
treindienste, sodat ons ekonomie ongehinderd kan groei, sodat mense weer
werk kan kry en sodat hulle weer betyds by hulle werk kan kom. Ons sal
dadelik 'n spoorwegpolisiestelsel in werking stel om vandalisme uit te roei
sodat pendelaars weer veilig kan treinry, en sodat daar effektief met hulle
gekommunikeer kan word.

Die DA kan 'n bloeiende ekonomie met 'n goeie vervoerstel aan Suid-Afrika
lewer. Ons is Afrodemokrate wat glo aan 'n markekonomie wat deur
ongehinderde privaatinisiatief en entrepreneurskap aangedryf word. Die siel
van ons ekonomiese beleid is Ubuntu: barmhartigheid en deernis vir mense
wat swaarkry: die armes, die siekes, die oues en die werkloses ...
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Since 1994 the ANC Government has neglected the railway system of South
Africa to such an extent that a backlog of R25 billion has already
developed in the maintenance of the existing infrastructure of the railway
system alone. We have not even mentioned new development. Within 15 years
everything will have been destroyed if something is not done about this
urgently.

Where did all the money go? It was used to allow the elite inner circle of
the ANC to ride the gravy train further, and to purchase a new jet for the
President of South Africa which is streets ahead of, more luxurious and
larger than anything other African heads of state will ever be able to
boast of. [Interjections.]

Why is there disgracefully little money to spend on the maintenance of the
railway system? The suburban railway system is already in such a state of
disrepair that no train driver today is certain that his rickety train will
be able to depart on time. [Interjections.] This results in people being
late for work on a regular basis and they then lose their jobs. Metrorail
cannot deliver a reliable service to its passengers any longer.

Vandalism is also reigning supreme. Even the loudspeakers at the stations
are being stolen so that commuters have to guess why their trains are late
and if so, when they will depart. No wonder they are becoming frustrated.
The question is also whether South African railway commuters do not want to
say something to the Mbeki government. Is the burning down of the Pretoria
station the writing on the wall for the ANC? Do they understand what is
written there?

When we come into office, the DA will immediately put the necessary
recapitalisation programme into operation to get the entire transport
system in South Africa running smoothly again, including the suburban train
services, so that our economy can grow unhindered, so that people can once
again find work and so that they can get to work on time. We will
immediately put a railway policing system into operation to combat
vandalism so that commuters can once again travel by train safely and so
that we can communicate with them effectively.
The DA can deliver a thriving economy with a good transport system to South
Africa. We are Afro-democrats who believe in a market economy driven by
unhindered private initiative and entrepreneurship. The soul of our
economic policy is Ubuntu: charity and compassion for people who are
struggling: the poor, the ill, the elderly and the unemployed ...
[Interjections.]]

... not only the inner circle of the ANC, but for all the people.
[Interjections.]

Ons glo dat 'n goeie vervoerstelsel 'n voorwaarde is vir 'n gesonde
ekonomie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Een van die redes waarom Suid-Afrika se
ekonomie lyk soos dit lyk is dat die ANC gemors het met die vervoerstelsel
van Suid-Afrika. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hulle het die geld gemors op die rykes
wat vandag binne die ANC se binnekring sit. [Tussenwerpsels.] D√≠t is waar
daardie geld heengegaan het ... [Tussenwerpsels.] ... plaas dat dit
gespandeer is om die vervoerstelsel te verbeter, en om Suid-Afrika se
ekonomie te dien. [Tussenwerpsels.]

'n Gesonde vervoerstelsel is die olie wat die ratte van die ekonomie glad
laat loop. Dit is die staat se verantwoordelikheid om die infrastruktuur
vir 'n vervoerstelsel te voorsien en in stand te hou. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die
treinpendelaars wil aan die Minister van Vervoer iets s√™. Hy luister kamma,
maar hy hoor nie wat hulle s√™ nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We believe that a good transport system is a prerequisite for a sound
economy. [Interjections.] One of the reasons why South Africa's economy is
looking the way it is, is that the ANC Government tampered with the
transport system of South Africa. [Interjections.] They wasted the money on
the rich who are today sitting within the inner circles of the ANC.
[Interjections.] That is where the money went ... [Interjections] ...
instead of its being spent on improving the transport system and on serving
the South African economy.

A sound transport system is the oil which allows the gears of the economy
to run smoothly. It is the responsibility of the state to provide the
infrastructure for a transport system and to maintain it. [Interjections.]
The train commuters want to tell the Minister of Transport something. He is
ostensibly listening, but he does not really hear what they are saying.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, in the absence of the hon Tommy Abrahams, I
shall have to deliver his speech.

There are simply too many authorities involved in administering commuter
rail services - too many important people who are preoccupied with
analysing, planning, calculating and estimating. These important people
seem to have been selected to calculate the age of rolling stock and to
estimate the billions of rands that have to be budgeted to prevent the
imminent and total collapse of the rail commuter business.

Service to the commuter is left to the lesser folk to contend with. It is
not, after all, a priority for the important people to concern themselves
with addressing problems and affecting improvements that do not require
huge infusions of cash. The frustration of the commuter is not important.
Show me the executive who even listens to the frequent appeals of train
drivers for fences around stations and along lines to be fixed. In the
career of a train driver, on average the driver will see more than 30
people die under his or her train's wheels. However, this is not a big
ticket item and, therefore, not considered urgent. Neither is the
frustration of the driver or the commuter taken into account.

On a study tour two weeks ago, the kind of service that was on offer was
seen. People streamed onto dirty station platforms, which were devoid of
any train timetables. They entered a train to wait like animals to be
carted off. There was no communication over the sound system to inform the
commuters of a delay in departure. They simply had to sit and wait.
Commuters spoken to were puzzled about this issue of announcements. They
did not know about sound systems at the railway station. No important
official seemed to care about the existing communication system that is
deficient. Too inexpensive a problem to solve. After all, the commuters
need rail more than rail needs the commuters.

Frequent delays in train departures cost commuters their jobs. The lack of
security on trains raises unnecessary anxieties and fears. Our very
important executives prefer to pay R40¬†000 to replace the stolen aluminium
doors on one passenger coach than to pay squads of security people to focus
on catching hoodlums who destroy trains and make travelling unsafe and
unpleasant for commuters. The Minister of Transport and the Cabinet are
aware of the fact that millions of rands are urgently needed to make up for
the decades of neglect of our precious rail commuter services. They will
have to answer if they ignore this need.

It is time for the army of executives of the various rail authorities to
move their focus to the smaller, equally important and less expensive
improvements in services that can be brought about. Otherwise, they will
continue to risk the ire of commuters. Anxiety and frustration caused the
destruction of Pretoria station. Poor administration and bad planning,
together with frustration, resulted in all the other recent rail incidents.
It is time to knuckle down and change attitudes. [Applause.]

Mrs B TINTO: Madam Speaker, one of the most serious challenges confronting
us on passenger trains is the problem of crime and vandalism. Rail, in
theory, is the safest and cheapest mode of transport.

If we are going to save money, reduce huge numbers of cars on our roads and
provide decent transport to millions of rail commuters, then we need to
make sure that train commuting is safe and secure. At present it is not the
case. Serious violence, armed robbery and rape of commuters happen in the
trains, sometimes in full view of other commuters. Some of these problems,
while being widespread, happen here in the Cape Metrorail system. Gangs
make their way through carriages and steal from passengers, especially
jewellery from the ladies. To counter this problem, the SA Rail Commuter
Corporation has begun to introduce windows that cannot be opened. This can
have other disadvantages.

A second category of criminal activity relates to the theft of material
from trains. Aluminium from carriage windows and sliding doors is removed,
sometimes whilst the train is in motion. Cable theft is also taking place
every day and this delays trains and impacts on the safety of the system.
Another problem is sheer vandalism - tearing up of seats, defacing station
walls and even arson, like the recent burning of two carriages on the East
Rand, not to mention the burning down of Pretoria station.

There is also widespread fare evasion on the Metrorail and main line
passenger service. One common method of fare evasion is to wait on the
bridges until the last minute before a train departs, and suddenly rush
onto the platform, creating confusion. Some commuters are crushed by trains
while running on the tracks because they have no ticket for the train.

Okwenzeke ePitoli ngowe-19 kuFebruwari akwamkeleki konke, konke. Nokuba
umntu sele enomsindo, engakwazi ukuzibamba, ayikho into ethi makawukhuphele
ekutshiseni amaziko kaRhulumente umsindo atshise isitishi sikaloliwe ngenxa
yokuba uloliwe elibazisekile.

Xa kukho isiphene ekusebenzeni kwezibane zokulawulwa, oololiwe
bayalibaziseka, beme esithubeni, ngelinye ixesha abantu bengazi ukuba
kwenzeka ntoni na. Xa inokungasiwa so loo nto iya kudala umonakalo omkhulu.
Kukudelela uRhulumente nokungahloniphi okukhulu okubangela ukuba abantu
batshise izinto zakhe.

Saya kuzibonela okwenzeke ePitoli sikunye noMnu. Dullah Omar, uMphathiswa
wezoThutho, neKomiti. Akwamkeleki nokuba sele kukho ingcaciso, okokuba
kusetyenziswe izigidi ezingama-R30 ngenxa yabantu abanomsindo.

Enye into enokuba lilinge ekuzameni ukusombulula le ngxaki ngamapolisa.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[What happened in Pretoria on 19 February is not acceptable at all. No
matter how angry one is, nothing should drive one to vent one's anger by
setting fire to Government property and burning down a station because a
train has been delayed.

When there is a signal failure, trains are delayed, or they stop on the
way, and sometimes people will not even know what is happening. If this
problem is not addressed, more damage will be caused. It is sheer
disrespect for the Government that causes people to set fire to its
property.

Mr Dullah Omar, the Minister of Transport, the Committee and I went to see
the damage. It is totally unacceptable, even though there might be an
explanation, that a sum of R30 million will have to be spent because of
angry people.

Another thing that could help to solve this problem is the police.]

As part of the transformation of the Police Service in our country, the old
railway police service has been disbanded. There are probably good reasons
for this, but it has left a gap. In some cases, such as here in Cape Town,
a special unit of the SAPS was deployed to the Metrorail network. The
deployment of 1 600 police had a very positive impact on the safety of
passengers, bringing down the level of crime significantly. However, as one
of its first decisions, the new DA-controlled municipality has announced
its intention to withdraw 1 300 of these officers.

This is a disastrous decision. There have been complaints from the public
and from the police themselves, and even the DA's own provincial MEC for
Safety, Hennie Bester, appears to have been caught off-guard. If we are to
talk about the mismanagement of rail services, then that is surely a
glaring example. The ANC calls for the immediate reversal of this decision
by the DA-controlled municipality.

This is not to say that there have not been many serious problems with
security on trains, even when the police are present. We will never be able
to secure each and every compartment, but there should at least be visible
policing on our trains.

There is no lasting solution to the problem, but the community, as well,
needs to assist. There are commuter forums which the community can also use
when there are problems with trains. There are rail commuter forums, such
as those in the Western Cape. There are coaches in which the gospel is
preached. Those are coaches the gangs do not board, because the people look
after themselves. This is what we need in order to assist the Government,
and we should not expect the Government to do everything for us.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, the ACDP does not condone the recent
actions by commuters at Pretoria and Park Stations, and believes that those
responsible should take full responsibility for their actions. The
punishment should not be a token one, but should fit the seriousness of the
crime. The question we must ask ourselves, however, is: Why are some
commuters this angry?

These action sadly reflect the pent-up feelings of anxiety and frustration
experienced by commuters around the country who have the daily added stress
of constant delays, security guard strikes, no protection from criminal or
other elements, poor infrastructure, frequent occurrences of fatal rail-
related accidents, and insufficient and poorly trained rail personnel.
Irresponsible security guards who lock gates 10 minutes before departures
are just one example of this, and train control officers failing to comply
with standard safety rules are another.

To add insult to injury, a Spoornet spokesperson stated on March 4 that the
company had no plans to improve security measures at the station and that
as far as they were concerned security was sufficient.

Must the people of South Africa continue to suffer and die by reason of yet
another relatively controllable circumstance? Commuters are calling on
Government to urgently put in place measures which will ensure passenger
safety.

Some commuters are saying that trains are now as deadly as taxis. Patricia
Mlaba of Central Western Jabavu said and, I quote:


  We are just waiting for our day to die while commuting on trains. We
  survived the train violence in the 90s and now there are accidents every
  day.

It is time for Metrorail and Spoornet to take stock and take action, as
commuters are convinced that they are not doing enough to prevent accidents
and ensure their safety. It is in all our interests to address this
situation, which makes South Africans and visitors alike apprehensive about
commuting, to say the least. Although we are pleased that the Minister of
Transport, Minister Dullah Omar, has promised action to ensure that
conditions at stations improve, South Africans are eagerly awaiting
evidence of these improvements. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, as 'n mens met enige van die
treinpendelaars gesels oor wat so 'n persoon elke dag deurmaak: eers van sy
huis af, dan in die trein, dan in die taxi om by die werk te kom en dan
weer terug, kan jy nie anders as om begrip te h√™ vir hulle frustrasies nie.
Die vraag is egter wanneer is die frustrasies hoog genoeg dat 'n mens 'n
gebou mag afbrand. Die antwoord: nooit nie. In 'n beskaafde, demokratiese
land is die antwoord dat 'n mens nooit geregverdig is om dit te doen nie.
Die volgende vraag is: is die probleem nou opgelos as ons enkele individue
aankla, en hulle skuldig bevind dat hulle die brand gestig het by die
Pretoriase stasie? Beslis nie. Die gedrag van die skare tydens die
brandstigting, en daarna, moet ook nog verklaar word om te weet wat presies
daar gebeur het.

Die skare het die brandstigting luidkeels goedgekeur, en telkens gejuig as
byvoorbeeld 'n deel van die dak ingeval het. Die vraag wat ek myself afvra
is hoekom het die skare dit gedoen? Ek het net een verklaring daarvoor, en
dit is, as 'n mens 'n studie maak van revolusies, sal jy sien dat tydens
die revolusie die massas opgesweep word teen die vyand, of teen 'n
skynvyand. Na die revolusie voltooi is, is die groot probleem van die
revolusion√™re leiers om die massas te kry om hulle AK-47's en hulle
petrolbomme te b√™re, en hulle kosblikke te neem en van nege tot vyf te gaan
werk. Dit is bitter moeilik vir die leiers om daardie omskakeling te maak.
Na die Franse revolusie kon die leiers nie daarin slaag nie. Die revolusie
het aangegaan totdat Robespierre se kop af was. In Iran, na die Sjah onthef
is, het hulle naderhand die Amerikaners gegryp om 'n vyand te kry.

Ek wil vir die ANC en die Regering s√™ dat hulle 'n groot
verantwoordelikheid het om aan die massas daarbuite te s√™ die revolusie is
verby. Die massas by die stasie het gejuig omdat hulle gedink het dat die
stasie nog aan iemand anders behoort. Dit behoort nog aan die vyand
daarbuite. Is die ANC 'n normale party, of is dit steeds 'n
bevrydingsbeweging? Sy retoriek het veroorsaak dat van die individue daar
waaarskynlik geglo het hulle was besig om een of ander revolusie aan te
help, of een of ander skynvyand aan te val. Dit is nie meer waar nie. Suid-
Afrika kan dit nie bekostig nie. Ons het nie geld om di√© soort van ding toe
te laat nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, if one talks to any train commuter about
what that person has to go through every day: first from his home, then in
the train, then in the taxi to reach his workplace and then back again, one
cannot but have understanding for their frustrations. However, the question
is when are the frustrations great enough that one may burn down a
building. The answer: never. In a civilised, democratic country the answer
is that one is never justified in doing that. The next question is: Has the
problem now been solved if we charge individuals, and find them guilty of
setting the fire at the Pretoria station? Certainly not. The behaviour of
the crowd during the setting of the fire, and thereafter, must also still
be explained in order to know what precisely happened there.

The crowd loudly approved the setting of the fire and cheered often, for
example when a portion of the roof collapsed. The question I ask myself is,
why did the crowd do that? I have only one explanation for this and that
is, if one studies revolutions one will see that during the revolution the
masses are incited against the enemy, or against an imagined enemy. Once
the revolution has been completed the primary problem of the revolutionary
leaders is to get the masses to put away their AK-47s and their petrol
bombs, and to take their lunch boxes and go to work from nine to five. It
is very difficult for the leaders to make that change. After the French
Revolution the leaders could not succeed in this. The revolution continued
until Robespierre was beheaded. In Iran, after the Shah was dethroned, they
eventually looked to the Americans to find an enemy.

I want to tell the ANC and the Government that they have a great
responsibility to tell the masses out there that the revolution is over.
The masses at the station cheered because they thought the station still
belonged to somebody else. It still belonged to the enemy out there. Is the
ANC a normal party or is it still a liberation movement? Its rhetoric has
resulted in some individuals probably believing that they were aiding some
or other revolution, or attacking some or other imagined enemy. That is no
longer true. South Africa cannot afford this. We do not have the money to
allow this sort of thing.]

Mr G E BALOI: Madam Speaker, the massive signal failure throughout Pretoria
and the fact that the communication system was reported out of order led to
the burning of the Pretoria Station on Monday, 19 February 2001. This is
uncalled for. If the communication system had been serviced regularly, the
tragic incident would not have occurred.

Imagine a situation in which 120 trains run daily in and out of Tshwane at
one time and then suddenly have to stop because of a signal failure. That
would cause havoc, if it were to happen. However, our passengers also
should be taught to have tolerance, especially when coming to their own
property. Pretoria Station was built in 1901 and it is our children's
museum and green heritage.

I am pleased that the Minister of Transport, Dullah Omar, undertook a trip
by train to get first-hand information and to see for himself what had
happened. We in the UCDP applaud the Minister for the efforts he made. The
fact-finding mission on both occasions revealed that it was caused by lack
of communication with passengers and the public, lack of security,
insufficient infrastructure and lack of a proper management structure.

Although the incidents are similar to one another, the second incident took
place on 2 March 2001 at 7pm. This was a second major incident within two
weeks. This also could have been avoided, and the lives of seven people,
including two children, could have been saved. For the information of hon
members, an escalator going down into the station which serves as an
alternative was also out of order when 300 commuters rushed to board a
train to Mafikeng. A security guard revealed that the escalator had been
out of order for two months.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the MF condemns the incident at the
Pretoria and Park Stations in Gauteng. The arson attack contributed to a
great loss to the public and put a dent in the Government's infrastructure
investment which was recently promised in the President's state of the
nation speech, all because of the past apartheid and group areas system.

The stampede at Park Station, which left seven people dead, leaves much to
be desired in terms of respect for a fellow human being. It is appalling to
note that individuals could stoop so low to get their way that they had no
regard for another individual or another's property.

The MF recommends that the rail system of transport be made more efficient
for the benefit of the public at large, so as to eliminate the frustration
of commuters whilst ensuring their safety, thus preventing the occurrence
of further incidents. According to Metrorail Regional Manager, Kris
Kilowan, vandalism is an ongoing thing, but this has been the worst thus
far, resulting in Metrorail running a scaled-down service of about 70% of
its normal capacity.

The MF supports the initiative of Minister of Transport, Dullah Omar, to
counteract this problem. It is especially commendable to note that the
Minister undertook a visit to Denneboom Station in Mamelodi to ensure that
the trains are comfortable, reliable, attractive, accessible and safe. He
will be meeting with all stakeholders in the rail sector, including
Transnet, Spoornet, Metrorail, the South African Rail Commuter Corporation
and Intersite to map out the way forward on how rail transport should be
operated effectively.

The MF agrees that priority should be given to the training of the security
personnel with regard to crisis management, and recommends that the public
be continuously informed on the steps taken to improve the quality of
commuter services.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, die AEB kan hom vereenselwig met al die
probleme wat hier geopper is omtrent die situasie van pendelaars en vervoer
in Suid-Afrika, en dit moet aangepak word. Ek het egter 'n groot probleem
met die debat vandag. ``The moral of the story is: burn a station, and get
a debate in Parliament,'' en daarmee kan ons nooit saamgaan nie.

Ons mag nie toelaat dat d√≠t die wyse van kommunikasie tussen die burgers en
die owerheid word nie. Die bevolking in Suid-Afrika mag nie die idee kry
die Regering luister net as die opsie van geweld en verwoesting uitgeoefen
word nie. Ek wil vra: wat sal gebeur as al die probleme, en daar is baie
probleme, en al die wanfunksionering, en daar is baie daarvan in hierdie
land en deur die Regering, op hierdie wyse gehanteer moet word? Ons kan in
di√© verband 'n navolgenswaardige voorbeeld noem. Die boere in Suid-Afrika,
wat tot die uiterste gedryf word deur plaasmoorde, het op ordelike wyse
protes aangeteken, soos ons gister in Thabazimbi gesien het. Daar was geen
vandalisme nie, niks is afgebrand nie, en daar was 'n duidelike en hoflike
verskoning van die organiseerders toe 'n joernalis onbillik deur enkelinge
behandel is.

Ons moet dit vir mekaar duidelik s√™: die dae dat Suid-Afrika se probleme
opgelos word ``with our tyres and our matches,'' is verby. Die vraag is,
wie het hierdie geweldskultuur geskep? In 1976 was die antwoord as jy 'n
probleem gehad het met die taal in die skool om klippe te gooi, en as jy in
2001 'n probleem het met treine wat laat kom, brand jy die stasie af. Die
ANC het oor dekades 'n klimaat vir revolusie geskep, en ons vra hulle om
hierdie klimaat van ``matches and tyres'' om te keer. Kom ons kry orde wat
hierdie saak betref.

Ironies genoeg het die afbrand van die stasie plaasgevind die dag voor die
begrotingsdebat. Die agb Minister het gepraat van die ``sweet fruits of
liberty'', maar dit word toe oorheers deur die ``bitter fruits of
anarchy'', wat 'n sterker sein uitstuur oor wat in Suid-Afrika aan die gang
is as die mooiste begroting. Vandalisme en verwoesting is nooit 'n
oplossing nie. Kom ons vertrou dat die reg sy loop sal neem in hierdie
ongelukkige saak, en pak terselfdertyd die probleme van die pendelaars
ernstig aan. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, the AEB can identify with all the problems
that were raised here regarding the situation of commuters and transport in
South Africa, which must be addressed. However, I have one big difficulty
with today's debate. The moral of the story is: ``Burn down a station and
get a debate in Parliament,'' and we could never associate ourselves with
that.

We should never permit this to become the manner of communication between
the citizens and the Government. South Africa's populace should not gain
the impression that the Government will only listen once the option of
violence and destruction has been exercised. If I may ask: what would
happen if all problems, and there are a lot of problems, and all instances
of malfunctioning, and there is a lot of that in this country and on the
part of the Government, were to be dealt with in this manner? In this
regard one can quote an example worthy of emulation. Farmers in South
Africa, currently deeply afflicted by farm murders, have registered their
protest in an orderly fashion, as we saw yesterday in Thabazimbi. There was
no vandalism, nothing was burnt down, and there was a clear and polite
apology from the organisers when a journalist was treated unfairly by
individuals.

We must tell each other clearly that the days of solving problems ``with
our tyres and our matches'' are a thing of the past. The question is: who
created this culture of violence? In 1976, if one had problems with the
medium of instruction used in schools, the answer was to throw stones, and
in 2001, if one has problems with trains that are running late, one burns
down the station. Over decades the ANC has created a climate for
revolution, and we are asking them to reverse this climate of ``matches and
tyres''. Let us restore order in this matter.

Ironically enough, the burning down of the station took place a day before
the Budget Speech was delivered. The hon the Minister talked about the
``sweet fruits of liberty'', but this was then dominated by the ``bitter
fruits of anarchy'', which sent out a stronger message about what is
happening in South Africa than the finest budget could have. Vandalism and
destruction are never a solution. Let us trust that justice will take its
course in this sad affair, and let us, at the same time, address the
problems of the commuters in earnest.]

Mr M H FAZZIE: Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, on 12
March the transport committee took a journey to Pretoria to go and see for
themselves the damage which we read about in the papers and heard about on
the radio.

Mabopane Station is divided into two parts. One part falls under Gauteng
province, and the other under the North West province. The Gauteng part of
Mabopane Station has been formalised, whilst the other part has not. The
unformalised part of the station is very dirty, full of empty plastic bags
and empty bottles. Tins and papers are all over the place. Hawkers have
illegally connected electricity cables from the Gauteng side which are
lying all over. General cleanliness is lacking and toilets are not properly
cleaned. It would seem hawkers on the Gauteng part of the station pay rent.

Facilities for the disabled are not available, and as a result things are
difficult for them. Security personnel are only visible on the first-class
coaches. Commuters' safety is questionable. The PA system is not working,
and train drivers do not have whistles, and as a result commuters are not
warned when the train is about to leave, and this is dangerous. Shacks have
been built next to the railway line, which leads to kids playing on the
railway line.

A lot of expense is caused because of drunkards walking on the railway
line. Lots of train drivers have been diagnosed with stress-related
illnesses as a result of these problems. Often a train that is supposed to
leave stands for a long time waiting for repairs because of stolen doors,
broken windows, etc. This becomes a problem which causes delays for
scheduled trains. Once a train has been delayed, commuters become
frustrated because they do not understand the cause of the delay. In order
to rectify the situation, the PA system should be used to communicate with
the commuters whenever there is a delay.

Regarding the Pretoria Station incident, a cable next to the small station
in Pretoria was damaged, and the train could not move because of that. That
delayed a number of trains, and unfortunately, it was peak hour when
commuters finished work. There were approximately 7 000 commuters in
Pretoria Station at that point in time, when about 200 commuters decided to
break doors and windows, and forced their way into the station where they
started the fire. The damage caused by the fire has been estimated at R30
million, and contractors are already engaged in cleaning up operations in
preparation for the construction.

Most commuters do not want to pay for their tickets. They wait until the
train arrives and then overpower the security guards. At Park Station there
was a stampede and seven people, including two children, were killed. To
correct the situation, the ticket examiners should be at the top of the
stairs to avoid a repetition of the incident. Commuters should arrive at
least an hour before the time to buy a ticket. The railway police service
should be reinstated. [Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Speaker, as part of this debate, I would like to deal
with the impact of the recent incidents at our stations and the
deteriorating condition of our urban rail commuter services on the tourism
industry.

My colleague Stuart Farrow spoke about the violence and disruption
associated with train hooliganism, and in addition, the unsafe working
conditions of Metrorail's train drivers. I want to elaborate further on
these issues. Firstly, there is the huge problem of violence and crime on
our trains. These matters are escalating daily. Commuters fear for their
lives and are subjected to constant abuse and violent acts, with little or
no protection from the state.

Tourists visiting our country, who have not been forewarned about these
problems, innocently board our trains only to experience a trip from hell.
No respect is shown to commuters who have paid for first-class tickets, and
end up having to be subjected to groups of drinkers and smokers using foul
abusive language. Many of these groups gain access to these carriages
without paying, and do the tourism industry untold damage.

One only has to travel on these coaches oneself and see the deteriorating
state of the carriages to realise that nobody cares anymore about the
standards. If doors and windows no longer function, how can a limited
number of platform personnel contain or stop access to these compartments
by would-be fare evaders?

The public transport system forms an important link between tourists
arriving either by air or sea to our cities and, in many instances, is the
only affordable means for tourists to get around our cities and points of
interest, especially for the growing backpackers industry. One bad
experience by a foreign tourist has endless repercussions for the industry,
as the affected party relays these poor images back home.
Metrorail needs to ensure that its privileges are not abused, and that
first-class customers are treated as such. Tourists visiting our country
are curious by nature, and witnessing burnt-out stations and coaches does
nothing for our image abroad. Despite the high level of frustration, we
cannot allow commuters to take the law into their own hands and burn and
destroy our valuable assets and infrastructure.

Pretoria Station is the embarkment and disembarkment point of our famous
Blue Train, and the burnt-out remains of this wonderful national monument
are an eyesore. The community at large needs to know the impact this has on
our tourism industry, and the opportunities lost to our economy. There is
no excuse for this sort of destructive behaviour, and we hope that the
perpetrators will be brought to book and made to pay for their actions.

I now turn to the second issue - that of offering a reliable and secure
rail service. My colleague alluded to the unsafe working conditions of
Metrorail train drivers. All of us, including tourists, put our trust in
the hands of train drivers and their controllers whom we believe to be
competent and well-trained in their fields of operation. A recent report
undertaken by Prof Le Roux revealed that many of our train accidents
occurred due to human error, mainly by train controllers failing to comply
with safety rules.

Nothing was said of the unsafe working conditions that train drivers are
exposed to every day. These include poor supervision under abnormal working
conditions, poor ergonomic condition of the driving cabs, long hours of
continuous driving in the same position, intoxifying odours, mainly of
dagga, coming into the driving cabs from passenger compartments, and
irregular shift-working patterns which result in fatigue and short rest
periods of eight hours between shifts. All these problems can be controlled
by the management of Metrorail, and would go a long way in making rail
travel safer and more efficient.

We therefore call on the Minister, firstly, to immediately institute an
official inquiry into the working conditions of train drivers, which
includes all role-players; secondly, to ensure the swift and urgent
piloting of the legislation on the Rail Safety Regulator through
Parliament; and thirdly, to investigate the immediate funding of rolling
stock and infrastructure improvement by Government or private sector
finance.

Unless this is done, there could be serious consequences for rail commuters
and the tourism industry as a whole. The time for action and not words is
now more necessary than ever before. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Speaker, hon members, I want to thank
those members who participated in this snap debate. There has, of course,
been a degree of party-politicking and point-scoring, as members have just
heard.

The hon Semple knows that those matters that she called on us to address
are already in the process of being addressed. She attends the portfolio
committee meetings in which reports have been given on the work that we are
doing. So, the call for action now is really a little out of place, but I
take it in the spirit in which it was made. Of course, I will ignore the
ranting and raving of the hon Odendaal who is still hankering after the
past. [Interjections.]

I think that we all share a common concern, except, of course, some members
on this side of the House who are too ignorant to understand that. We share
a common concern, namely, that the rail service is important, that the
service should be safe, efficient and reliable, that the service should be
extended wherever possible, and that everything possible should be done to
improve the current standard of service.

My department and I have worked very closely with the parliamentary
committees. We have encouraged structures responsible for rail and other
forms of transport to speak frankly at meetings of committees. We have
encouraged them to give information requested by political parties. My hope
is that whilst engaging in promoting our own party-political interests, we
will nonetheless find a way of working together to address South Africa's
needs and problems on the transport front. I want to express my thanks for
the co-operation and mutual respect which I have enjoyed in the Portfolio
Committee on Transport of this House.

In rail transport, we have the good and we have the bad. We have some good
basic infrastructure, our commuter rail service is the most inexpensive
mode of transport available to our people, and our commuter rail service
transports approximately 2,2 million people every day. Up to now, it has
served six major metropolitan areas in our country. Also, our institutional
arrangements over the years may have been adequate, but they need to be
looked at.

That is the good, but there is also the bad. Some of the problems are the
following: Firstly, the condition of our infrastructure has declined, and
there has been no adequate investment to ensure the maintenance of our
infrastructure, let alone its improvement; secondly, the rail signalling
system and rolling stock need to be replaced and, where appropriate,
upgraded; and thirdly, institutional arrangements need to be reviewed. One
aspect of this is the problem associated with the fact that the national
Department of Transport has one role, the Department of Public Enterprises
has another, Metrorail is the service provider and the SA Rail Commuter
Corporation is the responsible structure for contracting the services of
the service provider. It is a case of too many masters, as the hon Slabbert
mentioned.

However, there is a more serious problem in our current inherited
institutional arrangement, and that problem is the conflation or collapsing
or putting together, whatever one wants to call it, in one entity of the
functions of policy-making, operations and regulation. The more urgent
issue in this regard is that of safety. There are of course specific things
that we need to do to ensure maximum safety, such as improving
infrastructure, rolling stock, the signalling system, the purveys, better
management, training for personnel, adequate discipline, and addressing
human factors such as working hours and working conditions.

All these matters need to be addressed. However, the big institutional
change which is necessary is to separate regulations from operations, and
in particular to put into place a rail safety authority. All these matters,
as all hon members who serve on the portfolio committee know, are currently
being addressed.

On the question of safety we have secured the assistance of the Ghanaian
government. A special team involving role-players across the board has
looked at other international experiences. This team has now produced the
first draft of the legislation+ necessary to set up such a rail safety
authority. This draft is currently been refined and we will come to
Parliament shortly to obtain guidance before we proceed with the
legislation.

We are co-operating with the Department of Public Enterprises, Spoornet,
Metrorail and the SARCC to develop an implementation plan so that the
passing of the requisite legislation will result in the implementation of
the legislation as soon as possible. This is a mammoth task; it is entirely
new for our country. The structures, procedures and systems must be
developed and put in place. That is why the development of an
implementation plan is so important.

I am saying, therefore, that the setting-up of an independent rail safety
authority will go a long way towards addressing the many problems which we
are currently experiencing with regard to safety. The rail safety authority
will require service providers to submit their safety management plans
covering all issues relating to safety. Proper monitoring will be provided
for, with heavy penalties for failure to comply.

I do have details of all the accidents and incidents which have occurred,
including the Park Station and Pretoria incidents. Government deeply
regrets the loss of life which has occurred. We believe that lives lost
have been lost unnecessarily. Many families and individuals have suffered
unnecessarily. We are not just talking about it, we have met with Metrorail
and the SARCC, including Intersite which is responsible for South Africa's
stations, so as to ensure that immediate steps are taken to reduce the
possibility of a recurrence of the kind of tragedies which we have
witnessed.

We have asked that priority be given to two categories of issues. The first
category would involve, firstly, improving the signalling system; secondly,
addressing personnel-related matters such as training, discipline, working
hours and conditions; thirdly, dealing effectively with vandalism - I refer
here to the day-to-day vandalism which occurs and which costs our country
in the region of R1 million per month, leaving aside the big losses which
are associated with arson, for example; and fourthly, reviewing safety and
security on trains and at stations. Whilst we cannot solve all the problems
now, one can at least make a beginning to solve some of the problems, and
implement a process which will solve these problems soon. This is the one
category.
The second category of issues relates to taking steps to show our people
that we care and that we are doing our best, doing those little things that
will make train travel a little bit better. The SARCC and Metrorail always
do surveys of community views and attitudes. One of the more recent
responses to the surveys asks, for example, for simple improvements to be
made, which can be done without much delay.

For example, firstly, why are toilet doors at our stations often locked and
remain locked during the day? Why are many stations so dirty, smelly and
repulsive? Surely something can be done. Secondly, why are many stations so
drab and unattractive, not people friendly. Something can be done there
too. Thirdly, why can security and other personnel not be more civil
towards legitimate commuters?

Fourthly, why can we not have separate entry and exist facilities to and
from station platforms? These do not exist at certain busy stations.
Fifthly, why can we not improve communication with commuters at stations,
for example, by extending public address systems and ensuring that they are
in working order? Sixthly, why can we not involve local communities so that
they feel a sense of co-ownership of the facilities? After all, the
facilities do belong to them. Why do we not institutionalise to a greater
extent than before consultative processes throughout the country, as indeed
occurs in some areas?

Seventhly, why can we not take steps to ensure that trains run on time? The
view is that better micromanagement and planning can improve on the current
situation. Eighthly, how do we deal effectively with fare evasion and
ticket fraud? In other words, there are many little things which we can do
but which are being sacrificed on the altar of grand plans for the distant
future. And what we have asked of Metrorail and the SARCC is, firstly, to
address those little things now. They may be little to us, but to commuters
they are big things.

Of course, there are more fundamental, more general and more long-term
problems which must be addressed. Government has committed itself to ending
the neglect and decline of rail which we have witnessed for the past ten to
fifteen years. The President has, at the highest level, confirmed
Government's commitment to making rail transport the preferred mode, in
relation to both passenger transport and freight.
The question arises: How are we going to upgrade our infrastructure,
improve our rolling stock, and modernise our signalling system if we do not
have the resources? The commitment having come right from the top, I am
confident that with the presentation of an infrastructure development and
maintenance plan, we will be able, through the Treasury and the involvement
of the private sector, to address these problems systematically over the
next ten years.

As a first step, Treasury has already taken over the SARCC debt of R2,3
billion, thus relieving the SARCC from the burden of paying approximately
R300 million interest per year on their debt. That means that the savings
can be used to address infrastuctural needs. In addition, our budgetary
allocation, insufficient as many of us believe it may be, will also enable
us to have more space to address the problem than we had before. Of course
more money is needed, but all departments are crying for a bigger slice of
the cake and I have no doubt that over the next few years, more money will
be made available to address these problems.

One of our major problems, I believe, is the fact that local communities do
not always have a sense that the railways and railway facilities belong to
them. It is not the fault of commuters. It is the fault of Government, and
it is also the fault of our institutions, possibly the fault of this
Parliament, all of us, because we are responsible for that service
provision. Therefore, I have asked that considerable attention be given to
consultation with local communities to promote a feeling of co-ownership.

I have already referred to vandalism as a big problem. Safety on trains is
a problem to which I have also referred. Then, of course, law enforcement
is a major problem and we are committed to ensuring that law enforcement
takes place effectively at all levels at our stations, on our trains and
wherever law enforcement in transport is required.

These issues, our department, together with the provincial governments, has
already begun to address and we have requested our service providers to
consult with local communities everywhere through the commuter forums, so
as to ensure that together we can make rail transport safer for all the
people of our country. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I hope, hon Minister, that
with the support of Parliament you will be in a position to advance the
goals that you spoke of this afternoon.

Debate concluded.

      SPECIAL INVESTIGATING UNITS AND SPECIAL TRIBUNALS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Chairperson,
the principal aim of the Bill before the House is to bring a constitutional
... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I will not
tolerate your standing in the aisles and conversing. Hon Holomisa! As I
indicated before, if you have private business, please conduct it outside
the House. [Interjections.] Order! Could we now proceed with the business
that is before the House.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Chairperson,
the principal aim of the Bill before the House is to bring the Special
Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act of 1996 into line with the
Constitution of the Republic pursuant to the decision of the Constitutional
Court in South African Association of Personal Injury Lawyers v Heath and
Others, in which the court considered the constitutionality of the
appointment of a Judge or an Acting Judge of the High Court under section
3(1) of the Act, as the head of a Special Investigating Unit. As the law
stands, the head of a Special Investigating Unit - such as the one that is
currently headed by the honourable Judge Willem Heath, who was appointed as
such under Proclamation R24 of 14 March 1997 - must be a Judge or an Acting
Judge of the High Court, a feature of the Act which the Constitutional
Court adjudged to be in violation of the Constitution.

The Court, as hon members will remember, held that the appointment of a
judge to head a special investigating unit in particular violated the
separation of powers - an unwritten principle which, nonetheless,
constitutes part of the core of our constitutional system. The Court
stressed the importance of the separation of the judiciary from the other
branches of Government, and the need for courts to be and to be seen to be
independent of the legislature and the executive so that they can discharge
their duty of ensuring that the limits to the exercise of public power are
not transgressed.

This separation of powers prevents the legislature and the executive from
requiring judges to perform nonjudicial functions that are incompatible
with judicial office, and which are not appropriate to the central mission
of the judiciary and prohibits judges from undertaking such functions.

The national executive and Parliament, acting in the bona fide belief that
the problem of rampant corruption and maladministration that plagues our
nascent democracy requires the adoption of special measures, enacted the
principal Act, established the current Special Investigating Unit and
appointed Judge Heath as its head. I think it is appropriate to refer to
paragraph 36 of the Constitutional Court's judgment, where the Court
stated:


  Judge Heath has not intruded into the affairs of the executive at his own
  instance. The legislature made provision for the appointment in the Act
  and the executive, through the President, requested Judge Heath to accept
  the appointment. I have no doubt that in accepting the appointment, the
  first respondent acted in what he perceived to be the national interest.
  The fact, however, that all involved acted in good faith and in what they
  perceived to be the interest of the country, does not make lawful
  legislation or conduct that is inconsistent with the separation of powers
  required by the Constitution.

Of particular note in this regard was the Court's observation in paragraph
38 of the judgment that, and I quote:


  The functions that the head of the SIU has to perform are executive
  functions that, under our system of government, are ordinarily performed
  by the police, members of the staff of the National Prosecuting Authority
  or the State Attorney. They are inconsistent with judicial functions as
  ordinarily understood in South Africa.

As can be seen, the Bill, with consequential amendments, contains a
straightforward measure aimed at enabling the President to appoint a fit
and proper person, who will not be a Judge, as the head of a Special
Investigating Unit. It has been brought to my attention that some members
of this House and their parties would be happier if specific provision was
made to the effect that the incumbent, who may no longer be a Judge, is
independent in addition to the requirements proposed in clause 1(a) of the
Bill. However, it is my considered view that this is not necessary.
Independence is implied in the requirement that the incumbent would have to
be a fit and proper person, a person of integrity who is conscientious and
experienced.

Moreover, the amendments which the Bill is seeking to effect to the
principal Act should not be viewed in isolation. The Bill represents the
beginning of what I envisage will comprise a more comprehensive review of
the Act. The Constitutional Court referred to a number of aspects regarding
the functioning of a Special Investigating Unit, some of which have in the
past received the attention of the High Courts and the Special Tribunal,
notably in the matters of Konyn and others v Special Investigating Unit,
Toto v Special Investigating Unit and others, and Athimoolan Nadasen v
Special Investigating Unit and others. These matters are presently
receiving my department's attention and, when we are ready, I will
introduce further amendments to the Act in order to ensure that it conforms
fully to our constitutional dispensation.

Certain other matters pertaining to the principles underlying the Act also
deserve to be revisited, for example the perception that any particular
unit is a semipermanent institution with an open brief; the issuing of a
proclamation in respect of each and every matter to be investigated by the
Special Investigating Unit; and areas of duplication between the work of a
Special Investigating Unit and that of the Auditor-General, the Public
Protector, the National Commissioner of the South African Police Service or
the National Prosecuting Authority.

I believe that we will gain further valuable insight into these matters in
the process of rationalising and, to some extent, wrapping up the work of
the existing Special Investigating Unit. This process is presently underway
under the able leadership of Adv Jan Henning, a Special Director of Public
Prosecutions, whose report I have publicly undertaken to table in this
House in due course.

Lastly, I do not think that anybody in this House will dispute the fact
that the current Special Investigating Unit has - with limited resources,
may I say - done a lot of good work under the stewardship of Judge Heath.
It was in the light of this that I averred in my affidavit, which served
before the Court, that it was necessary to have a Judge appointed as head
of such a unit because the view was held that a judge would not only
possess the necessary integrity but also the requisite skills, experience
and expertise to perform the functions envisaged by the Act.

I would like to extend my gratitude to Judge Heath for his personal
contribution and his renowned passionate dedication to the cause of
combating maladministration and corruption. I would also like to
congratulate the members of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development who, under the very able leadership of their
chairperson, Adv Johnny de Lange, expeditiously dealt with the Bill in
their usual competent manner, as seen from the amendments effected thereto.
[Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN-KOTA: Mr Chairperson, Adv Johnny de Lange is not here today
and he sent me in his place. I see some people are cheering. I rise, as he
would have done, in unconditional support of this Bill as I did when we
passed the principal Act that we are today amending.

The Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act is the Act that
created what has commonly come to be known as the Heath commission.
However, this is no ordinary commission in the sense that we understand
commissions of inquiry. This is a unique instrument, the like of which
knows no comparison internationally. Unlike a commission of inquiry, the
Special Investigating Unit does not merely investigate in terms of a given
mandate and report its findings to the executive. Very often, governments
reject findings of commissions of inquiry, and no further action is taken.
This structure is not that kind of commission, and it is therefore wrong to
impute the qualities of an ordinary commission of inquiry to it.

I read with some interest the Hansard of the original debate in October
1996, when some of us were still very young. [Interjections.] The then
Minister of Justice, when introducing the debate on the principal Act, said
the following, and I would like to paraphrase what he said. He said that
ordinary commissions of inquiry for the purposes of fighting corruption
would be unsuitable. That is why we decided to create the Special
Investigating Units and Special Tribunals so that, unlike commissions of
inquiry which only have the power to make recommendations, this instrument
would have the power to investigate together with the power to make court
orders.

So, we have created a structure that is meant to be triggered in a similar
way to a commission of inquiry, but unlike a commission of inquiry, the SIU
is equipped to recover lost state assets quickly and efficiently. It does
this by instituting civil action in a special tribunal, which is a court
dedicated to this function. In this way, we are able quickly and easily to
process what would otherwise be lengthy civil applications.

There are no equivalent structures, and nowhere else in the world has a
government given away its right to referral and ultimate decision-making in
such a dramatic way. Much of the recent media coverage around the SIU has
focused attention away from Government's underlying commitment to fight
corruption and has focused on the sensationalist aspects of it. This kind
of reporting, I believe, stems from a lack of appreciation for the true
nature of the structure.

During our deliberations on this amending Bill, the DA raised the issue of
independence, as the Minister has stated. I hope that they have since
refined their argument, but this was an issue, unfortunately, that could
find no favour. The reason for this is that it, too, stems from a
fundamental lack of appreciation for the nature of the SIU.

For us really to understand how different these SIUs are, we would need to
go back to the principal Act that we unanimously passed in this House in
1996. In terms of the Act, the President appoints the unit or refers
matters to the unit whenever he or she deems it necessary. This is done by
a presidential proclamation which must set out the terms of reference of
the SIUs as the President may deem necessary. Furthermore, the President
may at any time amend a proclamation issued by him or her. From time to
time, as directed by the President, the unit must report on progress made
in the investigation with a further provision that, on conclusion of the
investigation, the unit must submit a final report to the President.

Evidence regarding the commission of a criminal offence must be referred to
the relevant prosecuting authority. So, what we had in mind at the time
that we passed this Act, was not to create yet another independent
structure such as the ones that we already have under Chapter 9 of our
Constitution, in respect of institutions such as the Public Protector, etc.
We did not want to duplicate those institutions. We also did not want to
duplicate the functions of the Office for Serious Economic Offences and the
National Prosecuting Authority, so the unit has no criminal jurisdiction.
We wanted a quick and effective mechanism which would civilly recover state
assets lost through illicit means and I think, by and large, that we have
succeeded in this quest.

Now, from what I have just said, it is quite clear that the SIUs are
instruments of the executive. The unit, as it stands now, is certainly not
independent of the executive branch, even though the executive, as I have
stated, has empowered the unit not only to investigate, but to take the
necessary legal action to effect its findings without immediate recourse to
the executive. But no one should be under the illusion that this unit is
anything but a tool of the executive. It is precisely for this reason that
the Constitutional Court concluded that for a member of the judiciary to
head the SIU violated the principal of separation of powers on which our
constitutional dispensation is based.

The DA then suggested in our deliberations that any incumbent to this
office should be required to be independent-minded. We preferred the word
``integrity'', which is used in the sense that it conveys, in a more
encompassing manner, the qualities of fairness and honesty and the notion
that the incumbent's character should be above reproach. It is left to me
to assure this House that we are concerned that the person who heads this
unit should be all of the things that I have just mentioned.

To those people who still harbour some discomfort with regard to the
exclusion of judicial leadership of the SIU, let me point out that, as the
Minister has said, in argument before the Constitutional Court on this
matter, the state stressed that, given the nature and ambit of the tasks
which the unit would necessarily be required to perform, a judge would not
only have the necessary skills to perform the functions envisaged by the
Act, but would also possess the necessary integrity. In his response, the
President of the Constitutional Court said:


  I accept that the head of the SIU should be a person of integrity, but
  judges are not the only persons with that attribute.

I think there is some wisdom in those remarks, and I think that those
people who still harbour that discomfort I have spoken about should ponder
those words.

Finally, let me say that I very sincerely hope that we in this House can
once again unanimously pass a crime-fighting Bill. It is important that
whoever is appointed to head this structure is seen to have the unstinting,
unwavering and unreserved support of all the parties in this House. I think
it will stand us all in good stead. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Mr Chairperson, I think it is time that the DA spoke for
itself. [Interjections.] On the face of it, what we are debating here is a
technical amendment to the Special Investigating Units and Special
Tribunals Act, Act 74 of 1996, necessitated, as the Minister has said, by
the judgment of the Constitutional Court to the effect that a judge may not
be the head of a Special Investigating Unit because of the constitutionally
guaranteed separation of powers.

Now, the DA respects the Constitutional Court's decision and certainly
supports the desirability of passing an amendment to ensure that a judge
cannot be appointed. However, not by any stretch of the ANC's imagination
on the subject of Judge Heath is this what this debate is really about. In
the first instance, it is about whether this Government is serious about
fighting and eradicating corruption. The importance of this issue was
thrown into high relief by the allegation in the Sunday Times this weekend
of possible improper conduct around the R43 billion arms deal involving the
Chief Whip of this Parliament, the hon Tony Yengeni.

The way the governing party has approached this Bill and dealt with the
issue of who to appoint instead of a judge is not reassuring.
[Interjections.]

Mr T M GONIWE: Mr Chairperson, when we dealt with motions, the Speaker
brought to the attention of this House the fact that the matter that the
member is referring to is a matter which is being dealt with by Parliament,
and therefore we were barred from pronouncing on this issue ...
[Interjections] ... or referring to it. [Interjections.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Mr Chairperson, I think that is a complete misunderstanding
and incorrect interpretation of the Speaker's ruling. It was in relation to
members bringing motions to the House on that particular matter. It did not
relate to references, for example, in this context. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Would you please take your
seat, Mrs Camerer. I think that while Mr Andrews is correct in the sense
that at the time when the Speaker was taking motions she, within the
context of the motions, indicated that no further reference should be made
to this issue, it is fit and proper that we should look at this in a
broader context. If it was inappropriate at the time of the motions, it
cannot now be appropriate in another debate at a later stage on the same
day.

So I would like to rule that, in keeping with what the Speaker indicated
this afternoon, this matter that relates to the hon Tony Yengeni, is being
addressed in certain ways by this Parliament. It would not be appropriate
to bring in remarks on this subject which cannot in any way contribute to
what is already underway. So I would like to request that remarks be
withdrawn and that no further reference be made to this during today's
debate.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, basically I was just trying to build my
argument, but you can regard my comments as not having been said.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I will take another point of
order from the hon Mr Andrews.

Mr K M ANDREWS: Chairperson, I would just like to draw a distinction.
Normally the rule of this House is that a matter before a committee of
Parliament is not debated in the House. In that context, since this has
been referred to the Ethics Committee, the Speaker ruled that one should
not come with motions which would suggest that one is about to debate the
matter. But, equally, it is common knowledge that in respect of the R43
billion arms deal, there are a range of issues that are being investigated.
In fact this House and a committee of this House, requested an
investigation by a variety of authorities.
There has also been a great deal of controversy as to whether the Special
Investigating Unit need or need not be part of this investigation. In that
context and in the context of the R43 billion arms deal, surely a reference
to one of the elements of the allegations in that regard has nothing to do
with the Ethics Committee of Parliament because it is a separate matter
which relates to the investigation as proposed by the Public Accounts
Committee. In that context and not in the context of the parliamentary
ethics, I believe, with respect, that the Chair should consider allowing
references, as long as they do not range too wide in that regard, to be
made.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the Speaker also
made reference to another important and fundamental principle, namely the
presumption of innocence. In respect of this, if I allow this reference to
be made, we would then be violating a very essential ingredient in respect
of the presumption of innocence. If a remark were to be made in broad and
general terms in respect of the arms deal, that would be quite another
matter. But in respect of the specificity of a particular individual whom
the Speaker has indicated has the right to enjoy ...

Mr B G BELL: Are you trying to cover this up now?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I was ruling and
I would like to know who mentioned something about covering this up? Would
the member please rise?

The hon member knows that in terms of the Rules of this Parliament, when
someone raises a point of order and when a presiding officer is attempting
to give a ruling, it is necessary for members to listen. It is quite out of
order to make unwarranted remarks. If an hon member is not happy with the
ruling that a presiding officer is making, that hon member has the right to
stand up at the appropriate juncture and raise a point of order. To make
unwarranted remarks is quite unacceptable. I hope that the hon member will
withdraw what he said and allow the presiding officer to proceed.

Mr B G BELL: I withdraw the remarks.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Thank you. On reflection I
would like to say that if the reference is too specific and erodes the
right of the individual to be presumed innocent, the hon Mrs Camerer, being
in the justice committee would accept that it is fair play. She should also
accept that we accord each member here that right. Once again, I would like
to request that the remark be withdrawn.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson I remove the specificity relating to the hon
Yengeni.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Thank you. So long as you talk in
general terms you may proceed.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, the way the governing party has approached
this Bill and dealt with the issue of who to appoint instead of a Judge to
head the Unit, is not reassuring. Although the Special Investigating Unit
operates under the aegis of the executive, and we do understand the nature
of the Act, after all it is dependent, as previous speakers have pointed
out, on presidential proclamations to do its work. Nevertheless, it was
always envisaged that the Unit should have the ability to act in a spirit
of independence and impartiality without fear or favour.

This can clearly be implied from the job it has to do and the powers it
exercises in terms of the Act once the proclamation is obtained. It can
also be inferred from the decision of this House in 1996, that a Judge
should head up the Unit. This was the main if not the only reason, for
appointing a judge in the first place. It was felt that a Judge must per se
be independent and impartial.

Section 2(2) of the main Act authorises the President to issue a
proclamation on the grounds inter alia - and this is important - of any
alleged serious maladministration or improper or unlawful conduct by
employees of any state institution or any unlawful or improper
appropriation or expenditure of public money or corruption in connection
with the affairs of any state institution. I want to inform the hon Kota
that we do understand the Act.

There are two main purposes of the Unit. They are to recover state assets
misappropriated through maladministration or corruption on the part of
state officials and to facilitate the prosecution of those guilty of
criminal acts by handing over the dossier of any particular investigation
to the national or provincial director of prosecutions. The obvious reason
for having an independent-minded, impartial person heading the Unit is that
although it operates as part of the executive, it has to go after agents,
officials or officers of the executive, state or Government if they have
been guilty of maladministration or corruption.

Therein lies the problem for the ANC. It is becoming more of a problem as
the ANC finds it increasingly difficult to distinguish between the party
and the state, particularly since the ANC's centralised redeployment
committee got going. Loyal ANC cadres are shifted between political and
Government posts. Sometimes they shockingly occupy both such as Mr Joel
Netshitenze, who has combined being head of Government communications with
the post of ANC propaganda agent. Opposition parties are regarded as
spoiltsports when they point this out. It is a problem that has been
repeatedly brought to light by the Unit when it was led by Judge Heath.

On countless occasions the corruption and maladministration uncovered by
the Heath Unit involved ANC party stalwarts often occupying senior jobs in
provincial administrations. The Mpumalanga story is a case in point. No
wonder Heath and his Unit got on the ANC's nerves in the way they did.
There is no denying that the Heath-led Unit was brilliantly successful in
what it set out to do. At a minimal cost to the state, assets valued at
over a billion rands were recovered within less than four years. A recent
institute of security studies and Markinor survey of 150 experts in the
corruption field in our country, funded by the European Union, found that
these experts rate the Special Investigating Unit as the most effective
anticorruption agency in South Africa by a long chalk. It scored 84,5%
approval among these experts, with the Auditor-General 10% points behind it
and the Public Protector scoring only 61%. What we are dealing with here is
not only de facto effectiveness, but also the public perception of an
effective corruption buster who is impartial and independent.

So, the question posed by this amending Bill is: If the Judge is removed
from the equation, how does one replicate judge-like qualities of
independence and impartiality in the new head of the Unit? The DA believes
that it is either by the mechanism for appointment which excludes party-
political control or by peremptory provisions in the amending Bill, such as
specifically providing that the incumbent must be independent and
impartial.
When the Bill was considered by the portfolio committee, this is what the
DA asked for and what the ANC refused to agree to. For this reason, the
closest proposed amendment by the DA goes to the heart of the matter. We
cannot support this Bill. It has been argued by the ANC - and the hon
Chohan-Kota again made the point today - that providing that the new head
of the Unit must be a person with due regard to his or her experience,
integrity and conscientiousness is sufficient to cover up our concerns and
that integrity includes independence. In our view, this just will not wash
and it is sophistry at its worst. I looked up the meaning of integrity in
the Oxford dictionary: it includes unimpaired or uncorrupted state,
original, perfect condition, soundness, sincerity, uprightness,
sinlessness, honesty and so on.

I know many ANC members in this House with integrity - some were and still
are on Scopa. There is no doubt that they started up there in a sinless and
uncorrupted state. But what happened to them then? Political pressure, and
where are they now? Political purgatory. They have had to turn their backs
on the investigation originally recommended by Scopa, including themselves,
which would have included South Africa's most effective corruption buster,
the Special Investigating Unit. They have now bowed to pressure from their
political masters. Setting cadres to catch cadres just does not work. There
are countless examples, not the least of which is the exoneration of Dr
Allan Boesak by the President's legal adviser, Adv Mojanku Gumbi, some
years back.

No, the DA insists that the person heading the Unit should be independent
from this sort of pressure and I hope that the Minister will take these
remarks to heart. They are meant in the best possible spirit of fighting
corruption in this country. As I said, it is clear from the provisions of
the Act governing the Special Investigating Unit that it is ideally
situated to pursue serious allegations of the kind surrounding the R43
billion arms deal. It can, inter alia, investigate corruption in connection
with the affairs of any state institution.

The powers of rapid search and seizure are designed to prevent the sort of
foot dragging that we are seeing now which could lead to a loss of
evidence. The ANC and specifically the Minister for Justice have also tried
to obfuscate the issue by arguing that before it can act, the Unit will
need enough specificity to amount to a prima-facie case. Firstly, this is
not correct in terms of the Act. Secondly, if the Sunday Times revelations
about the deal - regurgitated again with even more specifics added by The
Star today - are not sufficiently specific, what is?

Sadly, because of the ANC's foolish actions in excluding the Unit from the
probe, journalists, clearly armed with leaked documents, are doing the
digging for dirt, instead of the entity which was designed by this
Government for the job, namely the Special Investigating Unit. And we all
know why. The only way the ANC-led Government can now prove that there will
be no cover up is to revise its refusal to allow the Special Investigating
Unit to participate in the ongoing arms deal investigation. Anything short
of this will be seen as further evidence of the view expressed by
economists in their recent survey on South Africa, that what started out as
a splendid example of the new South Africa's commitment to honest public
administration is being undermined by the very people who are meant to be
guardians of justice and the public path.

As far as this Bill is concerned, words or a mechanism should be included
in it ensuring that the new head of the Unit is independent and impartial.
The New NP and the DA cannot support this amending Bill in its present
form. [Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Mr Chairperson, Minister and hon members, the Bill before us
is not a new one. It should be remembered that on 14 March 1997, the
President established a special investigating unit in terms of section 2(1)
of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, No 74 of
1996.

Through Proclamation R24 of 14 March 1997, the President, at that time,
appointed a Judge as the head of the Unit. It cannot be disputed that the
head of the Unit, who was Judge Heath, had his position challenged in the
Constitutional Court. The finding was that a Judge as the head of the Unit
was unconstitutional. The IFP recognises the judgment of the Constitutional
Court as being valid.

This Bill therefore addresses the need to amend the Act in order that the
Special Investigating Unit should continue to exist, but with a new leader.
While we have no choice but to make this change, we should also remember
that the Special Investigating Unit is not a permanent standing unit. It is
called upon to deal with special matters and it is a special arrow in the
armoury of the President to fight corruption. It could operate in a
province or against the executive itself if it is believed that money is
being misappropriated or is missing. The President, by proclamation, may
cause a Special Investigating Unit to investigate. Thus, it is to be seen
as a special unit called upon on a special occasion.

It is obvious that the person who will be heading this Special
Investigating Unit cannot be a Judge in terms of section 5(8) of the Act.
The head of the Special Investigating Unit has the power to issue
suspension orders or interdicts if he or she has reasonable grounds to
believe that any delay may jeopardise the case. These powers will not be
conferred on the head of a Special Investigating Unit henceforth. Although
the new Unit will have many powers, it will nevertheless be constrained as
I have just explained.

We will need to observe how effective the new Unit will be. It may be that
in future Parliament will have to devise ways and means of giving the Unit
sharp teeth with which to bite. For example, today, we can read in the
newspapers how far Nigeria has sunk into corruption. We must prevent our
country from becoming one where nothing happens without palms being
greased.

A Special Investigating Unit must therefore be able to move with great
speed and bite with very sharp teeth. The IFP is fully committed to a clean
and honest public administration and will keenly follow whether the Special
Investigating Unit is special, as it ought to be, after its new head, who
should be a fit and proper person, has been appointed.

This unit must be reflective of our democracy and the new values that we
espouse. The question is: If the person who is going to be appointed as the
head is going to be a person who is fit and proper, why then are we
removing such a good authority? It must be remembered that this person is
not going to deal with Yizo Yizo matters.

In conclusion, the IFP supports the Bill and urges the Minister to take
into account the remuneration of members of the Special Investigating Unit
so that they will be well paid and not fall into the temptation of bribery.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chairperson, amendments to the Special Investigating Units
and Special Tribunals Act, which we are debating today, are
constitutionally required by the judgment of the Constitutional Court
emanating from the appeal to that court by the SA Association of Personal
Injury Lawyers in a case against Judge Willem Heath, the Special
Investigating Unit, the hon the President as well as the hon the Minister
for Justice. Despite the fact that judgment was delivered on 28 November
2000, it is enlightening to see that we are in a position to debate the
amendments to the abovementioned Bill within a period of four months after
the delivery of that judgment.

Before dealing with the contents of the amending Bill, it would be
appropriate to state that Parliament and its Portfolio Committee on Justice
and Constitutional Development has demonstrated that it has the inherent
ability to deal swiftly with legislation when required to do so, provided
that the political will and support therefor is present. This,
unfortunately, as we all know, is seriously lacking in instances such as
the intended amendments to labour legislation, to mention but one example.

The poor administration of this Act by the executive, more specifically by
the hon the President and the hon the Minister for Justice, has been the
subject of various debates, questions, motions and criticism in the public
sphere, in the media and by opposition parties within Parliament in the
immediate past. This is so, due to perceived persistent attempts by the
executive, in particular the Minister for Justice, Mr Penuell Maduna, to
terminate the functions of the so-called Heath Unit under the experienced
guidance of Judge Willem Heath. This, despite an excellent track record by
the Unit in exposing corruption and maladministration within state
institutions with regard to state assets, public money and any conduct
which could seriously harm the interests of the public.

This has led to the submission of a Private Member's Bill, namely the
Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Draft Amendment Bill, to
the private members' legislative committee on 9 October 2000, which was
addressed to the Speaker by myself. That was done in response to the
frequently reported threat to terminate the functions of the so-called
Heath Unit by the executive. The purpose of that Private Member's Bill was
to ensure that a single Special Investigating Unit would be constituted by
proclamation by the President. That was done in order, inter alia, to
preserve the expertise of qualified personnel who had gained valuable
experience in the field of the statutorily required functions of the Unit.

According to the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development, this Bill has been referred to the Department
of Justice. Their comment has been requested as to the desirability of the
institution of a permanent and independent investigating unit. I mention
this to indicate that even before the judgment of the Constitutional Court
in this matter, which was delivered on 28 November 2000, the DA had already
indicated inherent problems in respect of the administration of this Act by
the executive, and its content. The ANC then conveniently chose to ignore
the concerns which the public, the media and, inter alia, the DA raised.

A further amending Bill was submitted by the hon Francois Beukman, which
dealt with specific appointment mechanisms of the head of the Unit and the
requirements for his or her removal from office as head of the Special
Investigating Unit. The Bill has, apparently, also been referred to the
Department of Justice for similar comments as stated earlier.

We need only look to our prosperous and stable neighbour, Botswana, to
witness the effective operation of a totally independent investigating
institution which, without the need for proclamations, investigates
corruption, serious malpractices and maladministration in connection with
the administration of state institutions. There, the directorate of
corruption and economic crimes has unfettered jurisdiction to institute and
continue with investigations. Nothing less than the institution of such an
independent investigative institution will satisfy the constitutional
imperative of an open and transparent society.

It should be stated clearly that the DA abides by the Constitutional
Court's ruling. It does so unconditionally and unambiguously. This is
required if one abides by the rule of law, which the DP and DA unwaveringly
support. However, the fact that certain sections of the Act have been found
to be unconstitutional does not mean that the ANC's views should be
accepted regarding the amendments that they have proposed. The debate
therefore centres on how the Act should be amended to give effect to the
Constitutional Court's judgment.

We do not agree with the ANC's views as to how the Act should be amended.
We do agree with the Constitutional Court's findings that the head of the
Special Investigating Unit, in performing all functions relating to the
purpose of recovering money for the state, is by its very nature partisan.
I refer members to paragraph 40 on page 15 of the judgment.

The DA accepts the fact that a Judge cannot be appointed as the head of
such a Unit. The question therefore arises as to whether the ANC's view
regarding the attributes required of a person heading the Unit is
sufficient to ensure the appointment of a person with the necessary
inherent abilities. The Constitutional Court made it clear that an
investigating unit derives its jurisdiction from a proclamation issued by
the President and is thus totally dependent on the boundaries set by the
proclamation in the investigation of the allegations it is tasked to
investigate.

In dealing with the issue, the Constitutional Court also indicated that the
proclamation issued by the President might, at any time before the
investigation is completed, be altered. It is thus clear that the special
investigating units are instruments of the executive to recover state
assets. It must be stated, once again, that the DA supports the principles
set out by the Constitutional Court. It is, however, the inherent
capabilities and requirements of the person to be appointed by the
President to head such a Unit which is in dispute.

The DA agrees that the person to be appointed should be a South African
citizen who, and I quote from the proposed amending Bill:


  ... with due regard to his or her experience, conscientiousness and
  integrity, is a fit and proper person to be entrusted with the
  responsibilities of that office ...

This is, however, not good enough. It does not go far enough. Although
these requirements are an absolute necessity, it is always required of this
person to act with the necessary independence within the confines of his
brief, which is the proclamation issued by the President in terms of which
the Unit is established. This would ensure public confidence in the
investigations and investigative procedures to which the Special
Investigating Unit confines itself.

The head of the Unit investigates serious malpractice or maladministration
in connection with the administration of state institutions. The public,
therefore, has a right to demand that whichever investigating unit is
proclaimed should, despite its master, in this instance the President, be
able to act independently within the powers and authority granted to it.
The President might have the power, firstly, to determine the boundaries of
such investigation and, secondly, to determine what allegations are to be
investigated, but should not be able to have an influence either directly
or indirectly on the independence of the head of this Unit. That is so
although the Special Investigating Unit, as stated by the Constitutional
Court, acts in a partisan manner on behalf of the executive arm of
Government.

The exercise of these functions should be done independently to ensure just
and fair investigations into those persons, institutions and organisations
being investigated and should be guided by the principles of natural
justice required of an independently minded head. It is, therefore, with
regard to this requirement of independence that the DA differs with the
ANC's views as to the requirements for the suitable person to be appointed.
This, however, is not the end of the matter. The fact that the court viewed
the investigating unit, constituted in terms of the Act, as an instrument
of the executive to recover state assets leads to the view that a Judge
should not be the head of such an executive instrument. That is so because
it blurs the distinction between the judiciary and the executive.

In view of this, the DA is of the opinion that a permanent independent unit
with inherent jurisdiction to investigate corruption should be created. It
should be established as soon as possible, taking into consideration the
two Private Members' Bills as submitted by the DA. What the DA therefore
requires is an Act that will grant inherent powers to a permanent unit to
investigate, without fear or favour or possible interference by the
executive, all cases of maladministration, corruption and serious
malpractices within the administration of state institutions.

The DA will not abide by discussions and agreements reached between the ANC
members of the committee and the Minister for Justice, as stated during the
deliberations on this amending Bill. The portfolio committee should
independently consider all Bills placed before the committee without the
perceived influence of the Minister.

In conclusion, the DA's opposition to this amending Bill should not in any
way detract from our unqualified support for the fight against corruption,
as evidenced by our initial support for the principal Act, as well as the
following proposals before the acceptance of the Bill: Firstly, a permanent
anticorruption unit should be established: secondly, inherent jurisdiction
to investigate cases of corruption should be allocated; and thirdly, the
unit should be placed as an independent institution deriving its power from
an Act of Parliament.

As none of these issues have been provided for in the present amending
Bill, the DA will be opposing the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr G B MAGWANISHE: Mr Chairperson and hon members, despite the fact that
the majority of South Africans lead their lives while pursuing goals and
ideals of a better life for all, there are people who believe in the notion
of `all for myself and nothing for the nation'. They believe that the state
is a big cow that should and must be milked. These people do not care, even
if this cow could bleed to death, as long as they get what they want. These
people use corruption and maladministration to defraud the state of its
resources.

The money and the state assets that they embezzle is supposed to help
mostly the poorest of the poor. These selfish people are the enemies of
this democratic society. They are guilty of one of the most serious
offences: crime against the poor. Because of these actions, there are
people who go to bed without anything in their stomachs. Some people are
denied access to basic necessities of life because funds, which Government
has allocated for specific projects, are embezzled. This is the reason for
fighting this evil with all our strength as Government.

It is important to realise that when trying to solve problems that are
facing us as a nation, we must always solve them in a way that does not
violate provisions of our Constitution. We need to address the moral
degeneration of our society very vigorously. Legislation assists, but it is
not the only weapons we have at our disposal. We need to build a nation of
people with good morals, a nation of patriots and a nation that we can be
proud of. Let our struggle to build a better life for all not be
jeopardised by the selfishness of individuals. As young people we must have
a special interest in fighting corruption because every rand that is lost
through corruption or maladministration will result in a bleak future for
ourselves.

To fight this corruption, a unit was established in terms of the Special
Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act of 1996, headed by Judge
Heath. The object of this Act is to provide the mechanism by which serious
allegations can be comprehensively and swiftly investigated. At the same
time, it provides the means by which remedial steps, which would ordinarily
have to be pursued through the courts of law, can be taken swiftly and cost
effectively.

When this Act was passed there was a unity of purpose in this House, and
that purpose was to fight corruption or maladministration. We all knew that
this was not going to be an easy route, because there was nothing
equivalent to this structure anywhere in the world. As a result, it might
not be the last time that we amend this legislation.
There were legal challenges to certain provisions of this Act. They were in
the form of cases through the High Court and the Constitutional Court. One
of these cases was Toto v Special Investigating Unit and Others, before the
Eastern Cape Division of the High Court. The case was about the validity of
proceedings instituted by the Special Investigating Unit against another
person before a special tribunal in terms of section 2(1) of the Act. The
question before the court was whether the SIU had the power to institute
proceedings not conferred by its terms of reference, even though provision
is made in the Act for the SIU to institute civil proceedings in the
special tribunal.

The court held that a special tribunal did not have the authority to
institute such legal proceedings, because the provisions of the
proclamation did not confer authority to the SIU to bring proceedings
before the special tribunal. Again, in the matter of Cohen and Others v
Special Investigating Unit, before the Transkei Division of the High Court,
the court held that the unit did not have the authority to institute
proceedings not conferred by its terms of reference.

There are numerous legal issues involving the SIU that await adjudication
at present, as there are various cases that are pending before the courts.
These units can only investigate allegations of maladministration and
unlawful and improper conduct on any of the grounds set out in section
2(2)(a) to (g) of the Act.

The President must first refer the matter to the Unit for investigation
through a proclamation in the Gazette, in terms of section 2(1) of the Act,
before the Unit can investigate the matter. I think that the learned Judge
overlooked this section when he insisted that the Special Investigating
Unit must be part of the investigation of the arms deal. There is no
provision in the Act that allows the head of the Unit to receive
information from the public and insist that the Unit must be part of the
investigation. In fact, section 2(1) gives the President a discretion
whether or not to appoint a special investigating unit.

In exercising that discretion, the President is guided by whether there is
prima-facie evidence or not. Where there is no prima-facie evidence there
is no basis for investigation. In terms of the ruling of the Constitutional
Court in South African Association of Personal Injury Lawyers v Heath and
Others that would constitute a fishing expedition which has been found to
be unconstitutional.

There has been a lot of noise on this issue, even from the learned Judge.
But noise does not answer the question: What is the basis for including the
Heath Unit in the investigation? We must be able to distinguish between
what the law says and our wishes. Some would have loved to see the Heath
Unit as part of the investigation, even if there is no need for it. Again a
wish and a need are different.

The pressure by the Judge and other people on the President to appoint the
SIU to be part of the arms deal investigation was in fact pressure on the
President to disregard the Constitution, the Special Investigating Units
and Special Tribunals Act, No 74 1996, as well as the judgment of the
Constitutional Court in the matter of South African Association of Personal
Injury Lawyers v Heath and Others. In terms of our Constitution the
President must be faithful to the Constitution and to the laws of this
country. Fortunately, this is what he has done.
As a constitutional democratic state, our laws must be within the ambit of
our Constitution. It is important that people entrusted with public
responsibility act within the ambit of the law. Failure to do that must not
be condoned, directly or indirectly, by public representatives because of
party-political point-scoring.

The speed with which we have moved to effect these amendments shows our
commitment to constitutional democracy and our commitment to fighting
corruption or maladministration in our country. We will only succeed if by
our words and actions we become united in action to help our country
succeed. We owe this commitment to ourselves and to future generations.
[Applause.]

Mr M E MABETA: Mr Chairperson and hon members of Parliament, there is no
doubt that the debate today is made all the more important by the
controversy with regard to Judge Heath's position as the head of the
Special Investigating Unit, and the decision of the Constitutional Court on
the role of a Judge as head of a Special Investigating Unit.

I would like to make it quite clear that we support this amending Bill on
the basis that, unless we can stand together in the fight against
corruption, irrespective of our party-political affiliation, everything we
have worked for as a people will have been lost. Our approach in the debate
is a simple one, namely that the executive has a constitutional prerogative
to set up any specialised investigating unit to deal, in this specific
instance, with the serious matter of white collar crimes, where big
syndicates are able to siphon off millions of rands from funds of the state
and thus undermine our efforts to transform and develop our country,
especially as the theft of millions of rands from funds undermines our
efforts to address the disparities created by the system we fought so hard
to undermine, apartheid.

Government needs an effective tool instead of relying on the police alone.
A simple indisputable fact is that the police cannot summon someone to come
and give evidence. Therefore, as a specific investigating tool, the police
is a limited instrument and not powerful enough. It is worth mentioning
that this is a mechanism the state has never enjoyed before. The
Constitutional Court has ruled that a judge cannot head any investigating
unit because his job is to sit as a judge. Someone else must head the unit.

We believe that the fact that there is going to be further discussion of
the specific processes to be followed with respect to the selection of the
person involved, gives enough room for us to make sure that the executive
cannot use this specific unit to look away where corruption is suspected
within Government. We therefore call for a vigorous and transparent
election system. Our Constitution spells out the separation of powers
clearly. The quality and capacity of the investigating unit becomes a
critical factor in the usefulness of such a unit.

We believe that the Minister has the responsibility to make sure at all
costs that ...

... asizi kuvuka kukho umntu ophethe icandelo eqhushekwe ngobusuku. Nokuba
kunzima kangakanani na ukukhetha loo mntu kubalulekile ukuba le nkqubo
yenziwe elubala ngakumbi ngokubhekisele kule ntetho ivela kweli cala, ukuba
le nkqubo mayenziwe ebaleni ... (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[... we do not wake up in the morning to find somebody new as a director of
a department who was smuggled into that position during the night. No
matter how difficult it is to choose that kind of person, it is important
that this process is conducted transparently, especially considering the
comments coming from this side ...]

... so that the selection of the person to head the Unit is not seen as
part of the alleged Government agenda. This will make the unit not police
itself.

We therefore would like to stress the point that other parties and
interested stakeholders must be involved in the selection of this person,
and that whereas the President has the final say on the decision as to who
is going to head the Unit, it must be seen by ordinary South Africans to
have gone through a process which lays the suspicions surrounding Heath's
position to rest once and for all, so that we can deal with the
transformation process in South Africa, which is what we are all here for.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, it is the right
of each member to have his name correctly pronounced. If the Chair errs in
any way, kindly feel free to draw the Chair's attention to this so that
your name is pronounced correctly. I think the Chair owes you that. So, if
any member does feel strongly about this, please draw the attention of the
Chair to it.
An HON MEMBER: Momberg!

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Chair, the name is Swart. [Laughter.] When considering
the appropriate amendment to bring the Act in line with the Constitution
following the Constitutional Court judgment, it is fundamental to bear in
mind that we are dealing here with public perception. The public at large
might not yet have grasped the legal implications of the judgment, namely
that the Unit is an executive structure, unlike the independent Chapter 9
constitutional organs, such as the Public Protector. The public perceive
Judge Heath and the Unit to be highly competent and seriously independent
in investigating and recovering state assets and to be particularly
effective in the fight against corruption.

The Constitutional Court stated that the legislation had been drafted on
the basis that the head of the Unit would control its activities and would
be a person of integrity and independence. Furthermore, the court went on
to say that ``if that person cannot be a Judge other criteria must be set
for measuring the independence and integrity of the person to be appointed
to that office''. The words ``independence and integrity'' used here must,
however, be seen in the context that the functions that the head of the
Unit has to perform are executive. Furthermore, by their very nature, the
court went on to say ``such functions are partisan''.

It is against this background that the ACDP proposed the qualification of
the word ``impartiality'', as we believe this should be a further guide to
the appointing authority. However, this suggestion was rejected by the
committee. But notwithstanding this rejection, the ACDP fully appreciates
the enormous responsibility that the head of this Unit carries, and wishes
to avoid any situation that would, in any way, delegitimise and, thereby,
demoralise the new head of this Unit.

Furthermore, we are aware that the structure of the Act and all its
provisions will be revisited soon, in accordance with the provisions of the
Constitutional Court. Consequently, the ACDP supports this amending Bill.
[Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, perceptions play a very vital role in politics.

Die persepsie bestaan dat die agb Minister en regter Willem Heath nie
noodwendig die beste verhouding het in Suid-Afrika nie. Daardie persepsie
is onder andere gebaseer op die feit dat dit gehandel het oor fondse - ``
more or less funds for this unit''.

Die Konstitusionele Hof se uitspraak van verlede November was waarskynlik
soos manna uit die hemel vir die agb Minister, want dit het die situasie
rondom regter Heath makliker gemaak om te hanteer. Aan die een kant het 'n
mens die tegniese situasie in terme waarvan die wysigingswetsontwerp vandag
voor die Parlement dien en daarmee kan 'n mens nie fout vind nie. Wat
opval, is die feit dat alhoewel die hofuitspraak gemaak is in November
verlede jaar ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[There is a perception that the hon the Minister and Judge Willem Heath do
not necessarily have the best relationship in South Africa. That perception
is based, among other things, on the fact that it concerned funds - ``more
or less funds for this unit''.

The judgment of the Constitutional Court in November last year was probably
like manna from heaven for the hon the Minister, because it made the
situation regarding Judge Heath easier to deal with. On the one hand one
has the technical situation in terms of which the amending Bill is before
Parliament today, and one cannot find fault with that. What strikes one is
the fact that although the judgment was made in November last year ...]

... and although the Constitutional Court gave the department one year to
correct the problem, it is almost one of the first Acts of Parliament to be
passed this year to correct this problem, or this alleged problem.

Nou die vraag wat ontstaan, lui soos volg: [The question which now arises,
is the following:]

If Judge Heath resigns today, he would then qualify in terms of the
Constitutional Court judgment, as well as in terms of the amending Bill, to
be heard regarding the Special Investigative Unit. So, the question now
arises: If Judge Heath were to resign and he was no longer a Judge, would
the hon the Minister, under such circumstances, support the reappointment
of the then Mr Heath, and no longer Judge Heath, as the head of the Unit or
not?

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Chairperson, the ruling by the Constitutional
Court that a Judge cannot head the Unit is technical and, therefore, does
not prevent the Unit from continuing with its mandate.

It is important that the ruling of the Constitutional Court is consistent
with the interpretation of future laws to ensure that there is consistency
for current and future tribunals so that their powers are interpreted
unambiguously. The current problem was precipitated by Heath's Special
Investigating Unit, because of its expressed interest to be part of the
probe. This has given rise to Heath's role being questioned.

The fact that the Unit was specifically commissioned to investigate
specific public tasks related to Government's maladministration and
corruption and that it was neutral to the arms deal probe, should have put
it within its scope. Hence the Portfolio Committee on Public Accounts did
make suggestions and recommendations to the House that the Heath commission
should be included in the investigation. This bears testimony to the
implied powers of the Unit prior to the constitutional and executive
challenge for its exclusion from the arms deal probe involving other
investigating units, like the Office of the Public Protector, the Auditor-
General and the Director of Public Prosecutions.

It is also crucial that we specify that the head of any future tribunal
should not be a Judge. But this should not prevent any skilled Judge from
being appointed as a head of any tribunal, because of his background as a
Judge. We need to say that any Judge, if appointed√ø.√ø.√ø. [Time expired.]

Mr G SOLOMON: Mr Chairperson, over the past few months, much drama has
erupted around the Special Investigating Unit headed by the hon Judge
Heath. The DA seems to continue to create drama around the Special
Investigating Unit. A recent media report describes the issue as


  ... a matrix of lies, distortions, half-truths, innuendo, rumours
  sensationalised in the media by a plethora of journalists and
  commentators, creating obfuscation and confusion, it seems, mostly
  through a lack of information and bad communication but sometimes it
  seems, even intentionally.

This, unfortunately, resulted in misunderstandings, misconceptions and
misperceptions about the Unit, its purpose and function. Be that as it may,
what is the Special Investigating Unit in question? The SIU is an
extraordinary mechanism created by the Special Investigating Units and
Special Tribunals Act, Act 74 of 1996, the amendment of which is before
this House, to investigate, by proclamation of the President, corruption
and unlawful conduct involving state institutions, state property and
public money.

Its function, according to its own mission statement is, and I quote:


  ... to provide the highest quality of forensic investigation and
  litigation service to all state institutions at national, provincial and
  local levels.

The activities of the Unit are therefore designed to effectively combat
maladministration, corruption and fraud involving the administration of
state institutions in order to protect assets and public money of the state
and to recover these, where necessary, in the most cost-effective way on
behalf of the state.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs and all other hon members who have a lot of private business, I
have indicated to you that you are very welcome to take that outside the
Chamber and allow matters here to proceed. Those who wish to leave may, so
that the speaker at the podium can have your undivided attention. You may
proceed.

Mr G SOLOMON: Section 2(2) of the Act enumerates the circumstances that
have to pertain before the President may exercise his powers to create a
unit or a tribunal. These circumstances confirm the restricted parameters
within which the SIU is legally allowed to operate.

On the basis of the above, I think it is correct to state that the SIU
cannot be used for fraud and corruption, in general. It will open itself up
to litigation, as has happened now. It is a unique structure set up by
means of legislation by the executive of the Government for the specific
task of recovery of money or property lost by the state through
maladministration, fraud and corruption by institutions or persons in the
employ of the state.

It is unfortunate that the opposition parties, particularly the Official
Opposition, deliberately created drama around the SIU and the hon Judge
Heath in order to exploit the situation for political purposes, creating
all sorts of negative perceptions in the minds of the general public that
the Government is covering up fraud and corruption, and is undermining the
SIU led by the hon Judge Heath. This is far from the truth.

To accede to the unjustified demands of the opposition would, in effect, be
to undermine the judgment of the highest court in our land, the
Constitutional Court, in recent cases pertaining to the SIU headed by the
hon Judge Heath. This Government, led by the ANC, will never condone any
such action. We will firmly uphold the independence of the judiciary, and
will amend the law in conformity with the judgment of the highest court in
our land, namely the Constitutional Court.

Let us now come to fraud and corruption in general, and deal with the
preposterous statement by the hon Sheila Camerer that this Government is
soft on crime and corruption. Since its inception, this democratic
Government, led by the ANC, has focused its attention on the matter of
corruption. In conceptualising corruption, the Government's vision is an
anticorruption regime in tandem with an overview of good governance. We
must understand the correlation between corruption and good governance as
two opposing forces to establish democracy and socioeconomic justice.

As a basis for this vision, the democratic Constitution makes provision for
a number of independent Chapter 9 institutions which could be utilised, and
are utilised, to combat serious maladministration, fraud and corruption and
also the misappropriation of state assets and money. These are: The Office
for Serious Economic Offences, the Public Protector and, in addition, the
commissions of inquiry, the office of the Auditor-General, the SA Police,
the National Director of Public Prosecutions and the courts of law.

In the conceptualisation of corruption, it is necessary to understand that
corruption is not a problem specific to the public sector and, in
particular, to the actions and attitudes of politicians and civil servants,
but one that reaches far wider. However, the problems and challenges in the
public sector are the priority of this Government in terms of good
governance and the delivery of services to the people.

This amendment is specific to the continuance and the existence of this
unique Unit which was led by Judge Heath. What we are saying is that
corruption is a societal problem and any anticorruption strategy should
involve both public and private sectors, and this came out very clearly in
the international and national anticorruption conferences held in South
Africa recently.

Combating corruption should be a collective and sustained effort. There is
a place and a role for a variety of role-players and mechanisms, each
making its own contribution towards addressing the abuse of public or
corporate power. No single role-player can address the problem sufficiently
and adequately on its own.

The clear intention of the Government is to fight fraud and corruption at
all levels, as is also indicated by legislation passed through this House
to deal with the matter. Among these are the Prevention of Organised Crime
Second Amendment Act and the establishment of an Asset Forfeiture Unit in
the office of the National Director of Public Prosecutions. Nobody in this
House can deny the successes of this institution in vigorously going after
the ill-gotten gains of criminals who are corrupting both the public and
the private sectors in our society.

Then there is the Promotion of Access to Information Act of 2000. This
right to access to information held by both the state and the private
sector is unique in the world, according to public administration experts
in South Africa. We are the first developing country to pass such a law.
Whilst the opposition might disagree with some of the checks and balances
that protect certain information held by Cabinet and judicial functions of
the court, they cannot deny that this piece of legislation will assist
greatly in eradicating corruption, establishing good governance and
improving the lives of the people of South Africa.

Another piece of legislation in this regard, which goes beyond
international best practice, is the Protected Disclosures Act of 2000. In
order to prevent corruption in both the public and the private sector and
raise the level of public morality, honest employees are given protection
if they blow the whistle on corrupt colleagues and bosses by following a
particular route and provided that the disclosure is shown to be motivated
by good faith and reasonable belief, is substantially true and is not made
for personal gain. This is certainly a crucial weapon in the fight against
corruption and an opportunity for ordinary workers to make a vital
contribution to this societal scourge of fraud and corruption.

This Government has done more than enough and will do more to strengthen
its anticorruption armoury. Constitutionally, legislatively and
institutionally, South Africa is more than ready to tackle the problem of
fraud and corruption which will enable it to hit hard, high and wide, in
order to establish a culture of good governance in both the public and the
private sector in order to create a better life for all in South Africa.
The only obstacle is the unco-operative and negative attitude of the DA in
this House. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the main objective of the amending Bill is
for the President to appoint someone other that a Judge as the head of the
Special Investigating Unit. This is due to a judgment delivered by the
Constitutional Court on 28 November 2000 in the case of SA Association of
Personal Injury Lawyers v Heath and Others that found the President's
appointment of a Judge to be in contravention of section 3(1) of Act 74 of
1996 and of the Constitution.

The MF supports and welcomes the new amendment, which states that the
President must appoint a South African citizen as the head of a Special
Investigating Unit. This allows citizens other than a Judge to have an
equal opportunity to aspects regarding judicial powers of this state.

In terms of the provisions of section 2 of Act 74 of 1996, the Special
Investigating Unit was entrusted with the responsibility to deal with the
whole spectrum of clean administration and the protection of the interests
of the public with regard to public money and public property. The
provisions of section 2 cover a wide range of unlawful activities, and
maladministration.

The Special Tribunals were established in terms of section 2 of the Act.
Judges of the tribunal are required to adjudicate on matters pertaining to
inadequate administration, against a background of allegations of
maladministration, corruption, etc, linked to the loss of state money and
assets, which impacts directly or indirectly on the citizens of South
Africa.

The MF commends the manner of operation of the Unit, which has specifically
designed infrastructure to deal with sophisticated malpractice with regard
to the misappropriation of public money and assets, money laundering and
the squandering of money, in order to equip the members of the Unit to
investigate cleverly devised activities of syndicates. Recently, South
Africa has been experiencing ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! May I just make the point that
when members are dealing with an amending Bill, they may not traverse the
territory of the principal Act. Members need to confine their remarks to
the nature of the amendments that are before the House. While we have
allowed some latitude today, generally the scope of debate should be
confined to the area of the amendments.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Voorsitter, die wysigingswetsontwerp skep altevol die indruk
van d√≠t waarteen die Bybel ons waarsku, 'n mens sit nie 'n ou lap op 'n
nuwe kleed nie. Ek kry die indruk dat hier 'n stukkie lapwerk aan 'n
bestaande wet gedoen word, terwyl die hele struktuur van die spesiale
ondersoekeenheid aangepas moes word om aan die vereistes van die
Konstitusionele Hof te voldoen.

Die bedoeling van die bestaande wet, met die vereiste dat die hoof van die
ondersoekeenheid 'n regter of oudregter moet wees, is duidelik die grootste
mate van onafhanklikheid en onpartydigheid moet aan die pos gekoppel word.
Dit is eienskappe wat in die besonder aan regters toegeskryf kan word wat
reeds deur die Regterlike Dienstekommissie geweeg en sodanig bevind is.

Die Konstitusionele Hof het nou die probleem uitgewys. 'n Regter kan nie in
di√© pos dien nie, want in wese behoort dit tot die uitvoerende gesag. Hier
kom die beginsel van die trias politica in gedrang.

Nou kom die stukkie lapwerk: Die wysigingswetsontwerp verander bloot
``regter'' na ``'n geskikte persoon''. Daar is wel objektiewe maatstawe
waaraan so 'n persoon moet voldoen, maar di√© maatstawe word, volgens die
wysigingswetsontwerp, deur die subjektiewe oordeel van die President self
toegepas.
In die proses verloor die eenheid ook sy objektiewe beeld en die
onafhanklikheid wat dit in die verlede gehad het. Dit is belangrike aspekte
want, soos in die verlede, kan ook die Regering aan ondersoeke van die
eenheid onderwerp word. 'n Veel deegliker en omvattender wysiging moes
aangebring word.

Maatre√´ls moes ingebou word wat nie die onafhanklikheid van die hoof van
di√© eenheid aan subjektiewe oordeel uitlewer nie. In plaas daarvan, is die
nuwe lap bloot oorhaastig op die ou kleed geplak.

Ek kan nie help om die indruk te kry dat die lapwerk te wyte is aan
onnodige oorhaastigheid nie. Die Konstitusionele Hof het tot 27 November
2001 tyd gegee om die saak reg te stel. Ander wette, soos die vier wat die
Grondwet vereis en wat ons in Februarie verlede jaar goedgekeur het, is
enkele dae voor die sperdatum afgehandel, maar di√© een sommer dadelik.

Was die oorhaastigheid daaraan te wyte dat die wet 'n probleem is, of is
dit dat regter Heath te lastig geraak het in die objektiewe, deurdringende
wyse waarop hy die sinkplaat ook vir die Regering warm gemaak het?
Die AEB kan nie die wysigingswetsontwerp in sy gebrekkige formaat steun
nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairman, the amending Bill very much creates the
impression of what the Bible warns us against, namely that one does not sew
a new patch onto an old robe. I get the impression that some patching is
being done to an existing Act, while the whole structure of the Special
Investigating Unit should have been adjusted to comply with the
requirements of the Constitutional Court.

The aim of the existing Act, which has the requirement that the head of the
investigating unit should be a judge or former judge, is clearly that the
greatest degree of independence and impartiality should be attached to the
post. These are characteristics that can specifically be attached to judges
who have already been assessed by the Judicial Services Commission and
found to be just that.

The Constitutional Court has now identified the problem. A judge cannot
serve in this position, because in essence it belongs with the executive.
The principle of trias politicas is being jeopardised here.
Now for the patching: The amending Bill merely changes ``judge'' to ``a
suitable person''. There are in fact objective criteria with which such a
person should comply, but, in terms of the amending Bill, those criteria
are applied by the subjective judgment of the President himself.

In the process the Unit also loses its objective image and the independence
that it had in the past. These are important aspects because, as in the
past, the Government could also be subjected to investigation by the Unit.
A much more thorough and comprehensive amendment should have been effected.

Measures should have been built in which do not subject the independence of
the head of the Unit to subjective judgment. Instead of this the new patch
has simply been sewn onto the old robe overhastily.

I cannot help getting the impression that the patching is the result of
unnecessary overhastiness. The Constitutional Court gave until 27 November
2001 as the deadline to rectify the matter. Other laws, such as the four
required by the Constitution, which we approved in February last year, were
completed a few days before the cut-off date, but this one was dealt with
immediately.

Could this overhastiness be blamed on the fact that the Act is a problem or
is it that Judge Heath became too troublesome in the objective, in-depth
manner in which he also made life very difficult for the Government?

The AEB cannot support the amending Bill in its defective format.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Mr Chairperson, hon members, the IFP respects and
supports the Constitutional Court's decision in respect of the Special
Investigating Units. Having said that, I wish to state that the importance
of such a Unit in the fight against corruption is that it enables South
Africans to enter into the important dialogue and action about ways and
means of fighting corruption.

Our Government has become resolutely alert to the weakening of the national
moral fibre brought about by corruption in this country. The Special
Investigating Unit, with a new head, as proposed by the Bill, will still
remain an asset to the country as a whole and to the Government's campaign
against corruption, as illustrated by the anticorruption initiative which
initially involved the Public Service Commission when it organised the
public-sector anticorruption conference and the national summit, at which
relevant stakeholders deliberated on measures with which all South Africans
could work towards a higher moral purpose.

The comments of the General Council of the Bar of SA are also interesting.
They recognise the Constitutional Court's judgment to amend the Special
Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act. They see no reason why a
Special Tribunal cannot be constituted in a manner that will enable it to
hear applications for an interdict or suspension order on an ex parte and
agent basis.

We sincerely hope that the amendments, to the extent that they remove the
obligation to appoint either a Judge or an acting Judge to the position,
will widen the scope or net, to find a variety of persons who are not only
fit and proper, but also credible and impartial. We believe therefore that
the Unit will add value to other institutions which fight corruption in
South Africa. We also believe that corruption must be attacked head-on, not
politicised. The IFP supports the Bill.

Mr L T LANDERS: Chairperson, it is a privilege to follow on the hon Prof
Ndabandaba.

The DA never let the facts get in the way of a good story. [Interjections.]
They would have us believe that they have prioritised the fight against
corruption, yet in this instance they are opposing this Bill because they
have failed to accept a few pertinent facts.

Notwithstanding the fact that the Constitutional Court has confirmed that
the Special Investigating Unit is an instrument of the executive, the DA
now expects this House not to comply with an order of that Court. The NP
wanted some kind of reference to the word ``independent'' included in the
requirements for the person to be appointed. It has been argued that the
reference to ``experience'', ``conscientiousness'' and ``integrity'' as
well as ``a fit and proper person'' are sufficient.

Going back to the Chapter 9 institutions, the requirements for all of them
is ``a fit and proper person''. The only additional requirement in the
Constitution is for the Auditor-General to have specialised knowledge or
experience in auditing state finances. This begs the question: Why must the
head of the Special Investigating Unit, which is not a Chapter 9
institution, have the requirement of ``independence'' when others do not?

What the National Assembly is witnessing today is the executive and the
legislature succumbing to an injunction from the highest court of our land,
namely the Constitutional Court. We reiterate that we accept and respect
the Constitutional Court's judgment in the matter between SA Association of
Personal Injury Lawyers v Heath and Others.

The Bill before this House is a direct manifestation of that acceptance.
Much has been said and speculated on before and after the Constitutional
Court ruling about the role, purpose and function of the Special
Investigating Unit, as provided for in the principal Act. What cannot be
disputed is the fact that the Special Investigating Unit, in its present
form or as it will be constituted when this Bill becomes law, is unique in
the world. What also cannot be disputed is the fact that the primary
purpose of the Special Investigating Unit is to speedily, efficiently and
effectively recover state assets that may have been stolen or defrauded.

The principle Act provides that this must be done using civil litigation
instead of criminal litigation. The specialised body created in the law for
this purpose is the Special Tribunal which, in terms of the principal Act,
only has civil jurisdiction as opposed to criminal jurisdiction. In other
words, once an investigation has been completed by the SIU and referred to
the Special Tribunal for adjudication, any criminal matters emanating from
such investigation must be referred to the prosecuting authority for them
to deal with in terms of their criminal jurisdiction.

Let us understand this clearly: The head of the SIU and the SIU itself do
not have criminal jurisdiction. It is significant that the Constitutional
Court stressed the point in its judgment that the Special Investigating
Unit is an instrument of the executive. As such, any investigating unit
appointed by our President in terms of this Act is answerable and
responsible to the executive, and obtains its mandate from that executive.
What this means in effect is that an ordinary person, while they may
approach the head of the SIU, cannot, as a result, automatically expect an
investigation to ensue.

The history of how this matter came before the Constitutional Court is
common knowledge. In response to allegations that certain lawyers were
allegedly defrauding their clients of money due to them from claims made to
the Road Accident Fund, a proclamation was issued to the Special
Investigating Unit for the investigation of those allegations. In turn, the
SA Association of Personal Injury Lawyers took this matter to the
Constitutional Court. What is regrettable about this matter, however, is
that the legal profession has not seized this perfect opportunity to
comprehensively and effectively deal with these allegations and thereby
gain the respect and confidence of the public - something that the legal
profession sorely lacks.

We want to say that we share the appreciation expressed by the hon the
Minister for the hon Judge Heath. But we want to say that by opposing this
Bill, the DA has shown its allegiance to Judge Heath and not to the Special
Investigating Unit. [Interjections.] It brings to mind the column in the
City Press called ``Siyahleba'', dated 21 January 2001, which reads as
follows and I quote:


  Judge Willem Heath is, it seems, the only honest person in South Africa.
  Nobody else, not even President Mbeki, can be believed, according to the
  Heath lobbyists.


  Not since the death of Jesus 2 000 ages ago has there been such an
  honest, trustworthy person. So when the Cholera Commission is formed,
  give it to Heath, or we'll never know the truth. Fire Judge King from the
  Hansie Commission and give it to Heath (quiver Hansie, quiver).


  When the Beer Price-Monopoly Commission is formed, give it to Heath -
  every other judge, politician and prosecutor is too drunk to be believed,
  and they're too bribable.


  When the DA Jobs-for-Pals Commission springs into action, give it to
  Heath if you want to find out the truth. That should keep him busy. In
  this nation of crooks and liars, Heath is synonymous with honesty,
  integrity, Jesus.


  Anoint him, ye nation of sinners!
[Interjections.] One aspect of the Constitutional Court's judgment that
needs to be addressed deals with other judgments of the Court and the
Special Tribunals. The Constitutional Court refers to the fact that the
Special Investigating Unit has been held to have -


  ... exceeded its jurisdiction and has undertaken recoveries beyond its
  powers.

In paragraph 67 of its judgment, the Constitutional Court goes on to state:



  As amending legislation will be required to address the matters decided
  by this judgment, the state may wish to consider other issues relating to
  the structure of the Act and its provisions.

The Constitutional Court refers to the cases Nalesen v Special
Investigating Unit, Cohen and Others v the Special Investigating Unit, and
Toto v Special Investigating Unit to further illustrate their point.

I want to make reference to the judgment of the Special Tribunal held in
East London on 29 June 2000 where the Special Investigating Unit
purportedly brought forward a dispute between the local authorities of Port
St John's, Qumbu, Engcobo and Cala and certain ratepayers who had fallen
into arrears with their rates. Justice Pickard, for the tribunal, in his
judgment, is scathing in his criticism of the SIU and the head of the Unit
for, amongst other things -


  ... acting as a state debt collection agency without the knowledge of the
  state bodies and institutions on whose behalf it purports to be
  collecting such debt.

On page 52 of the judgment, Justice Pickard says the following:


  Nowhere in the Act is there any suggestion that the purpose of the unit
  is also to collect debts or enforce obligations on behalf of state
  institutions. Nothing in this section suggests in any way that the unit
  was or could be created to recover money or assets or to unilaterally set
  right what it finds to be wrong. Its purpose is to investigate and report
  and institute proceedings before the tribunal to resolve disputes for
  purposes of an accurate report.
On page 54, he goes on to say:


  If the unit was intended to act as the debt collector for state
  institutions, one would have expected at least a provision providing
  therefor, and not a provision for referral to the institution or state
  attorney, as in section 57.

Justice Pickard goes on to criticise the Unit for bringing matters to the
Special Tribunal for adjudication purportedly on behalf of state bodies and
institutions while such bodies, it appears, had no knowledge that the SIU
was doing so on their behalf. The head of the Special Investigating Unit
also delegated powers given to him by the Act to members of his Unit, which
seemed to be a licence for these members to investigate cases which their
head did not know about.

On page 50 of the judgment, Justice Pickard says the following:


  The unit was not created to oversee the functions and actions of
  institutions and departments which must be assumed to know what they need
  to do. Once the unit has reported the results of its investigation, one
  may assume that the heads of departments, institutions, Ministers, state
  attorneys and the like will be in a position to make their own decisions
  regarding what needs to be done or recovered.

This judgment by the Special Tribunal as well as the judgments in the cases
that have already been referred to all need to be addressed by the
executive and this legislature so that the work of the Special
Investigating Unit can be more effective and efficient, and we appreciate
the comments by the hon the Minister in his introductory remarks to the
effect that this House can expect amending legislation in this regard.

We support this amending Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon
members have actually covered quite a number of the aspects that I thought
I would have to respond to. In particular, I want to thank members such as
the hon member Solomon and the last speaker for dealing with the so-called
lack of seriousness on the part of Government in dealing with corruption.
Those who want to be taken seriously, who are not just throwing around
dollops of nonsensical propaganda, will acknowledge that quite a number of
innovative things have been done since 1994 by this Government to deal with
the problem of corruption.

There are new laws and institutions that this country did not have at all
before we came into office. These institutions are doing work of sterling
quality. For the first time the criminal element in this country knows that
the chances of benefiting from crime have been reduced in terms of the law,
because assets derived from crime are being seized. This never happened
before. But I do not want to dwell on that.

A very interesting question has been raised with regard to independence,
but no one was prepared to say independent of whom.

An HON MEMBER: The Government, for a start.

The MINISTER: No, it cannot be, for God's sake. Listen carefully to what
Judge Arthur Chaskalson says in his judgment. He says in paragraph 40:


  The functions the head of the SIU has to perform are all related to the
  purpose of recovering money for the state, if necessary, through
  litigation. By their very nature, such functions are partisan. The judge
  cannot distance himself or herself from the actions of the SIU
  investigators. The evidence in this case provides illustrations of
  partisan conduct on the part of investigators of the SIU, which are
  inconsistent with the judicial office.

It is accepted that this is an instrument in the hands of the executive to
deal with intractable problems of serious maladministration.
[Interjections.]

Now, another question that has been asked is: why the haste? Fortunately,
the gods are smiling on the likes of me, because the answer is provided in
the same judgment. [Interjections.] Listen carefully. In paragraph 69 the
learned President of the Constitutional Court has the following to say:


  If the legislature wishes to address all the issues raised in this and
  other decisions concerning the constitutionality of the Act, that may
  take a significant period of time. Less time will however be needed for
  an amendment to address the declarations of unconstitutionality made in
  relation to section 31 and Proclamation R24 and to appoint a functionary
  other than a judge to head the SIU. These are the only declarations that
  are to be suspended. Although there may be reasons for allowing
  sufficient time for all matters to be dealt with simultaneously, there
  are good reasons for the first respondent's position as head of the SIU
  to be regularised without undue delay.


There is no haste on our part. We are complying solely with this judgment.
We have been asked again whether I would support Mr Heath, as opposed to
the appointment of a Judge. I cannot give that undertaking. According to
this law, the appointment is made by the President. I cannot make it, and
it has nothing to do with the personality of Judge Heath. [Interjections.]
The fact of the matter is that Parliament, in its wisdom, vested this power
in the head of state. I am not the head of state.

Again I wish to say ... [Interjections.] Please listen. It is interesting
that when it comes to independence, the Act does use the phrase
``independent and impartial'', but this is only with regard to the Special
Tribunal in section 81 of the Act. I think this is deliberate. These were
the words that this collective of leadership chose when we thought it was
convenient to do so. If we want to change it, let us debate that.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Party, New National Party and Afrikaner
Eenheidsbeweging dissenting).

The House adjourned at 17:29.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 22 MARCH 2001

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of Mines and Works Compensation Fund for
         1999-2000 [RP 10-2001];


     (b)    Accounts of the Transkei Electricity Supply Corporation for 1994-
         95, 1995-96, 1996-97 and for 1 April to 31 December 1997 [RP 184-
         2000].

                            FRIDAY, 23 MARCH 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 23
         March 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Supreme Court Decree, 1990 (Ciskei) Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2001] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Justice and Constitutional Development - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 22156 of 19
              March 2001.]

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance. The Report of the
         Auditor-General contained in the following paper is referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
         report:


         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
         Service for 1999-2000, including Reports of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements of the South African Revenue Service:
         Administered Revenue and Financial Statements of the South African
         Revenue Service: Own Accounts for 1999-2000.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         (a)     Framework Agreement for the creation of a Free Trade Area
              between Mercosul and the Republic of South Africa, tabled in
              terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Framework Agreement.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolo Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government and the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statement of the Board for Municipal
              Accountants for 1998-99.


         (b)     Report and Financial Statement of the Board for Municipal
              Accountants for 1999-2000.


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises and the Select
         Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         24 - Public Enterprises for 1999-2000 [RP 133-2000].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation:


         (a)     Government Notice No 1195 published in Government Gazette
              No 21783 dated 22 November 2000, Education Laws Amendment Act,
              2000 (Act No 53 of 2000).


         (b)     Government Notice No 1196 published in Government Gazette
              No 21784 dated 22 November 2000, Higher Education Amendment
              Act, 2000 (Act No 54 of 2000).


         (c)     Government Notice No 1355 published in Government Gazette
              No 21783 dated 13 December 2000, Adult Basic Education and
              Training Act, 2000 (Act No 52 of 2000).


         (d)     Government Notice No 73 published in Government Gazette No
              22002 dated 22 January 2001, Amendment of Statute of the
              University of Venda, made in terms of section 32 of the Higher
              Education Act, 1997 (Act No 101 of 1997).


         (e)     Government Notice No 74 published in Government Gazette No
              22003 dated 22 January 2001,    Amendment of Statute of the
              Technikon Free State, made in terms of section 32 of the
              Higher Education Act, 1997 (Act No 101 of 1997).


         (f)     Government Notice No 75 published in Government Gazette No
              22004 dated 22 January 2001,    Amendment of Statute of the
              Technikon Natal, made in terms of section 32 of the Higher
              Education Act, 1997 (Act No 101 of 1997).


         (g)     Government Notice No 121 published in Government Gazette
              No 22031 dated 9 February 2001, Item for inclusion as an
              addendum to the National Policy on the Conduct of Senior
              Certificate Examination: Supplementary Examination, made in
              terms of section 3(4)(1) of the National Education Policy Act,
              1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (h)     Government Notice No 122 published in Government Gazette
              No 22031 dated 9 February 2001, Item for inclusion as an
              addendum to the National Policy on the Conduct of Senior
              Certificate Examination: Memorandum, made in terms of section
              3(4)(1) of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27
              of 1996).


         (i)     Government Notice No 123 published in Government Gazette
              No 22031 dated 9 February 2001, Item for inclusion as an
              addendum to the National Policy on the Conduct of Senior
              Certificate Examination: Meetings of Examiners and Moderators,
              made in terms of section 3(4)(1) of the National Education
              Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Refugee Relief Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 12-2001].


     (b)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         High School Vorentoe Disaster Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 13-2001].

National Assembly:

Bills:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


       1) Wetsontwerp op die Verdeling van Inkomste [W 11 - 2001].


         The Division of Revenue Bill [B 11 - 2000] (National Assembly -
         sec 76) was introduced by the Minister of Finance on 21 February
         2001 and referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on Study Tour to
     Australia and New Zealand, dated 6 March 2001:
    A.      Introduction


         A delegation from the Portfolio Committee on Education undertook a
         study tour to Australia and New Zealand from 23 June to 6 July
         2000, with the following mandate:


         1. Objectives of tour


              In a meeting on 27 October 1999 the Committee unanimously
              agreed that a delegation undertake a study tour to Australia
              and New Zealand, with the following objectives:


              (1) To study outcomes-based education (OBE): Conceptualisation
                  policy practice (implementation); curriculum development;
                  development of learning and teaching materials; teacher
                  training and assessment.


              (2) To study student financial assistance for further
                  education and training in higher education.


              (3) To study the use of information technology in education.


         2. Specific interests


              Specific interests included the link between universities and
              Parliament; university and research funding; university
              involvement in distance education; registration and
              accrediation regarding institutions of higher learning;
              quality assurance programmes; are teacher training colleges
              attached to universities and stand-alones?; student
              funding/government bursaries; and student exchange programmes
              with South Africa.


              Committees play a vital role in promoting co-operative
              governance between provinces and the central government,
              thereby improving the quality of life of every citizen at
              grassroots level. As both countries have extensive experience
              on OBE, the delegation focused mainly on the shortcomings and
              successes and the implementation of OBE in the respective
              education systems.


         3. Delegation


              The multi-party delegation, under the leadership of the
              Committee's chairperson, Prof S M Mayatula, included Mr R P Z
              van den Heever, Mr L M Kgwele, Ms P N Mnandi, Mr S J de Beer,
              Adv A H Gaum, Mr M J Ellis and Ms N C Manjezi (Committee
              Secretary). Mr Ellis left the delegation after the third day
              of the official business for health reasons, while Adv Gaum
              joined the delegation after the first day, due to pressing
              engagement with his party.


              An attempt was made to obtain a valued balanced view, with
              input from various sources, like the Ministers of Education
              and Training in both countries, the Associate Minister, senior
              departmental officials, principal and teachers.


     B.     Department of Education and Training, Sydney, New South Wales
         (NSW) - official view by Deputy Director-General, Dr T Burke


         1. Government schools


              The school system is recognised as a leader in general, as
              well as in literacy, education, technology and vocational
              education. This year the school education comprises 40
              districts with more than 50 000 teachers and over 765 000
              students in 2 227 public schools; 11 institutes on 129 sites
              with more than 450 00 students; and over 20 000 staff, across
              the State. These include 1 630 primary schools, 18 separate
              pre-schools, 65 central schools, 393 high schools, 99 schools
              for specific purposes and 22 environmental education centres
              (previously field studies centres). It also incorporates early
              childhood and primary education, secondary education,
              technical and further education, vocational education and
              training, higher education and adult and community education.
              NSW is a multi-cultural society, with students from more than
              60 cultural backgrounds and an indigenous population of
              approximately 30 000. Students throughout the NSW are
              supported by more than 50 000 classrooms and specialist
              teachers and about 9 700 administrative staff members. A
              further 2 400 specialist education officers provide additional
              teaching and learning support to students and teachers. All
              poor schools are allocated additional subsidies by the
              government.


              The Department of Education and Training runs 78 pre-schools
              across the State. Nine of these are in aboriginal communities
              and target aboriginal students. The pre-schools provide
              educational programmes to children for one year prior to
              enrolment in Kindergarten. Children who will be four years of
              age by 31 July, may enter pre-school at the beginning of the
              year. Most pre-schools are privately run and fully funded by
              the government. The Department of Community Services oversees
              these private pre-schools. The children begin formal schooling
              at the age of five.


              The school curriculum is organised into key learning areas,
              from Kindergarten to Year 10. The key learning areas of the
              primary school curriculum are English, Mathematics, Science
              and Technology, Human Society and its Environment, Creative
              and Practical Arts, Personal Development, Health and Physical
              Education.


              All public school teachers are trained at universities, and
              they form one of the most highly qualified workforces in the
              world. About 2 000 students in remote areas access school
              education through distance and rural education programmes,
              which operate through 11 primary and eight secondary distance
              education centres.


              At government secondary schools, more and more students are
              seeking to maximise their options for employment, further
              training and higher education by choosing to study vocational
              courses alongside their general education subjects. Close to
              one in three students now study vocational courses as part of
              their Higher School Certificate (HSC) programme. This year the
              new HSC programme has been introduced, making this world-class
              credential fairer and stronger for all students.


              Government schools are committed to high-quality, flexible
              education options for students. In 1999 more than 3 000
              students undertook their senior schooling on a part-time
              basis. Part-time traineeships provide students with the
              opportunity to develop employment specific skills, leading to
              an industry credential while at the same time gaining the HSC.


              The Department is therefore committed to effective
              participation of parents in their children's schooling. There
              are a number of ways in which parents can become actively
              involved. These include parent/teacher conferences, state and
              local parent associations and individual school councils.
              School councils are a popular and effective form of parental
              participation at local school level. The partnership between
              parents, teachers and schools is at the core of the public
              school system. The interest and participation of parents are
              not only valued but welcomed, and as the department move into
              a new century, this partnership continues to strengthen.


              Children learn best when parents and teachers work together in
              partnership, and when parents and teachers share the
              responsibility for this partnership. Parents are welcome to
              participate in school activities. The school councils, the
              parents' and citizens' association and other groups, such as
              the parents' club, are forums for parent participation and
              decision-making. Parents and citizens' associations at schools
              bring parents, citizens, students and teachers together to
              closely co-operate. Many parents assist teachers in the
              classroom, in creative and performing arts activities, in
              sport and on excursions and many after-school activities.


              Schools welcome visits by parents during school hours, but it
              is best first to make arrangements.


              The Department is the largest single organisation in Australia
              and has an annual budget allocation for schools and vocational
              education training of $7 billion.


         2. Technical and Further Education (TAFE)


              TAFE is the largest provider of vocational education and
              training in Australia. There are 11 TAFE institutes with over
              130 campuses, as well as the Open Training and Education
              Network (OTEN). TAFE training offers a practical advantage for
              job-seekers, students aiming for promotion and those who want
              to change careers or re-enter the workforce. It is a great way
              to secure a satisfying career in areas such as
              telecommunications and information technology, human resource
              management, tourism and hospitality and nursing.


              More than 40 000 students are enrolled in TAFE courses each
              year, including more than 20 000 through distance learning
              with OTEN. TAFE teachers have a mixture of industry experience
              and formal training.


              Statistics show that of every 12 NSW residents over the age of
              15, one was a TAFE student in 1999. Students can choose from
              more than 1 000 courses and many short courses. Most TAFE
              qualifications are accredited under the national Australian
              Qualifications Framework (AQF). These qualifications are
              developed with industry and community consultation and are
              recognised widely in Australia.


              The vocational education and training sector, school sector
              and university sector are now all covered by the AQF. This
              helps students to move flexibly between education sectors,
              receiving credit for prior knowledge, skills and experience.


              Each year, over 22 000 former university students study at
              TAFE to gain more hands-on skills and improve their chances of
              employment. TAFE graduates are "ready to work", and studies
              have shown that more than 70% of TAFE graduates are employed
              within six months of graduating. Through OTEN, students can
              combine study in the workplace, at home and at a college or
              campus. Distance education and open learning give many
              students the choice of studying at their own pace and in a way
              that best suits their individual lifestyles.


         3. OTEN


              (1) Functions


                  Distance Education is there to reach those students whose
                  learning objectives are restricted by distance,
                  disability, isolation or other circumstances. It aims to
                  provide educational experiences flexibly, using
                  appropriate traditional and technological means. It also
                  supports isolated schools and students through distance
                  education centres, the provision of teaching programmes
                  and materials and other forms of curriculum support. The
                  directorate is responsible for strategic planning to
                  promote and facilitate distance learning.


                  Pre-vocational schools and vocational (TAFE and industry)
                  courses and materials are designed, produced and
                  delivered by the directorate in co-operation with
                  schools, TAFE institutes and curriculum development
                  agencies within the Department. The implementation of
                  policies relating to the needs of schools, students and
                  their parents in distance education is a key
                  responsibility for the directorate expressed through the
                  Distance Education Centres, the Country Areas Programme,
                  the Access Programme and the Schools Radio and Satelite
                  Systems, Computers and Internet.


                  Other specific responsibilities include management of the
                  Living Away from Home Allowance, scholarships for
                  isolated boarding students at government agricultural
                  high schools and isolated schools grants.


              (2) Distance education


                  Distance Education is a TAFE Institute in its own right,
                  working with other institutes to extend and complement
                  the range of vocational options available to students in
                  a face-to-face mode. It enrolls and teaches approximately
                  31¬†000 students each year in about 600 vocational subject
                  areas. It is positioned to be a key co-ordinating force
                  in the development of print, audiovisual, Internet and
                  interactive learning materials. Distance education also
                  provides a range of library and information services to
                  the Department's corporate, district offices, schools and
                  external clients. It also operates from a technologically
                  sophisticated facility in Strathfield and from a State
                  Office location in Bathurst.


              (3) Services and activities


                  OTEN offers a range of services and activities that are
                  constantly assessed and modified in response to client
                  needs, government directives and changes in technology.
                  These include the following: Individualised, interactive
                  and flexible distance education teaching, instructional
                  design and course development, multimedia, CD-ROM and
                  website design and production, television and video
                  programme production for a wide variety of clients, print
                  material design, development and production for the
                  school sector, TAFE and other government bodies and
                  industry, the TAFE library systems support and
                  information services management, consultancy services to
                  industry on training needs and flexible delivery
                  strategies, apprenticeship and traineeship offered in
                  conjuction with other TAFE institutes, private and
                  interstate providers, student management systems and
                  support, and research and the use of new and emerging
                  technologies.


         4. Vocational education and training at schools (VET)


              VET programmes build pathaways between school, college and
              work, to enable students while they are still at school to
              prepare for success in their careers and adult life. These
              programmes now provide flexible patterns of study, work
              placement and paid work that will lead to enhanced employment
              opportunities and facilitate life-long learning.


              VET options can provide a headstart for all students,
              including those planning a university degree after their HSC.
              They do have career advisers who provide a range of
              information and planning services to students throughout the
              junior and senior years of high school. Students and parents
              are able to access a wide range of information, some of which
              is available on computer software and the Internet. The
              streamlining of education services, particularly between
              schools and TAFE under the Department, has further
              strengthened the information available through career
              advisers.


              Work experience is offered through many high schools to give
              students an understanding of the employment environment and
              also of particular careers, and it is arranged by the school
              in consultation with the career advisers, course co-
              ordinators, students and parents. Students may take vocational
              courses as part of their HSC. The Board of Studies has
              developed seven industry curriculum frameworks which align to
              a range of nationally endorsed training packages. The
              frameworks cover Construction, Business Services
              (Administration), Tourism and Hospitality, Primary Industries,
              Metal and Engineering, Retail and Information Technology, and
              each framework course has a mandatory workplace component.


              Vocational courses for students planning to attend university
              have at least one 240-hour course in each framework which is
              eligible for inclusion in the Universities Admission Index
              (UAI). In order for the results of the 240-hour course to be
              included in the UAI, students must sit for an optional
              external HSC examination.


              Part-time traineeship may be undertaken by students while they
              are still attending school. A traineeship is a work-based
              training programme which combines paid work with structured
              training and, in this case, senior secondary studies.


              In Education-based Partnerships, schools are engaged in a wide
              range of vocational learning initiatives built on strong
              partnership between education, community and business.
              Students and teachers are extending learning beyond the
              classroom by exploring the nature of work and further
              learning, by researching career options and by developing
              enterprising skills. This is achieved through Local Industry
              Education Networks, School-Industry Links, the Teachers-in-
              Business programme and other education and local industry
              partnerships. Some programmes are also conducted in
              association with Australian Business Week, the Australian
              Quality Council and Young Achievement Australia.


         5. Literacy and numeracy


              Through the government's Literacy and Numeracy Plan introduced
              in 1999, the Department is continuing to build on the
              achievements of the State Literacy Strategy, and has
              successfully introduced and established a comprehensive
              numeracy plan. The government has spent in excess of $200
              million on literacy programmes since the beginning of the
              State Literacy Strategy. This has provided the personnel and
              resources needed to support teachers to achieve increased
              literacy outcomes. Over the next four months the government
              will provide a total of $41,8 million for numeracy programmes.
              This figure includes an additional commitment of $30 million
              to expand key programmes within the State Numeracy Plan.


              (1) Literacy


                  A major focus of that strategy has been and will continue
                  to be the monitoring of the literacy achievements of
                  students. The literacy needs of all students are
                  identified through Basic Skills Tests in Years 3 and 5
                  and the English Language and Literacy Assessment in Years
                  7 and 8. These are complemented by school-based
                  assessments of syllabus outcomes.


                  Explicit and systematic teaching programmes provide
                  targeted support for students based on early
                  identification and intervention. In 2000, all primary
                  schools have been provided with a comprehensive package
                  of materials to support the early identification of
                  student's needs in respect of both literacy and numeracy.


                  The Starting with Assessment materials have been provided
                  for all Kindergarten, Year 1 and Year 3 teachers. Again
                  this year, 800 students have access to the Reading
                  Recovery Programme. In 1999, 76% of Year 3 students who
                  had received Reading Recovery Programme support in Year
                  1, achieved Band 2 or higher in the Basic Skills Test.


                  About 40 district literacy consultants continue to
                  provide professional development for teachers to assist
                  them to meet the specific literacy needs of students in
                  their classrooms. In 1999 the consultants provided
                  professional activities to support the implementation or
                  literacy priorities on over 1 350 schools and 7 020
                  teachers. Literacy meetings were held in districts
                  supporting more than 900 parents.


                  In demonstrating the departmental commitment in improving
                  literacy and numeracy achievements, the government has
                  allocated an additional $14 million over four years to
                  the Literacy and Numeracy Follow-up Programme. This
                  funding will enable teachers to identify and work with
                  students who experience difficulties in achieving basic
                  literacy and numeracy standards.


                  As part of the Literacy Linkages Programme, a team of
                  linkage consultants provide targeted support for schools
                  to assist teachers to meet the literacy need of students
                  moving from primary school to high school. Training is
                  currently provided to teachers in 117 high schools for
                  students identified as needing additional support in
                  literacy.


                  In 1999 the government provided to all primary teachers a
                  comprehensive package on teaching and spelling, including
                  the use of spelling lists. During this term all schools
                  will be provided with the policy document on the teaching
                  of writing, which includes Focus on Literacy - Writing,
                  preparations are made for the final strand of Focus on
                  Literacy - Talking and Listening. Support for Stage 6
                  English for the HSC is being developed and provided.
                  National Literacy Week will be celebrated during the week
                  of 28 August 2000. This will be a further opportunity to
                  celebrate the outstanding achievements of all the schools
                  in promoting high expectations and delivering improved
                  standards in literacy as the result of government
                  initiatives.


              (2) Numeracy


                  The numeracy component of the Literacy and Numeracy Plan
                  is building upon existing successful projects and
                  emphasising the use of quality assessment information to
                  support teaching and learning. The focus on numeracy is
                  to provide intensive local training and development for
                  teachers in recognising and addressing the numeracy needs
                  of students.


                  This year all the schools have been provided with a
                  comprehensive package of materials to support the early
                  identification of students' needs in respect of both
                  literacy and numeracy. The Starting with Assessment
                  materials have been provided for all Kindergarten, Year 1
                  and Year 3 teachers.


                  The 40 district mathematics consultants emphasise how to
                  link information, from assessment to specific teaching
                  strategies. This has been an important component of the
                  consultants' training.


                  In early years of schooling, the Count Me In Too Numeracy
                  Programme is expanding progressively to all primary and
                  central schools. During 1999 over 300 schools
                  participated in this. Over 370 primary schools will take
                  part in the programme in this year, supported by the
                  district mathematics consultants and over half a million
                  dollars of programme support.


                  On May 2000, the piloting of a new statewide Year 7
                  numeracy test took place in 113 secondary schools. This
                  test was designed to provide better quality information
                  on numeracy achievement.


                  Further professional development is provided for teachers
                  through the Counting On Project to address gaps in
                  students' knowledge of key concepts such as place value.
                  Nine secondary schools have taken part in the successful
                  pilot of Counting On. The programme has been expanded to
                  at least one secondary school in each district in 2000.


                  An important aspect of developing the numeracy plan is
                  the valuing of effective home/school partnerships. A
                  range of practical support materials is being developed
                  along the theme of "Helping your child with...". This
                  will address topics such as helping the child to learn
                  how to tell time or to do subtractions.


         6. Computers in schools programme


              (1) Internet access


                  Government schools were connected to the Department's
                  Internet service by the end of 1996. Since then, the
                  Department has enhanced student and teacher access to the
                  Internet by progressively connecting government schools
                  to the Department's wide area network. The connection
                  provides fast, reliable and simultaneous access to the
                  Internet and the Department's data network. At present,
                  there are 1 941 schools connected to the network.
              (2) Internet usage


                  Government schools and TAFE colleges collectively request
                  more than 10Gb of data each day. This includes access to
                  the Department's website, which offers more than 2 000
                  pages and links to over 350 external sites.


              (3) Technology in Learning and Teaching Programme (TILT)


                  The TILT programme provides training and development for
                  teachers in the use of computers and associated
                  communication technologies in key learning areas. A total
                  of 17 127 teachers had already completed TILT training by
                  December 1999. To date the government has spent some
                  $19,38 million on TILT. The 1999-2000 State budget
                  announced the provision of funding to train a further 10
                  000 teachers in TILT over the next four years. In
                  addition, a new programme, TILT Plus, will provide
                  training and development for up to 15 000 teachers,
                  school executive and specialist support staff in the
                  advanced use of technology. The government has provided
                  funding of $16,4 million over four years, including $3,2
                  million in 1999-2000.


                  All teachers have received curriculum support materials
                  to assist with the integration of computer technologies
                  into teaching and learning. The Department's worldwide
                  website for schools, Network for Education, will continue
                  to be expanded and improved to include additional
                  resources that further support teachers and students.


                  Innovative technology, including satelite delivery and CD-
                  ROMs, have been used to broaden teacher training,
                  supplementing TILT courses.


                  The equivalent of more than 77 000 multimedia computers
                  have been distributed to government schools under the
                  Computers in Schools Programme. The government will spend
                  more than $47 million per year on the leasing and support
                  of these computers. This leased computer equipment is
                  being replaced progressively from April 2000 to ensure
                  that students continue to be supported by the latest
                  technology. The government has allocated $188,16 million
                  over the next four years to replace and support the
                  computers.


                  The 1999-2000 State budget announced that an additional
                  25 000 multimedia computers will be distributed across
                  all schools during the government's current term and will
                  spend an additional $15,3 million per annum on leasing
                  these computers.


                  Satellite dishes have been installed in rural schools and
                  most TAFE colleges. The TAFE OTEN develops courses which
                  combine satellite television programmes and print
                  materials. A technology adviser has been appointed to
                  each of the 40 district offices to provide technology
                  advice and support to the district office and district
                  schools.


                  The Computer Co-ordinator Allowance enables schools to
                  better co-ordinate and integrate computer resources with
                  their teaching and learning programmes. In 1999-2000 the
                  government provided $20,7 million to support this.


         7. Assessment and reporting


              (1) English Language and Literacy Assessment (ELLA)


                  The ELLA is a key element in providing an explicit,
                  systematic and co-ordinated strategy for improving
                  student outcomes in literacy in secondary schools. It is
                  held each year in term one for all Years 7 and 8 students
                  attending those schools that choose to be retested. Over
                  90% of schools volunteer to test their Year 8 students.
                  The assessment provides schools with information about
                  the literacy skills of their new Year 7 students and the
                  development of literacy skills of their Year 8 students
                  from the previous year. The participation of teachers in
                  training to assess students writing against diagnostic
                  criteria is an important component of the programme. A
                  large number of Catholic and Independent schools with a
                  total number of 20¬†000 students also conduct the test.


                  All participating schools receive comprehensive reports
                  with detailed diagonistic information about their
                  students'literacy skills and knowledge. There is also a
                  detailed report for parents. These reports are provided
                  at the beginning of the second term.


              (2) Basic Skills Testing Programme


                  This programme assesses and reports on the state of
                  literacy and numeracy in government primary schools,
                  providing the following:


                  (a)  Parents and teachers with systematically collected
                       information on the achievement of individual students
                       in key areas of the curriculum.


                  (b)  Schools with reliable annual and trend data on the
                       performance of their students in relation to
                       statewide achievement levels.


                  Over 180 000 students in Years 3 and 5 from NSW and South
                  Australia participated in the 1999 programme.
                  Distribution of the report packages to government schools
                  occurred in September 1999. The results show that the
                  percentage of young students in the bottom bands for
                  literacy and numeracy is the lowest ever.


                  The data on disk software was released to all NSW
                  government schools, South Australia government schools
                  and 10 of the 11 Catholic Dioceses in NSW. Positive
                  feedback has been received from both NSW, South
                  Australian and Catholic schools on the use of the
                  software.


                  In 2000 the tests will be given to various student
                  populations on 2 August. In addition to South Australian
                  government schools, the South Australian Catholic
                  Education Commission will participate in the 2000 Basic
                  Skills Testing for the first time.


         8. School self-evaluation and reporting


              (1) Annual school self-evaluation


                  Each school conduct an annual self-evaluation, which will
                  include consideration of progress in achieving statewide
                  and school priorities. The principal, staff and parent
                  representatives participate in self-evaluation. Where
                  appropriate, community and senior student representatives
                  can join in. Representatives make regular reports to
                  their nominating groups, detailing discussions of the
                  committees's work.


                  All accumulated participation and learning outcome data
                  available in the school are provided to the committee.
                  The committee is at all times made aware of data of a
                  confidential nature. Information that would identify
                  individual students, is not made available to the
                  committee. The committee has the support of a chief
                  education officer to assist with its work.


                  The committee develops recommendations on the school's
                  priorities and targets. After consideration by staff and
                  the district superintendent, the committee finalises its
                  recommendations and refer them to the principal for
                  incorporation into school plans. The committee's
                  deliberations and recommendations form the basis of the
                  school's annual report.


              (2) Annual school reporting


                  Every school produces an annual report, which is the
                  responsibility of the principal. It is produced in
                  collaboration with staff, parents, students and the self-
                  evaluation committee. The chief education officer assists
                  with the production of the report, and is a co-signatory
                  with the principal.


                  The report is written within a framework provided by the
                  Department of Education and Training, and provides a
                  balanced, open and genuine account of the schools's
                  achievement and areas for development. Copies of the
                  report are provided to each family in the school, with
                  copies being available on request from the school and the
                  local district office.


         9. Adult and community education (ACE)


              ACE is open to all adults regardless of age or previous
              education, and can provide pathaways into further education
              and training at TAFE or university. Each year more than 30 000
              NSW adults study over 28 000 ACE courses at locations across
              the State. It is accessible and affordable, with courses
              spanning the humanities, commerce, science, technology, and
              arts and crafts. Popular courses include computing awareness
              and computing applications; stress management; painting and
              fine arts; literacy and cooking skills.


              ACE provides workforce training for industry through
              established courses or customised programmes tailored to
              specific skill requirements. It also offers a growing range of
              nationally endorsed training courses as part of the national
              vocational education and training system, along with literacy
              and other targeted courses for disadvantaged groups.


              In 2000 the NSW government has committed more than $13 million
              to support the important ACE sector through more than 100 ACE
              organisations across the State.


              All ACE centres are non-profitmaking. For many classes, they
              use facilities such as classrooms, laboratories, kitchens, art
              studios and libraries or high schools and TAFE colleges.


         10.     Adult migrant English service (AMES)


              The AMES is recognised throughout the world as a highest
              quality language and literacy provider and is an important
              component of the NSW public education system. It has been in
              operation for more than 50 years and in that time more than
              one million migrants have studied English with the
              organisation.


              AMES offers a range of courses and services, in particular
              free English courses for newly arrived migrants to help
              prepare them for community participation, work and education
              in Australia. It supports business and industry by providing
              cross-cultural communication training for workplaces and
              community organisations. It is also responsive to community
              needs and develops customised courses to meet the individual
              requirement of communities or industry.


              New immigrants to Australia from non-English-speaking
              backgrounds are entitled to 510 hours of English instruction
              with specialist teachers and tutors. English language,
              literacy and numeracy training is also offered for employees
              in workplaces who need additional education and support.
              Employment and workplace training is a key priority of AMES
              and special programmes are in place to help migrants qualified
              abroad find work in their field of expertise.


              AMES offers fee-paying courses to develop pronunciation,
              reading, writing, speaking and listening, and the instruction
              is flexible and addresses the individual needs of students by
              providing tuition through education centres, distance
              education, independent learning centres and home visits under
              the home tutor scheme.


     C.     Official view on NSW School Curriculum Support by Director of
         Curriculum, Mr L Wasson


         1. Setting Curriculum
              At present, there are 140 staff members in the Curriculum
              Support Directorate in the Department.


              The parliamentary Education Act of 1990 gives directives on
              the setting up of Curriculum in the Department. The Minister
              approves Board of Studies' syllabuses, of which the Board
              produces syllabuses for K - Year 12 and advises the Minister
              on requirements for secondary certificates, which start at
              Year 7, and HSCs. The Director-General also sets additional
              requirements for government schools.


              The setting up of the curriculum support is based on primary
              and secondary curriculum, viz:


              Primary curriculum: English, Mathematics, Science and
              Technology, Human Society and Its Environment (including
              languages), Personal Development, Health and Physical
              Education.


              Secondary curriculum: English, Mathematics, Science, Human
              Society and Its Environment, Languages, Creative Arts,
              Technological and Applied Studies and Personal Development,
              Health and Physical Education.


              The Board of Studies plays a vital role in the Department and
              is responsible for the following:


              (1) Developing or endorsing syllabuses for all primary and
                  secondary schools.


              (2) Registration and accreditation of non-government schools.


              (3) Conducting examinations and granting awards of
                  certificates (secondary and HSCs).


         2. Years 7-10 requirements


              All the government schools must study -


              (1) English, Mathematics and Science for 500 hours;


              (2) Human Society and Its Environment for about 400 hours (i.e
                  100 hours for history and 100 hours for geography during
                  Years 7 and 8, 100 hours for Australian history and
                  another 100 hours for Australian geography during Years 9
                  and 10);


              (3) one language other than English for about 100 hours;


              (4) Design and Technology for 200 hours;


              (5) Visual Arts and Music for 100 hours each; and


              (6) 300 hours for Personal Development, Health and Physical
                  Education (150 hours during Years 9 and 10).


         3. HSC requirements commencing in 2001


              All the students must have completed 12 units of preliminary
              courses and 10 units of HSC courses. Preliminary and HSC
              courses must include at least -


              (1) six units of Board-Developed Courses;


              (2) two units of Board-Developed Courses in English;


              (3) three courses of two units (or greater); and


              (4) four subjects and not more than six units of Science.


         4. Curriculum support
              The Curriculum Support Directorate provides -


              (1) frameworks and guidelines for curriculum implementation;


              (2) curriculum material in print and electronic form;


              (3) professional advice on curriculum implementation; and


              (4) training and support for district consultants.


              In 2000, there are six district consultants: Middle Years'
              Literacy Consultants, Human Society and Its Environment K-6
              Consultants, Literacy Consultants, Mathematics Consultants,
              Creative Arts Consultants and Science 7-10 Consultants,
              providing support for the delivery of statewide curriculum
              initiatives.


         5. Resources to support curriculum


              The Department identified a need for support materials before
              they are produced and are funded by the government. They won
              the tenders to support the 240 projects to produce curriculum
              materials and also to produce the Olympic education packages.
              They also do CD-ROMs in languages and multi-media type of
              work. The focus is on literacy and numeracy, and all materials
              are designed for teachers and not for students. Approximately
              600 000 copies of these support materials (numeracy materials)
              have been sold to New Zealand. The Department operates
              separately and independently and there is no competition with
              publishers.


         6. Outcomes Education


              (1) The Outcomes Education has the potential to improve
                  teaching and learning based on common curriculum
                  framework; clarity about course expectation and content;
                  and clarity about student achievement and progress.


              (2) It provides a clear framework of educational standards.


              (3) It helps equality of learning outcomes.


              (4) It provides parents with quality reports.


              (5) It gives schools and systems the capacity to monitor and
                  evaluate the effectiveness of education.


         7. Standards


              Standards refer to student achievement at each stage. The
              standard is defined by the outcomes, indicators of achievement
              of the outcomes and work samples which illustrate achievement
              of the outcomes.


         8. Student assessment


              The teachers make judgements about students' achievement based
              on a wide variety of information, including -
              (1) statewide test results (e.g. basic skills tests);


              (2) standardised tests;


              (3) student work samples, including oral, written and
                  behavioural;


              (4) student self-assessment; and


              (5) information from other teachers and parents.


         9. Statewide testing


              (1) Basic Skills Testing Programme: Tests are in English and
                  Mathematics and all students in Years 3 and 5 are tested.


              (2) English Language and Literacy Assessment Programme: All
                  students in Year 7 are tested;


              (3) Secondary Numeracy Assessment Programme: all students in
                  Years 3 and 5 are tested.


              The Board of Studies conducts the school certificate tests in
              Year 10, and tests are in English, Mathematics, Science, and
              History/Geography/Civics, while the HSC tests are done in Year
              12.


         10.     Kidmap


              The Kidmap is purpose-built software for NSW to support
              teachers in implementing an outcomes approach to teaching and
              learning. It also supports comprehensive and valid assessment,
              provides fast, flexible record-keeping and reporting,
              pinpoints student progress and needs, provides instant access
              to resources and helps to plan and prepare both teachers' and
              students' work.


         11.     Technology in teaching and learning


              Technology in teaching and learning provides potential on the
              following three main areas:


              (1) HSC On-Line


                  HSC On-Line provides quality material to support students
                  doing their HSC, and regularly receives 90 000 visits a
                  day. There is a new site to be launched this year to
                  support a new HSC, which will include nodes (a component
                  in a computer network) for 38 subjects by the end of
                  2001. It has also won a bronze award in the 1999
                  Premier's Public Sector Awards.


              (2) Support for use of technology in classrooms


                  The support for use of technology in classrooms do have
                  research to identify and analyse implementation models.
                  They use computer-based technologies in the series of
                  publications. They also utilise follow-up implementation
                  packages for use with networks and schools. They also
                  have additional support for early childhood. It also
                  links between computer-based technologies and areas such
                  as literacy, numeracy, assessment and continuity.


              (3) Support through electronic media


                  The support through electronic media has the following
                  three components:


                  (a)  Multi-media, which aspires 2000 Olympic Resource for
                       Australian schools, China Album, sites and scenes.


                  (b)  Online Support, which gives access to the
                       Department's web site and school libraries.


                  (c)  Video, which continues to be an effective method of
                       support.


         12.     Curriculum support development process


              In the curriculum support development process the following
              are done:


              (1) Identify a need for support material in relation to system
                  priorities.


              (2) Identify a funding source.


              (3) Design the structure of the proposed support material.


              (4) Involve key stakeholders in the development of the draft
                  material.


              (5) Trial the draft material with teachers and/or students.


              (6) Endorse the final product.


         13.     Curriculum support materials


              The curriculum support materials include print materials for
              students (including textbooks), print materials for teachers,
              computer-based materials, audio-visual materials, posters,
              brochures, other promotional materials and any other
              combination of materials.


         14.     Distribution and marketing of materials


              The distribution and marketing of curriculum support materials
              can be distributed free to a target audience, or to
              subscribers, and can be sold within and outside NSW.


         15.     Sponsorship and tendering


              The support materials may be provided through government
              funding, cost recovery, funding by appropriate sponsors and
              tenders to produce materials for national distribution.


         16.     Print-based, computer-based and audio-visual support for
              teachers


              Print-based support for teachers includes unit of work,
              resource modules, curriculum information (including approaches
              to implementing new syllabuses) and reviews of available
              teaching and learning resources.


              Computer-based support for teachers includes diskettes,
              interactive multi-media, CD-ROMs and materials published on
              the Internet.


              Audio-visual support for teachers include audiotapes,
              videotapes and overhead transparencies.


         17.     School focus


              The school focus in the School Curriculum Support is
              facilitated by the district mathematics consultant, who has a
              synthesis of 15 years of national and international research
              and conducts independent evaluations.


         18.     Expansion of framework


              Initial focus on the learning framework is during the first
              three years of school. They expand the focus to include Years
              3 and 4 with multiplication, division and place value. They
              also link the project across the learning continuum in
              mathematics K-8 with the Counting On project.


         19.     Materials development


              They use theory- and classroom-trialled support captured for
              broader use to organise materials by developing Efficient
              Numeracy Strategies, the Count Me In Too professional
              development package and the Count Me In Too website.


     D.     Official view on Board of Studies by President, Prof G Stanley,
         and General Manager, Mr J Ward


         The Board of Studies in NSW is an independent statutory authority
         of the NSW government with a membership representative of all
         areas of education, including teacher unions. It is appointed by
         the Minister and has 24 members.


         1. The Board's main functions and responsibilities are:


              (1) Curriculum development


                  This entails development of syllabuses and curriculum
                  support materials for all schools from Kindergarten to
                  Year 12 and of materials to support these syllabuses.
              (2) Credentialling of students


                  It develops and conducts examinations leading to the
                  award of the School Certificate and HSC and awards
                  credentials.


              (3) Registration and accreditation of schools


                  It gives advice to the Minister for Education and
                  Training on applications from non-government primary and
                  secondary schools seeking to operate in NSW and granting
                  permission to non-government schools to present
                  candidates for school certificates and HSCs.


                  Professional and administrative support services are
                  provided to the Board by its Office.


         2. Board's new syllabus development process


              In 1998, the Board endorsed a new syllabus development process
              that would increase opportunities for consultation, establish
              achievable timeframes and ensure quality syllabuses.


              The new process uses a project management approach, which
              involves five stages:


              (1) Planning and promotion.


              (2) Briefwriting development.


              (3) Syllabus development.


              (4) Handover for implementation.


              (5) Data collection and evaluation.
         3. Planning and promotion - stage 1


              Its purpose is to develop a project plan. The key feature is
              the conduct of research and consultation to identify issues
              and concerns that need to be taken into account during the
              preparation of writing the brief.
              Outcome: Broad directions and a list of issues to be addressed
              during the development of the brief.


         4. Briefwriting development - stage 2


              Its purpose is to develop a brief that takes account of the
              needs and directions established during the planning stage.
              During preparation, working draft(s) of the brief will be
              published for comments from key groups identified in the
              project plan, which will be approved by the Board.


              Outcome: A brief that has been noted by the Minister. The
              brief becomes the detailed blueprint for the development of
              the syllabus, against which the final syllabus is judged.


         5. Syllabus development - stage 3


              Its purpose is to prepare a draft syllabus and then a final
              syllabus package. Comments will be sought from the key groups
              identified in the project plan. The key focus of the
              consultation will be on the extent to which the draft syllabus
              meets the specifications of the brief.


              Outcome: A syllabus package is approved by the Minister.


         6. Handover for implementation - stage 4


              Its purpose is to produce and distribute the new syllabus
              package and manage its handover to school authorities. The
              handover programme includes briefings with curriculum and/or
              district consultants.


              Outcome: Publication and distribution of the syllabus package
              following details specified in the project plan and including
              both printed and electronic versions of documents.


         7. Data collection and evaluation - stage 5


              Its purpose is to collect data on the use of the syllabus so
              as to ascertain whether the intentions of the syllabus are
              being achieved. The strategy for this data collection is
              included in the project plan. This stage of the process leads,
              in turn, back to the first stage.


              Outcome: A report, analysing collected data on the use of the
              syllabus, for consideration by the Board and/or the Minister.


              At key stages, advice will be sought from teachers,
              significant individuals and organisations. In particular,
              professional teacher associations play a greater role in the
              process.
              To assist with its monitoring and quality assurance role, the
              Board has appointed Board Curriculum Committees to assist it
              to monitor the quality of the material produced by project
              teams and ensure the integrity of the syllabus development
              process. These Committees report directly to the Board of
              Studies.


              A project manager employed by the Office of the Board will
              manage the syllabus development project, developing the
              initial proposal, establishing consultative networks, managing
              consultation and drafting and revising syllabus documentation.
              Project teams at various stages of the syllabus development
              process include curriculum, assessment and publication
              officers.


     E.     Riverside Girls High School, Gladesville


         1. Official view by executive and school principal, Ms J King


              This is a government school with an enrolment figure of 920
              students and 66 teachers. It offers high school studies for
              Years 7 to 12. The entire building is a brick structure that
              is very strong and well-maintained.


              The government was kind enough to pursue OBE in schools in
              NSW. All incoming students and parents for Years 7 to 11 are
              given a handbook or booklet which specifies all the subjects
              offered. Each child is given an opportunity to choose their
              subjects. The teacher-student ratio (1:24) is legislated by
              the government in the Education Act of 1990. The school has
              120 computers, 68 of which were donated by the Department over
              the past two years, while the remaining 52 were bought by the
              school. The students are always motivated to do computer
              courses when choosing their subjects. Ancient History is the
              popular subject in NSW schools and universities, as well as in
              New Zealand.


              At the end of each year, students write external statewide
              examinations. After completing the final year, about 70% of
              them prefer to study degree courses at NSW universities. Most
              young people in Australia attend universities, as most TAFE
              institutes operate on a part-time basis. Students do receive
              loans while studying, which is payable when they re-enter the
              workforce upon completion of their degree. The school has a
              fully equipped library, with nine computers.
              As the school is a government school, it is allocated a budget
              of $250 000 per year. Teachers' salaries are not paid from
              this budget. The school buys books from the budget. Each
              family unit contributes about $200 to $300 per year towards
              school fees. As the school does not receive enough funding,
              according to the school principal, they lease out school
              facilities, like the hall and 25 classrooms, to various
              churches, and they receive $70 000 per year. This money is
              ploughed back into the school to cater for school needs and
              learning materials. NSW also gives huge allocations of its 25%
              budget to fund private schools. This allocation is legislated
              by an Act of Parliament.


              About 95% of the teachers are members of the state union, the
              NSW Federation, as there are no teacher registration councils.
              Independent schools have their own teachers' union.


              The curriculum is being audited regularly, and the school has
              been given an 18-months' notice for implementation of OBE. The
              implementation of OBE in Years 7 to 11 is already taking
              place, and schools have to invent their own ways of developing
              curricula. There have been difficulties in working with new
              students from other schools because of the different curricula
              and reporting system. Since the establishment of the Board of
              Studies, the whole curriculum development process has
              improved. As regards the Profile Report in OBE, there is no
              statewide report designed for schools; each school has to
              design its own way of formulating its reports. The descriptive
              reports are statewide, while individual reports are generated
              by the school. Private schools rely more on HSC to publish
              their achievements.


              There is excellent parental support between teacher, parent
              and student at the school. Children learn best when parents
              and teachers work together in partnership and when they share
              responsibility for this partnership.


         2. Reaction of parents on OBE
              It has been noted with concern that parents find it difficult
              to read reports and understand education philosophy. As a
              result, the Board has involved local interest groups and
              professional learning teams in schools. They also receive
              newsletters from the Department, enhancing learning documents
              in respect of the HSC, but the process is not funded by the
              government.


              It is also difficult to do an assessment if the class has more
              than 30 students. In OBE, the students are much more focused
              on what needs to be achieved.
              Some underlying principles of an OBE approach to teaching and
              learning are the following:


              (1) All students can learn successfully.


              (2) Success leads to further success.


              (3) Teacher control creates conditions in which learners can
                  learn successfully.
              (4) The student is the focus of teaching and learning, and the
                  process is student-centred and performance-based.


              (5) Teachers identify and comment on
                  progression/improvements/achievements in learning within
                  a standard reference work.


              (6) Teachers determine the most appropriate strategies to
                  ensure that learning/improvement/development occurs.


              (7) Teachers create a climate of continuous improvement.


              (8) Teachers encourage students to establish priorities, set
                  realistic and achievable goals, and involve them in using
                  the language of an outcomes approach to assessment and
                  learning.


              (9) There is respect for student diversity, as students learn
                  at different rates and in different ways.


         3. Learner-support materials


              Most classes use learner-support materials like textbooks. The
              school also buys resources, and students access these in the
              absence of textbooks. As textbooks are very expensive, the
              school buys its own paper to produce printed or photocopied
              material. As there is not sufficient funding, parents are at
              all times encouraged and motivated to pay school fees in order
              to assist the school in buying learning materials.


         4. Discipline in NSW government schools


              Discipline in NSW government schools is guided by the
              Ministerial Statement Good Discipline and Effective Learning,
              available to any school. This statement requires that
              government schools have a School Discipline Policy, which is
              reviewed regularly. The policy is developed collaboratively
              with students, staff, parent organisations and the school
              council and is in four parts:
              (1) School rules or disciplinary code.


              (2) Strategies to promote good discipline and effective
                  learning in the school.


              (3) Practices designed to recognise and reinforce student
                  achievement.


              (4) Strategies for dealing with unacceptable behaviour.


              All parents and students are given a copy of the school's
              disciplinary code. It includes the school's homework policy
              and standards of dress determined by the school community.


              Principals may suspend students from school. Possession of a
              suspected illegal substance, violence, possession of a weapon,
              persistent disobedience or criminal behaviour may lead to
              immediate suspension. Principals can provide more information
              on suspension and expulsion.


         5. Relationship between government schools and private schools


              At times the school lose students, whose parents prefer them
              to study at private schools. Private schools expel any child
              who misbehave. Government schools are very tolerant and multi-
              cultural, while private schools are not. The media regularly
              attack government schools, as they have a reputation of being
              rebellious.


              The teachers and management of the school are highly dedicated
              in their calling.
     F.     Meeting with Mr J Aquilina, NSW Minister of Education and
         Training


         The Chairperson, Prof Mayatula, gave a brief overview of the
         objectives of the study tour both to Australia and New Zealand.


         Official view


         The administration of education is the role of the Commonwealth
         and funding is raised through various franchise. The Federal
         government has policies in the nature of education to be provided
         in all schools.


         The office on the Ministry of Education and Training is
         responsible for 40% of education in the nation and is more advance
         than other States. Four years ago, there were discussions that
         were held to consider intervention with South Africa with regard
         to education, and there is still a need to explore education
         system in South Africa.


         Vocational education provide more than 1 000 courses and
         graduation ceremonies are held twice a year. The students graduate
         from technical colleges and universities in the NSW.


         With regard to Outcomes-Based Education, they have standard and
         numeracy tests and examinations are set and marked centrally. The
         school reports are given to each individual parent and school.
         They have the statewide test in NWS education system; they can
         track the performance of each child and its outcomes as well as
         the competency of the school.


         NSW Department of Education and Training has different types of
         schools and different type of delivery systems. In 1996 they
         introduced the system "learning by recovery" for students in Year
         1. 200¬†000 students and 400 schools were affected. The literacy
         results in NSW schools have improved far ahead from other States
         and there were literacy programmes for children to help their
         basic skills testing.


         All the school in NSW are in the Internet and is regarded as
         effective way of communication. Most students are motivated to
         take computer studies as a subject, this enables the students to
         use the computer in schools.


         The NSW Department of Education and Training has just reviewed its
         curriculum. A Committee was established in 1995 which undergone a
         consultative process through the Board of Studies, interest groups
         and teachers and teacher unions.


         The Act of Parliament have outlawed corporal punishment to
         government and private schools.


         Universities are directly funded by the Commonwealth and not by
         the State funding and is aimed to assist certain students in
         different faculties. The Act of Parliament regulates the funding
         of higher education. The students are admitted in universities and
         after graduating they repay the loan when they start to work
         through taxation. The funding of private schools differ from State
         to State. The Act of Parliament requires to allocate an additional
         25% on top on the allocated budget.


     G.     Overview on information technology in education


         1. Official view by Mr J Banham, Chief Information Officer,
              Department of Education and Training


              Mr J Banham, the Chief Information Officer is in charge of
              computing in all schools, vocational colleges and connection
              to the data network in NSW schools. The Information Technology
              Bureau is divided into 3 groups, viz:


              (1) Computing infrastructure


                  This includes computer hardware andsystems hardware,
                  computer operations, central and Institute Computer
                  security, capacity planning, database administration,
                  network management and Email;


              (2) Education Technology
                  This includes education services, help desk, desktop
                  support services, software sales, publishing services,
                  strategic planning, standards and procedure, accounts and
                  budgeting and quality control; and


              (3) Application
                  This area includes business modelling, application
                  architecture, applications development and maintainance,
                  package selection and implementation, user support and
                  training.


         2. Goals for installing computers in schools


              The computers are installed in the NSW schools with the
              following goals or objectives, viz:


              (1) Every child should be familiar with computers as an
                  educational tool;


              (2) The use of computers across all subject areas should be
                  optimised;


              (3) Computers should help to achieve educational outcomes
                  efficiently and with great quality; and


              (4) Students should develop analytical and problem solving
                  skills to cope with expanding access to computerised
                  information.


         3. Policy for computers in schools


              All the teachers are trained in the use of technology in the
              classroom. There are technology advisers appointed to the
              district offices. The Department of Education and Training has
              also developed the curriculum materials to support teachers in
              integrating technology into the teaching process. There is an
              increased computer co-ordinators in primary and secondary
              schools and all schools are connected to the Internet.


         4. Implementation of computers


              Approximately 77 000 computers have been provided to schools
              on a three-year lease option. About 22 000 additional
              computers will be provided in 2002-03. There are 40 technology
              advisers, one per school district and the Department has
              increased funding to support schools. The role of the
              districts is to identify district training and development
              priorities and to work with schools to plan district provision
              of training and development.


              They have also microsoft corporate licence for desktop
              software and all schools are linked to data network. Some
              students in some schools are also provided with laptops.


         5. Computers in vocational colleges


              The goal for installing computers in vocational colleges is to
              provide a standard range of classrooms of computers to support
              all the software and subjects taught in colleges. The
              provision of a range of self pace computer learning areas are
              in open computer laboratories and libraries.


         6. Implementation of college computers


              A standard computer classroom contains 16 personal computers
              and two printers and are networked locally via the college
              server. All colleges are connected to the data network. There
              were 700 PC classroomss in 1999 and the standard work stations
              for general subjects. All schools are electrified to install
              the computers.


         7. Support for teachers


              15 000 teachers have been trained to assist in implementation
              and use of computers in the curriculum. The teachers underwent
              a 36-hour training course of six modules based on TILT
              (technology in learning and teaching) while they are still in
              NSW universities, and there is an advanced TILT Plus training
              underway. 85% of the trained teachers make use of the training
              they received through TILT and they do not get credits in
              terms of financial benefits.


         8. Support for use of technology


              They have the centralised help desk which is linked to
              maintainance company. They also have on site computer
              maintainance, centralised PC replacement programme, department
              wide 150 software contract packages and software sales to
              schools and colleges to support the use of technology. The NSW
              Department of Education and Training has 93 packages of
              education software.


         9. Networking computers


              The networking of computers is aimed for communication and
              access to information to students and staff at all schools and
              colleges. About 2 000 schools and colleges are connected to
              Internet via 64Kb ISDN data lines. The remaining schools will
              be connected by the satellite. The schools and colleges form a
              common Departmental intranet with Internet gateway. In the
              next 1 or 2 years, 60% of schools will get computer connection
              including those in the rural areas. They need to support rural
              schools with computer networkings.


         10.     Data network


              The data network serves as a security for staff and students
              and secure internet for outside internet world. They also have
              on-line handbooks, flexible communication that is very
              powerful, e.g. purchasing and management of computers. Any
              person who has access of authority may have access to students
              records by using a password. As viruses are major problems,
              the department has bought virus networking where they put
              scanning software to scan every incoming e-mail. They also
              have up-dates to virus to protect software over the network.


         11.     Budget


              The budget allocated to implement the entire process is $120
              million. This budget includes the following costs:


              the labour costs - $30 million; networking costs - $36
              million; leasing costs - $40 million; software costs - $10
              million; and maintainance costs - $10 million.
         12.     Technology plans


              With regard to technology plans, they have:


              (1) e-mail accounts for school administration;


              (2) teacher and students E-mail pilots;


              (3) remote access pilot for isolated students studying through
                  distance education; and


              (4) improved network management and monitoring.


              The entire endevour needs people with professional skills and
              knowledge on Information Technology.
     H.     Official view on training and development in NSW Department by
         Director, Mr G Dawsont


         1. Role of Training and Development Directorate


              The Training and Development Directorate has 110 000
              employees. The primary role of this Directorate is to -


              (1) analyse training and develop priorities and needs;


              (2) develop and implement training and initiatives;


              (3) develop and implement international programmes and
                  initiatives;


              (4) provide policy advice on training and development issues;
                  and


              (5) monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of training and
                  development programmes.


         2. The purpose of Training and Development in the NSW Department
              of Education and Training is to contribute to improved student
              learning outcomes by-


              (1) improving the quality of teaching in schools and colleges;


              (2) improving the quality of leadership and management in
                  schools;


              (3) facilitating and promoting continuous improvement and
                  organisational change; and


              (4) promoting a commitment to lifelong learning.


         3. Programme areas


              The curriculum and training functions both play a fundamental
              role in the training and development in education. The main
              programme areas in all schools are:


              (1) School programmes


                  The students are made sure that they have access to
                  information technology to promote quality teaching and
                  learning, literacy and numeracy. The schools make use of
                  technology for teaching and learning and administration
                  as well as for the school improvement initiatives. In
                  almost all schools they do have training and development
                  in curriculum priorities.


                  In these school programmes, students are assessed and
                  student outcomes data is also analysed. They also conduct
                  student welfare, child protection and behaviour
                  programmes and also parent and community programmes to
                  enhance education in schools.


              (2) Leadership development programmes


                  These programmes are aimed to prepare all principals,
                  executive staff/teachers and aspiring learders to take
                  leadership roles in the schools.


              (3) Management development


                  The Department do have programmes aimed at developing
                  senior management and educational administrator. They
                  also target groups to become school counsellors. They
                  also have programmes for teachers who are recruited from
                  overseas to teach in Australia.


              (4) School improvement strategy


                  The focus in school improvement strategy is on teachers
                  and the purpose is to enhance school capability for
                  sustainable self-improvement.


                  The training and development in schools support teaching
                  and learning. Every teacher has to know the Education Act
                  to make sure that every child is safe. Teachers can make
                  their decisions with their supervisors and principals to
                  assess training needs.


         4. Role of private sector in training and development


              There are joint programmes with universities and private
              schools to run the programmes on training and development.
              Most schools see training as an important factor to enhance
              education and most strategies are aimed at the classrooms. The
              Department of Education and Training has allocated funds to
              run these programmes with the private sector.


     I.     Official view on TAFE and OBE by Director of Educational
         Development, Ms J Bryne


         1. Outcomes of Vocational Education and Training (VET)


              The outcomes of vocational education and training are the
              knowledge and skills required to perform effectively in the
              workplace. Workplace performance is defined in industry
              developed competency standards which are a component of
              training packages. An endorsed training package is the package
              that has competency standards, assessment guidelines and
              qualifications. TAFE is funded by the State government and
              partly by the Commonwealth.


         2. Competency standards


              The competency standards describe desired workplace perfomance
              and are based on a skill analysis. They are developed by a
              Industry Training Advisory Body or equivalent and are endorsed
              by the Australian National Training Authority. These
              competency standards need to conform to a set format.


         3. Handling of mail to facilitate information flow and elements of
              competency


              This unit covers receiving and distributing incoming mail and
              collecting and despatching outgoing mail. It also covers
              collating and despatching bulk mail according to Australia
              Post specifications.


              Incoming mail is checked and registered to ensure accuracy of
              records. Urgent and confidential mail is identified and
              distributed to the addressee promptly. Mail is sorted and
              despatched to the nominated person. Damaged, suspicious or
              missing items are recorded and where necessary reported
              promptly.


              Evidence of satisfactory performance in this unit is best
              obtained by observation of performance, questioning and
              discussion. More specifically, to indicate understanding and
              knowledge of handling mail according to enterprise procedures
              and policies one must check that -


              (1) mail is distributed within the accepted enterprise
                  timelines;


              (2) outgoing mail is collected with the accepted enterprise
                  timelines;


              (3) mail is despatched on time, in appropriate mail
                  style/envelopes;
              (4) numerical information is correct;


              (5) bulk mail quantities are greater than 50 items; and


              (6) documents are bulk mailed according to instructions.


         4. Curriculum in TAFE


              TAFE NSW uses curriculum (an educationally sound structured
              learning plan) to assist learners to achieve education and
              training outcomes. It includes intended learning outcomes,
              underpinning knowledge, skills, behaviour, attitudes which are
              important for effective learning and generic skill development
              and associated learning experiences. Curriculum in a
              competency based system is a structured, sequenced learning
              programme or plan based on competency standards. The
              curriculum contents consist of a syllabus, assessment
              criteria, conditions of learning and assessment, assessment
              methods, assessment strategies and a number of other
              curriculum requirements including resource requirements.


         5. Assessment


              Assessment in TAFE NSW is a process of collecting evidence and
              making a judgement on whether the competency has been achieved
              or specified skills and knowledge have been achieved which
              lead to the attainment of competency. The assessment may be
              against module and course outcomes or directly against units
              of competence, depending on client need. Achievement is
              assessed against criteria established for the curriculum
              outcomes rather than against the achievement of other
              students. TAFE NSW reports achievement of module and course
              outcomes and units of competence.
     J.     Overview of Sydney Institute of Technology by Director, Ms M
         Persson, and executive staff


         1. Official view
              The Institute is Australia's leading centre for delivery of
              quality education and training. Established in 1891, the
              Institute has grown to become the largest vocational training
              provider located in the heart of Sydney in Australia. The
              Institute's six major campuses offer more than 700 courses
              accredited under the AQF with an annual intake of over 53 000
              students with the current budget of $120 million. Each campus
              has a co-ordinator to offer support and assistance to
              international students.


              Over two million students have graduated from the Institute to
              take their place in the workforce. The graduates are now
              contributing their expertise to Australia and nations
              throughout the world.


              In recognising the need for a more sophisticated and highly
              skilled workforce, the Institute has developed an extensive
              range of professional and technical customised programmes
              across the spectrum of industry. Qualifications from Sydney
              Institute of Technology are internationally recognised and are
              developed in close conjuction with industry to meet
              international standard. The Institute conducts major
              consultancies and training needs analyses for many
              international organisations and training providers.


              The consultancy services aim to promote economic growth
              through the transfer of knowledge, skills and technology; to
              contribute to the development of training infrastructure in
              neigbouring countries and to create goodwill and an
              international outlook among the people of Australia and its
              neighbouring countries through educational co-operation.


         2. Student profile


              In 1999, 22 737 of the Institute's students were female
              (47,3%) and 25 313 were male (52,7%). The student body
              comprised of 43 300 part-time students (90,1%) and 4 750 full-
              time students (9,9%). Over half of these students (24 952) had
              completed their HSC (51,0%).


              There are graduate certificate offered, one year for full time
              students and six months for part-time courses. Most of these
              courses have good articulation ranges for universities, and
              most of the subjects have conceptualized computing commercial
              courses, business and service tax etc.


         3. Placement


              At the end of each year, Sydney employ a recruitment agency to
              set up an employment service. There are also university
              students who are enrolled with the Institute to acquire jobs.


         4. Aboriginal studies


              In Australia, the indigenous population numbers around 390 000
              making up about two per cent of the Australian population. The
              indigenous Australians represent a diverse range of cultures
              and backgrounds from this diversity needs to be remembered in
              examining educational issues and needs.


              The majority of indigenous people in Australia (about 80%)
              have lost their language of origin, and they speak only
              English. However, in the Northern Territory just over 60% of
              them also speak an indigenous language or Aboriginal English
              and have varying levels of English proficiency. At almost all
              levels, educational participation and achievements rated for
              indigenous people remain behind those of the non-indigenous
              population.


              The Sydney Institute has a Faculty of Aboriginal Studies which
              aims at providing quality and innovative education for
              Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. The Faculty
              services the vocational education and training needs of
              Aboriginal and Torres Strait people. It provides a range of
              relevant instruction and training for clients, which includes
              -


              (1) developing personal skills and building self confidence;


              (2) promoting a learning environment that centres on students
                  needs;


              (3) encouraging specialised skills and techniques; and


              (4) providing opportunities for vocational and educational
                  enhancement.


         5. Aboriginal Programme Unit


              Within the Institute, there are Aboriginal co-ordinators who
              provide advice and guidance to Aboriginal community groups and
              individual on TAFE courses. They provide assistance in the
              development of vocational education and training programmes
              that cater for specific needs of community groups. Areas in
              which course can be developed include, administration, and
              management; arts; building trades; business and finance;
              computing, hospitality, literacy and numeracy and occupational
              studies.


         6. Courses


              Students and courses are supported by -


              (1) course leaders and teachers with extensive training and
                  practicing industry experience;


              (2) innovative, flexible teaching methodology enabling
                  recognition of prior learning;


              (3) self-pacing and mixed mode methods;


              (4) counseling and support services for students;


              (5) fully equipped and technologically advanced facilities;


              (6) a specialised Aboriginal resource centre; and
              (7) community participation in all events.


              The Institute has set targets that by the end of the year they
              will have an increased Aboriginal education and training unit.
              At present, they have not met the target because the Institute
              has not identified the appropriate courses and has not
              promoted vocational education and training for Aboriginal
              people.


         7. Information Technology Strategy for Sydney Institute


              (1) Official view by Ms C O O'Conor


                  The courses on IT are divided into three groups: Basic
                  information technology courses for IT literacy;
                  vocational courses with IT outcomes based on them and IT
                  specific courses ranging across developing technology and
                  web IT.


              (2) Goals
                  The goals for the IT Strategy for Sydney Institute are
                  mainly to -


                  (a)  ensure students and staff access to the best
                       possible technological resources and support for
                       learning and teaching;


                  (b)  establish a shared structure for managing the IT
                       environment to oversee the management, evaluation and
                       continuing renewal of the IT support effort;


                  (c)  provide an information management and systems
                       environment that encourages innovation in learning ,
                       teaching, administration and knowledge management;
                       and


                  (d)  provide a network and desktop access and
                       infrastructure capable of accommodating all traffic
                       and connectivity demands, including external and
                       network access.


                  The Sydney Institute learners are able to connect to
                  Sydney Institute using a terminal at home, the workplace,
                  or their nearest local community facility. They can
                  receive hard copy versions of any screen based
                  information via a local printer, they can communicate
                  with their teacher/tutor either directly by telephone
                  /videophone or indirectly using an e-mail, they can
                  submit assignments and reports for feedback and
                  assessment using electronic file transfer, they can
                  participate in student discussion and research groups and
                  /or provide informal contact with other students, they
                  can participate in group tutorial using either video or
                  PC-based conferencing to link participants and the tutor,
                  they can connect beyond Sydney Institute Internet to
                  communicate and lastly, they can obtain information and
                  undertake research world-wide.


                  The Sydney Institute teachers can be able to connect
                  Sydney Institute using a terminal at home or at
                  workplace, receive assignments, make comments, and return
                  work electronically, answer questions from students
                  electronically, simultaneously tutor group or students at
                  different sites, facilitate and support workplace
                  trainers at various worksites, prepare instructional
                  material through access to module and/or test banks or
                  other on-line information services or by communicating
                  and exchanging material with colleagues and enterprises,
                  find and exchange teaching resources on the Internet,
                  connect beyond Sydney Institute Internet to communicate,
                  obtain information, and undertake research world-wide.


                  They have open facilities and general purpose classrooms
                  of which some are located in the workplace. The TAFE
                  commission Act regulate the TAFE Institutes.


              (3) Challenges
                  The Institute at present has limited budget to keep up in
                  terms of its facilities. Staff are always encouraged to
                  do further studies to keep them up updated on all
                  programmes. They are also using part-time staff so as to
                  allow full-time staff members to further their studies.


                  Because of immigration and history of Sydney, the
                  Institute has almost 80 - 100 of their students still
                  regarding English as not their preferred language.


              (4) Library


                  The delegation undertook a tour around the Institute and
                  to the Library.
                  The library and Information Management Unit of the
                  Institute is responsible for the effective management,
                  operations and development of the Sydney Institute
                  Library, the largest TAFE library in Australia. The
                  library operates in a multi-Campus environment and
                  delivers services through six college libraries and
                  includes the Educational Technology Access Centre at the
                  Ultimo library.


                  These provide an extensive range of facilities, resources
                  and services which are integrated with the educational
                  programmes, research and corporate initiatives of the
                  Institute. The facilities, resources and services of the
                  library incorporate use of the Internet, multi-media
                  products and CD-ROM Networking, to improve access and
                  further contribute to the achievement of excellence in
                  learning and teaching. The unit also incorporates the
                  Institute's Records Management Unit.


                  It provides access to information and learning resources
                  in a wide range of formats - on line, CD-ROM, print,
                  video and multi-media. The library collection includes
                  valuable specialist resources in a number of areas such
                  as design, the trades of Aboriginal studies. Access to
                  library collections is facilitated through the TAFE NSW
                  online Library Information System which provides a share
                  database of all materials held by TAFE NSW libraries. The
                  shared database supports networking and resource sharing
                  which is a strength of libraries in TAFE NSW. Access to
                  information is further enhanced by reciprocal borrowing
                  arrangement with other educational libraries, by use of
                  inter-library loan and access to web based and other
                  electronic services.


                  It provides a range of facilities to support students
                  learning needs, including group study rooms, individual
                  study carrels, seminar rooms, and PC networks. Library
                  opening hours are as broad as possible to provide
                  extended access to resources, facilities and services.
                  All college libraries are open Monday to Friday and the
                  Ultimo Library services on Saturday from 09:00 - 13:00.


                  The library has a statewide curriculum support role
                  through consultancy services provided to the two
                  Educational Services Divisions of TAFE NSW which are
                  located within the institute. It is a major priority for
                  the unit to develop effective linkages with other
                  educational providers, especially the higher education,
                  vocational education and secondary education sectors, to
                  enhance opportunities for business development and
                  strengthen the Institute' reputation as a provider of
                  highly competitive library and learning resource
                  services.


     K.     University of Sydney


         1. Official view


              The University of Sydney sits in the heart of the city of
              Sydney, the nation's commercial capital and host city for the
              2000 Olympic Games. The NSW Parliament incorporated the
              University of Sydney in 1850, making it Australia's first
              university. Teaching began in 1852 with three professors and
              thirty students. The first degree offered were in arts, law
              and medicine. The University has since become internationally
              renowned, using leading-edge technology to further its
              research and scholarship. Today, it has 35 000 students
              learning from over 2¬†000 academic and research staff.


              Each year, more than 12 000 new local, international,
              undergraduate and postgraduate students enrol at the
              university. They come for the chance to study at one of
              Australia's most innovative universities. The University is
              committed to delivery modern, diverse education, backed by
              almost 150 years of tradition.


         2. Teaching


              The University enjoys an international reputation both for
              quality of its undergraduates teaching and the breadth and
              excellence of its research. Its 110 departments located in 17
              faculties and grouped in three colleges, offer the most
              diverse range of courses of any Australian university.
              Australian scholars have elected the university staff member
              to the nation's leading academic bodies, including the
              Australian Academics of Science, Technological Sciences and
              Engineering, Social Sciences and Humanities. Students are
              catered for in 92 diverse teaching departments.


              The sophisticated computer network links the campuses to
              interstate and overseas institutions and provides extensive
              student access to computer modems. It has a great diversity of
              clubs, societies and sports associations than any other
              Australian university.


              It is committed to continued growth in the flow of students
              between countries, a flow involving local students from the
              university studying for part of their courses at leading
              overseas universities and international students coming to the
              university to undertake either full degree courses or one or
              more semesters of study through study abroad and exchange
              programmes.


              Teaching is conducted throughout the university campuses, in
              research centres, farms, teaching hospitals, libraries,
              museums, galleries, and theatres and the largest academic
              library in the southern hemisphere. Student with TAFE courses
              do have credits when they want to continue and further their
              studies at the university.


         3. Research
              The University of Sydney is a major research institution,
              contributing to the economic, cultural and social welfare of
              Australia, with the largest cohort of PHD and research masters
              students in the country.


              Sydney's researchers, in both pure and applied research, are
              ranked among the world's best. By supporting distinguished
              practitioners of applied research, the University has
              established an international reputation for research
              excellence.


              It has developed strong links with industry and was a lead
              partner in the establishment of the Australian Technology
              Park. More than 6 000 staff and students are engaged in
              research and in 1998 the University was awarded 80 new
              Australian Research Council large grants, the largest number
              of any institution in Australia, and worth $13,7 million.


         4. International status of University


              Sydney is an international university linked t every part of
              the world. Scholars from more than 80 countries contribute to
              campus life. Most of the students come from China/Hong Kong,
              Singapore, Malaysia, Korea, the United States, Indonesia and
              Japan, while student intakes from Europe are also growing.


              Sydney University exchange students are currently studying at
              20 universities around the world and it supports them with
              grants, scholarship and award to cover fares and living
              expenses. Many departments also include short-term overseas
              projects in their courses.


              The active participation of students from many different
              backgrounds and nations in university life enriches the
              university. By attracting overseas students, through
              scholarships and other support programmes, and encouraging
              local students to use the Study Abroad Scheme and exchange
              programmes with foreign universities, the universities
              maintains a global vision.


         5. Serving community


              The University's academic staff is active in professional,
              scientific, cultural and academic organisations and advice to
              governments, statutory authorities and community groups. They
              engage in policy debates, articulate community needs and set
              the agenda for change.


              A number of university organisations, many of them voluntary,
              are actively involved in the community. Regular events,
              lecturers and exhibitions are open to the public.


         6. University's Strategic Plan for 1999 to 2004


              This is the second of the University's recent strategic plans.
              The plan sets out strategic goals and objectives for the
              period up to an beyond the University's 150th anniversary.


              The Plan is complemented by further plans at the college,
              Faculty and Department level which translate goals and
              objectives into detailed operational strategies. The plans
              play an important role in the central administrative
              portfolio's in the university library and with respect to
              information technology, research management, teaching and
              learning, internationalization, the student university
              experience strategy and the capital development programme.


              The University plan builds on the achievements of the original
              1994-2000 plan and addresses new strategic priorities. It
              assists re-evaluation of the annual performance against agreed
              goals and forms a valuable part of the unversity's
              accountability processes. The major goals are as follows:


              (1) To maintain and enhance its positions as an outstanding
                  provider of high quality undergraduate and postgraduate
                  teaching, both in Australia and internationally.


              (2) To provivide access to tertary study and appropriate
                  support for students from a diversity of backgrounds.


              (3) To develop its reputation as an institution where pure and
                  applied research and research training are conducted at
                  nationally and internationally recognised standards,
                  including research relevant to the economic, social and
                  cultural well-being of Australia and the region.


              (4) To enhance its position as a university of high standing
                  in the international community of scholars.


              (5) To make a significant contribution to the well-being and
                  enhancement of the wide range of professions with which
                  it engages.


              (6) To improve its position as an efficient, effective and
                  responsible institution, striving to meet the needs of
                  students and staff, and committed to qualify in all
                  aspects of its operations.


              (7) To maintain and enhance its position as a leading
                  contributor to the opinion of ideas, cultures and
                  lifestyles of the many communities it serves locally,
                  nationally and internationally.


     L.     Education Queensland International, Brisbane


         1. Official view by Mr F Jansen


              The Education Queensland International is the largest public
              sector in Queensland. It has more than 10¬†000 teachers with
              more than 1 300 schools. Over a period of two years, parents,
              students and teachers came up with a long-term strategy for
              the future of education in Queensland. Education Queensland
              has intentional structures set up to make sure that education
              is in control and have partnership with private sector.


         2. Curriculum, teaching and learning


              Curriculum, teaching and learning is the central focus for all
              schools. It is accepted that there is a need for a broad
              common curriculum. Nevertheless, schools have the additional
              capacity to generate locally approved curriculum options,
              which address these broad curriculum requirements and also
              meet specific local needs. In addition, schools need to ensure
              regular reviews of the schools' curriculum; recognise that
              essential learning is not all academic and ensure quality
              professional development and training, associated with
              curriculum delivery and implementation.


         3. Curriculum


              In Queensland, two statutory authorities, the Queensland
              School Curriculum Council (QSCC) and the Board of Senior
              Secondary School Studies (BSSS) develop syllabuses approved by
              the Minister of Education. The QSCC develop curriculum
              materials for pre-school and the compulsory years of schooling
              (Years 1 - 10) in Queensland schools, and the BSSSS for Years
              11 - 12. These include statewide approved syllabuses; i.e QSCC
              Key learning area syllabuses; QSCC pre-school curriculum
              guidelines; QSCC Years 9 - 10 subject syllabuses; and for
              Years 11 and 12, BSSS syllabuses including Subject Area
              Specifications.


              The district director approved schools curriculum offering in
              the Standard Flexibility Option. Any changes to school
              curriculum offerings are approved by the principal, subject to
              consultation with the district director and school advisory
              committee, or subject to consultation with the school council.
              Schools therefore are given an opportunity to become more self-
              managing as they have a significant role in their development
              and outcomes.


         4. School curriculum programmes
              School curriculum programmes are expected to be implemented by
              all teachers within a school. These programmes are structured
              to accommodate appropriate professional flexibility for
              teachers. Teachers are able to develop their own knowledge,
              interests and experience.


              Education Queensland support schools during implementation
              phase of each syllabus by providing access to professional
              development and training. They also provide systematic models
              for school curriculum programme which are sample school
              curriculum programmes reflecting some ways in which the
              syllabuses can be interpreted. The school has an important
              role to play in each child social development.


         5. Presentation by Research Manager, Mr P Buchanan


              The virtual schooling service has 36 district offices. All
              schools are connected to network and administrative data. They
              intend for their schools to offer a full range of subjects. At
              present, they have 110 students (11 students in the pilot
              phase), with four schools in this project. Schools involved in
              the project are part of Education Queensland's connection.


              They offer vocational and computer studies, Japanese and
              Mathematics C (i.e. Advanced Mathematics).


         6. Virtual classroom


              The virtual classroom allows students and teachers to interact
              during lessons by communicating with students by phone or by a
              computer. Teachers work with their students from different
              locations. Students and teachers connect for two on-line
              lessons of 40 minutes per week. Computers and telephone enable
              the lessons to be delivered to students. Interactive
              whiteboard can also be increased and teaching on-line allows
              teachers to put screens for students to read and information
              can be share with the class.


              Schools can deliver these essential services to those schools
              which have no teachers to offer particular subjects like
              Mathematics, Economics etc. They can teach from the office
              while they are in the Department. All schools are connected in
              the Department of Education network and all schools have
              Internet networks.


          7. Virtual study room


              Students access this study room anytime to get work set by the
              teachers. They do their work on their own and they can easily
              work on line. Interactive whiteboard (students can type on the
              whiteboard and can be shared with the class), presentations
              and software programme can be shared by students.


              It also provides students with easy access to learning
              materials, resources and assignments and students work on
              these materials in lessons. The tasks are modernised by weeks
              and these help the students to review their learning skills.
         8. Other sources of information


              Curriculum exchange provides teachers and students access to
              curriculum resources and materials via the Internet. The
              subjects are chosen through curriculum to run on the virtual
              schooling service. There is no restrictions in numbers, but in
              on-line teacher can teach 12 - 25 students. In relation to its
              limitation, it is different from the normal classroom
              teaching.


         9. Presentation by Manager: Material Development, Mr K Jewell


              They need their materials delivered in another way than
              through the post. All materials are paper-based and contain
              copyright material and difficult to modify. They are available
              to schools in electronic form.


              Their vision for on-line delivery are: write once, publish in
              different forms, print, CD-ROM and web. To move towards the
              vision they need to investigate and choose suitable software;
              establish production processes - educate the writers in
              descriptive writing; establish writing templates and style
              guides and interactive way; and minimise the reliance on
              copyright materials and modular materials - develop them as
              smaller modules. The spelling websites help to improve
              learning outcomes.


         10.     Budget


              The money is allocated by the Department to provide these
              materials to all schools. The estimated cost of two CD-Roms
              and two websites is $185 000. It takes up to 12 months with an
              estimated amount of $125 000 to produce a single CD-ROM packed
              with audio.


         11.     Presentation by Dr B Dudley, Deputy Director: Moderation
              and Curriculum, Board of Senior Secondary School Studies


              (1) Role of curriculum committee


                  This committee is an advisory committee to the Board. The
                  functions of the committee are -


                  (a)  to keep the Board informed of current trends in
                       curriculum development in secondary education;


                  (b)  to review syllabi and other materials submitted by
                       subject advisory committees;


                  (c)  to make recommendations to the Board additional to
                       those made by subject advisory committees about the
                       suitability of syllabi and other materials in the
                       context of the senior secondary curriculum; and


                  (d)  to assist in other matters the Board may determine
                       from time to time.


                  A major function of the Committee is the reviewing of
                  syllabi recommended by subject advisory committees. The
                  curriculum committee forwards advice to the Board in
                  addition to that provided by subject advisory committees
                  at each of the crucial stages of the development of
                  syllabi, which are when proposals for changes are made;
                  when proposed syllabi are recommended to the Board; when
                  the annual decisions regarding the rates of progress of
                  syllabi are made; and when trial, pilot and trial-pilot
                  decisions resulting from evaluations are made.


                  The advice of the committee is widely based. While the
                  advice of subject advisory committees is generally
                  subject-specific, that offered to the Board by the
                  curriculum committee is directed towards helping the
                  Board make decisions about the relationship between
                  subjects and the likely impact of new or revised subjects
                  across a school curriculum or across the State.


              (2) Role of office of Board
                  This office services the following aspects of the
                  development of syllabi:


                  (a)  Initial research to inform subject advisory
                       committees.


                  (b)  Writing syllabi and work programmes.


                  (c)  Accreditation of work programmes.


                  (d)  Monitoring and verification of folios of student
                       work.


                  (e)  Development and dissemination of appropriate
                       standards for student achievement.


                  (f)  Evaluations of trials, pilots, and trial-pilots by
                       independent evaluators.


                  (g)  Conferences of teachers for trials, pilots and trial-
                       pilots.


                  The curriculum, moderation and vocational education
                  sections of this office provide the services appropriate
                  to their areas of responsibility. Throughout the
                  development of a syllabus the Assistant Director
                  (Curriculum) and the Assistant Director (Moderation)
                  liaise frequently to ensure that the Curriculum and
                  Moderation sections function well together. In the case
                  of syllabi with embedded vocational education and
                  training components, the Assistant Director (Vocational
                  Education and Training) liaises with the other two
                  assistant directors to ensure that the three sections
                  function well together.


                  The other major functions of the Board are to develop and
                  approve syllabi for subjects for Year 11 and 12; moderate
                  the standard of assessment implemented by the school
                  board; develop and implement the Queensland Core Skills
                  Test; calculate the overall positions and field positions
                  for tertiary entrance; issue the senior certificate (this
                  certificate incorporate all the achievements); and assure
                  quality vocational education and training in schools.


         12.     Australian certificate of senior secondary education


              This certificate is issued on completion of Year 12 in full-
              time schooling by the Queensland BSSSS, one of the
              Australasian Curriculum, Assessment and Certification
              Authorities. Australian certificates of senior secondary
              education are official and authentic records of student
              achievement. They are accepted nationally and internationally.


              The certificate can record student achievement in Board
              subjects and Board-registered subjected studied during Year 11
              and/or Year 12. This certificate and results in Board subjects
              are accepted by universities across Australia and around the
              world. The certificate may also record achievement in
              accredited vocational education, in the Queensland core skills
              Test, and in recorded subjects. The Queenslands' BSSSS is
              responsible for setting and maintaining the standards reported
              on its certificates.


         13.     Board subjects


              A Board subject is one for which a syllabus and school's work
              programme has been approved by the Board, and the standards of
              assessment are moderated. The minimum amount of timetable
              school time to be devoted to the study and assessment of each
              Board subject is 55 hours per semester.


              There are BSSS syllabi for over 50 subjects at the senior
              secondary level. A full list of Board subjects is available
              from the Board's office.


         14.     Board-registered subjects


              A Board-registered subject is any subject, other than a Board
              subject for which a study area specification or work programme
              has been approved by the Board. The minimum amount of
              timetabled school time to be devoted to the study and
              assessment of each Board-registered subject is 40 hours per
              semester.


         15.     Level of achievement


              This indicates the standard attained in relation to the
              criteria stated in the accredited work programme. The levels
              are:


              (1) Very High Achievement.


              (2) High Achievement.


              (3) Sound Achievement.


              (4) Limited Achievement.


              (5) Very Limited Achievement.


              Level of achievement in Board subjects are recorded only for
              students in those schools that accept Board conditions and
              follow Board procedures for the moderation of standards. They
              are based on school assessments that are not subject to the
              Board's procedures for the moderation of standards.


              The criteria used in making the final judgement of the level
              of achievement include the student's knowledge and
              understanding of the concepts and principles of the subject as
              well as the student's cognitive and practical skills in a wide
              range of situations.


         16.     Accredited vocational education


              The Board has power under the Vocational Education, Training
              and Employment Act, to accredit vocational education and to
              register providers of vocational education for students in
              Year 11 and 12. Some Board and Board-registered subjects have
              embedded in them accredited vocational education modules or
              competencies as part of Board-developed vocational education
              programmes. Student achievement in these modules and/or
              competencies is reported only if the student has successfully
              completed them. Most modules are based on industry-endorsed
              competency standards. For these modules, the Senior
              Certificate records the unit of competency recognised within
              the industry standards (e.g. handle mail to facilitate
              communication) and the title of the industry standards (e.g.
              national clerical-administrative) (private sector).


              Completion of certain sets of modules or competencies may
              qualify the student for a qualification such as Certificate II
              in Clerical-Administration (Private Sector). If so, such
              qualifications may be shown on the Senior Certificate.


         17.     Queensland core skills


              All Year 12 students are offered the opportunity to sit for
              the Queensland core skills (QSC) Test. The QSC Test -


              (1) tests the common elements of the senior curriculum
                  employing three modes of response (i.e. extended writing,
                  short response and multiple choice) and involves seven
                  hours of testing over two consecutive days;


              (2) is a standardised test requiring reading and writing in
                  Australian English;


              (3) being cross-curriculum, provides information supplementary
                  to the subject results;


              (4) is a common statewide test for Queensland Year 12 students
                  grounded in the Queensland senior curriculum;


              (5) is an achievement test, not an intelligence test, not an
                  aptitude test; and
              (6) accessible to all Year 12 students regardless of
                  individual differences in subject pattern.


              Results are recorded as grades from A to E (A indicating the
              higher achievement).


         18.     Recorded subjects


              These are subjects other than a Board subjects or Board-
              registered subject, offered by the school or other educational
              institution approved by the Board, the result of which are
              recorded on Board certificates. The Board's procedures for the
              moderation of standards of achievement do not apply to results
              in these subjects. Presently, recorded subjects are either
              approved vocational education modules or competencies, or
              approved subjects in the performing arts. Approved vocational
              education modules or competencies may be completed as a
              component of some Board-registered subjects. (A sample of 1999
              senior certificate is available on request.)
         19.     Presentation by principal project officers, Mr M Snartt
              and Ms C Harrod


              (1) Queensland School Curriculum Council


                  This is an inter-systematic statutory authority
                  established in 1997. It provides for the development of
                  high quality curricula for pre-school to Year 10,
                  including pre-school curriculum guidelines, and syllabi,
                  sourcebooks and initial in-service materials for Years 1
                  to 10 and have outcomes focus. The BSSSS has
                  responsibility for syllabus development in Years 11 to
                  12. It is responsible for quality assurance in terms of
                  developing tests required under regulation. Currently,
                  these tests assess aspects of literacy and numeracy
                  against national benchmarks at Years 3, 5 and 7 and
                  development for the compulsory years of schooling. It has
                  determined that the Queensland years 1 to 10 curriculum
                  have an outcome focus.


                  The Council is responsible for publishing syllabi,
                  sourcebook guidelines, sourcebook modules, and initial in-
                  service materials for the key learning areas.


                  The Council has completed the non-mandatory pre-school
                  curriculum guidelines, and a number of positions on the
                  cross-curriculum priorities of literacy, numeracy,
                  lifeskills, and a future perspective. It has also
                  conducted a number of forums, which have produced good
                  reports focused on special issues, including industry and
                  special education.


                  Since 1997 the Council has made decisions about the
                  nature of a common and core curriculum, and the nature of
                  contents of syllabi, sourcebooks, and initial in-service
                  materials. Information about these decisions have been
                  published to schools in the council's official newsletter
                  interlinks. While the Council is responsible for
                  curriculum development, school authorities are
                  responsible for implementation.


                  It is well represented by all stakeholders, teachers
                  unions, interest groups and parents.


              (2) Outcomes approach to Queensland Years 1 to 10 curriculum


                  The main features of the outcomes approach to the
                  Queensland Years 1 to 10 curriculum are:


                  (a)  for students to demonstrate specified outcomes,
                       rather than for students to cover set materials;


                  (b)  determine the nature of curriculum inputs, rather
                       than the reverse; and


                  (c)  student's potential is developed at the rate
                       appropriate to them (by being allowed to develop and
                       demonstrate outcomes at one level) before working
                       toward outcomes at the next level, rather than moving
                       through expected learnings at a year level-specified
                       rate.


                  The curriculum is often perceived as the aggregate of the
                  courses of study offered in schools. The "structured"
                  courses of study or subjects offered in schools can be
                  seen to constitute a "formal" curriculum. Various
                  curriculum reviews, both nationally and within
                  Queensland, have highlighted the desirability of a
                  holistic curriculum that promotes learning coherence and
                  continuity. In Queesland, advocacy for curriculum
                  coherence and continuity led to the establishment of a
                  single curriculum agency for the compulsory years of
                  schooling.


              (3) Curriculum development


                  Curriculum development occurs at systematic and local
                  levels. There are diverse ways of devising different
                  courses of study that meet the different needs of
                  students in different settings. Over time, new contents
                  and contexts are identified by school authorities and
                  local school communities. There are expectations that
                  curriculum development and its ensuing realisation into
                  students' learning experiences be flexible and adaptive.


              (4) Training of teachers


                  Universities nominate individuals from the teaching
                  faculties to train teachers before the syllabus is out.


         20.     Presentation by Manager, Learning and Development
              Foundation, Ms L Shaw


              The Foundation provides a strategic approach to learning and
              development across all sectors of Education Queensland. It
              also aims to provide support to all employees by co-ordinating
              a range of communication strategies linking individuals with
              learning and development activities and opportunities.


              It enables Education Queensland to broker, facilitate and
              maximise the provision of learning and development
              opportunities in a co-ordinated and conscious manner. It also
              exists to enable the people to unlock and enhance their
              knowledge, skills, and professional behaviours to meet future
              schooling needs of students.


              It aims to reinforce notions of its staff as the first
              learners in the organisation. The staff are informed, critical
              and lateral thinkers. With a creative and innovative mindset,
              they provide service that is flexible, relevant and engaging
              for all learners.


              The Foundation is based on the concepts of entitlement;
              professional standards; recognition of individual development
              needs; availability of programmes and services and alignment
              to the strategic direction of the system, business
              units/offices and schools.


              (1) A foundation for all employees


                  The establishment of three distinct teams within the
                  Foundation reflects its commitment to providing learning
                  and development activities for all staff. It also
                  provides services to staff in district and central
                  offices and also to schools.


              (2) Membership


                  It also offers all individuals an opportunity to become
                  integral active members, and this is central to the
                  Foundation's future success. The members on the regular
                  basis will inform the Foundation's strategic direction,
                  be active as learners, and be valued members and
                  participants of the learning community.


              (3) Foundation Online
                  This will be launched during the latter part of 2000.
                  This networked learning community will be accessible
                  through the technological advances created by the
                  ConnectEd project, and provides the opportunity for all
                  members to interact via a learning laboratory available
                  through every online computer.


     M.     University of Queensland


         Official view by Professor A Luke and Prof T Grigg


         1. Graduate School of Education


              The University was set up by an Act of Parliament: The
              University of Queensland Act. There are approximately 100
              Aboriginal students studying at the University. The Graduate
              School of Education is one of the largest graduate school in
              Australia with 1 587 students from home and overseas. The
              teaching began in 1945. The Faculty of Education was
              established in December 1949 and grew to be one of the largest
              in the university. In 1997 it became part of the new Faculty
              of Social and Behavioural Sciences.


              There is a strong research culture in the school which
              provides an opportunity for students to contribute to new
              research ideas. Students are encouraged to take part in the
              Research interest groups as well as to attend research
              seminars, weekend workshops and conferences organised in the
              Graduate School of Education.


              It provides a variety of ways of studying as well as a range
              of courses, and offers new and interesting opportunities for
              students and staff in teaching, learning, research and
              professional development. Other research within the School
              focuses on the improvement of teaching and learning, on
              behaviour disorders and communication. Other major research
              programmes include Literacy Education, Intercultural
              Communication, Mathematics and Science Education and the
              Higher Education Policy Project, which has resulted in many
              publications by staff and students. A library of policy and
              other documents available for use has supported this research
              by all staff and students.


              The Research and Postgraduate Committee of the Graduate School
              of Education supports postgraduate research through funding
              policy making, and through the organisation of a variety of
              research and thesis workshops, seminars and conferences.


         2. Support services and facilities


              It offers well-established and comprehensive support
              facilities to its students. It owns the largest library in
              Queensland, comprising a central library and 11 branch
              libraries. Computer-assisted learning is also widely used
              throughout the University. For students with disabilities,
              special arrangements can be made to facilitate study and
              access to university facilities. It provides an extensive
              range of services including caf√ø, a shopping arcade, theatre
              and gallery, dental surgery and optometrist, women's equal
              opportunity area, legal advice and travel agencies.


          3. Funding


              Funding received by the University include government grants,
              contributions by students through the Higher Education
              Contribution Scheme (HECS), tuition fees, research grants and
              contracts, donations and miscellaneous revenue. It has a
              budget for 1999 exceeding $550 million, owns equipment valued
              at $171 million and employs more than 5 000 staff. Student
              fees are levied including Australian residents and
              international students. State government plays a minor role in
              funding the university.


         4. Revenue


              About half of the University's revenue is derived from the
              Commonwealth government grants which totalled $243 million in
              1997 financial year. The HECS makes up less than 13% of total
              university revenue, with fees and charges comprising a further
              13%. The remainder of income is derived from Queensland
              government grants, specific research grants and contracts,
              from services provided to community and from funds for
              scholarships, prizes and other special purposes nominated by
              donors.


         5. Expenditure


              Two thirds of the university's net income is used to support
              major teaching and research activities and associated support
              services. Other major expenses include libraries, student and
              public services, academic support services, property and
              facilities and administration costs.


         6. Fund-raising


              Direct fund-raising activities are pursued through the
              development office, the University of Queensland Foundation
              Ltd. It also benefits from the fund-raising activities of a
              number of other bodies like Alumni Association of the
              University of Queensland, Graduate Associations in Australia
              and overseas etc.


              An Annual Appeal and major gifts programme is actively
              promoted each year to fund a range of activities including
              scholarship, research, equipment, library resources which
              assists intellectually-able students from disadvantaged
              backgrounds.


         7. Exchange programmes


              It has exchange programmes with the university of Pretoria and
              university of Witwatersrand and these links are extremely
              active and beneficial. Presently, they have 412 exchange
              students drawn all over the world.


         8. Loans


              $400 million is allocated for loans. Loan scheme and
              scholarships are given to international students who are doing
              research. These students are also given a living allowance of
              $150 per week.


              Loans are granted to students while studying and on completion
              of the course, repayment is made by being deducted from
              student's salaries in a form of taxation.


         9. New Basics Project


              The New Basics are clusters, families or groups of practices
              that are essential for survival in the world that students
              have to deal with. There are four clusters, namely life
              pathaways and social future; multi-literacies and
              communication media; active citizenship and environments and
              technologies, together they describe the interactive
              requirements of new life and future orientations. This New
              Basics acts as curriculum organisers and is aimed at narrowing
              the outcomes. As such, they will help schools, teachers and
              curriculum planners to move beyond a defence of status quo
              knowledges to a critical engagement with the ongoing change
              that characterises social, technological and economic
              conditions.


    N.      Parliament House, Canberra


         The delegation was warmly welcomed by both the Senate Standing
         Committee on Employment, Workplace Relations, Small Business and
         Education and House of Representatives Standing Committee on
         Employment, Education & Workplace Relations. Both Committees were
         represented as follows:


         1. Standing Committee (House of Representatives)


              The House of Representatives Standing Committee, under the
              leadership of the Chairperson, Mr B Nelson included Mr K
              Sawford (Deputy Chairperson); Ms M May, Mr K Barlett; Mr P
              Baressi; Ms J Gillard; Ms K Elson; Ms T Gambaro; Mr C Emerson
              and Mr P McMahon (Committee Secretary).
         2. Standing Committee (Senate)


              The Senate Standing Committee was led by the Chairperson
              Senator J Tierney included Senator T Crossin; Senator N Stott-
              Despja; Senator J Ferris and Mr J Carter (Committee
              Secretary).


              Prof S M Mayatula and Mr R P Z Van den Heever gave a brief
              overview of the visit to Australia, South African legislative
              processes and role of the Committee in general.


              Constructive discussions were held with regard to functions
              they perform, their role in formulating legislations. They
              also do lot of enquiries in relation to educational matters.
              The Senate Standing Committee has more intervention approach
              than House of Representatives and has a major role in looking
              at legislation. They have caucus committees to discuss and
              agree on any legislation.


              As the Standing Committee from the House of Representatives
              has an oversight function to enquire on small business, it
              focuses at the retail sector, introduces the measures in the
              budget to assist women in business and encourages the
              development of small business to escape poverty for Aboriginal
              communities. All committees are attached to a secretariat and
              staff are well-resourced.


         3. Launch of HIV/AIDS Education


              Australia has recognised the need for co-ordinated action to
              combat HIV and AIDS. In the National HIV/AIDS Strategy,
              Australia leads the way in responding to the challenges posed
              by the HIV/AIDS epidemic.


              (The National HIV/Strategy: 1999-00 to 2003-04 (Changes and
              Challenges) comprehensive document is available on request).


              In OBE, emphasis is put on numeracy and literacy and on the
              basic benchmarks.


         4. Courtesy visit to Presiding Officers
              The delegation also paid a courtesy visit to the Presiding
              Officers in Parliament House: The President; the Senate
              Speaker, Sen the Hon M Reid; and the Speaker of the House of
              Representatives, the Hon N Andrew.


     O.     Legislative Assembly for Australian Capital Territory (ACT)


         1. Official view of Standing Committee on Education, Community
              Services and Recreation


              The Chairperson, Ms K Tucker (Chairperson); Mr W Berry (Deputy
              Chairperson); Mr H H Hird; union representative; departmental
              officials and key community people were in attendance in the
              working lunch hosted by the Legislative Assembly.


              This Committee examine education, schooling, training
              services, children's, youth/ family services and
              sport/recreation and any other related matters.


              The ACT and Queensland schools have general examination and
              school assessment designed to assess the outcomes which has
              impact on the personal development of the individuals. Most of
              the assessments are outcomes-based and aimed to assess what
              they have achieved and not to compare children and schools. In
              national ACT testing - the curriculum is narrowed and focus is
              in the criteria in which those standards are directed. The key
              competency clearly state what the school should focus on.


              The ACT government is committed to improve the schools and
              student outcomes by working in partnership with teachers and
              parents. A range of information on school performance is
              provided which includes school board annual reports; regular
              school performance reports from quality assurance assessment
              through the school development progress; and comparative data
              on government and non-government college performance published
              annually.


              Reading, writing and numeracy skills are the basic building
              blocks of a successful education, and are vital to students'
              future life opportunities. Testing students' skills is an
              important way of monitoring student performance in these vital
              areas.


              Schools also provide the opportunity for parents to receive
              feedback and discuss each individual's performance through
              parent-teacher interviews.


              It also introduced literacy testing into government schools in
              1997, and numeracy testing in 1999. The latest results on
              Years 3,5,7, and 9 literacy and numeracy performance were
              given to parents in late February 2000. A national benchmark
              for Year 3 reading has been established, with other minimum
              literacy and numeracy standards being developed for Years 3,
              5, 7 and 9. Reporting individual student and ACT results
              against these benchmarks provide greater detail about how well
              the department is achieving the literacy and numeracy goals.
              Schools also receive the reports that should remains
              confidential to the school. These reports compare the school's
              performance with the system results, but is not available to
              parents.


         2. Resources


              Additional resources are targeted to support students in need
              of extra help. In 1999, $5,48 million was allocated as
              learning assistance support for students in the greatest need
              and an additional S4,3 million was allocated for learning
              English as a second language. In Years 3 and 5, learning
              assistance support is provided for students performing in the
              bottom 20% of the year group.


              There is a strong public interest in providing more
              performance information to the public, although no government
              school system in Australia currently publishes school by
              school literacy and numeracy results in a form which enables
              comparisons to be made between schools.
     P.     Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs (DETYA)
         The delegation was welcomed by the departmental officials which
         included, Ms M Bell, Ms M McDowell, Ms C Wildermuth, Mr D McCann,
         Ms E Jones and Mr B Pearson.


         Official view


         1. University Involvement in distance education


              In 1999, 84 757 students in Australia studied externally out
              of a total of 603 156 students, a 2,3% rise on 1998 figures.
              Including overseas students, the number of students studying
              externally rose to 94 010 out of total of 686 267.


              All universities can offer distance education courses. Several
              universities do not offer external courses like ANU,
              University of Canberra, University of Western Australia,
              University of Technology, Sydney. Major providers in Australia
              are:
              Charles Sturt University  16 039
              University of New England 11 377
              Deakin University    10 277
              Monash University     7 008
              University of Southern Queensland     10 806
              Central Queensland University    5 168
              Edith Cowan University     3 704
              Universtiy of South Australia    3 286


              Australian universities also provide distance education for
              overseas students. Large markets include:


              Singapore       2 979
              Hong Kong       2 080
              Malaysia  1 725
              South Africa      244


              The corporate arms of universities also are involved in
              distance education, e.g Deakin Australia. There is no
              breakdown in statistics on fields of study for external
              students but the range of subjects offered externally is not
              restricted.
         2. Open Learning Australia (OLA)


              It is a private company owned by Monash University originally,
              but now with a number of university shareholders. It operates
              as a broker of higher education and vocational education and
              training and training courses.


              The company was established in 1993 with Commonwealth funding
              of $29 million over four years. The Commonwealth government at
              that time was looking to alternative ways of providing higher
              education and vocational education and training courses for a
              number of reasons. At the time there was some evidence that up
              to 50 000 eligible students could not get into university
              because of insufficient places. Also there was a strong
              interest in government in the use of technology to support
              teaching and learning especially the use of television and
              radio but also emerging computer technologies.


              A pilot project called TV Open Learning was funded in 1992 to
              broadcast learning programmes using the national, publicly
              owned, television broadcaster. Following the success of the
              pilot, the government invited university consortia to apply
              for funding to establish an open learning agency. After early
              growth the OLA has had modest success, with an average of
              about 2 400 students per study period (there are 4 study
              periods a year with a workload equivalent to a university
              semester). An undergraduate degree comprises 24 unit subjects.
              Cost per subject for higher education is around $454 (1999).


              The unique features of the OLA are:


              (1) There are no entry requirements.


              (2) Four continuous study periods, each equivalent to a
                  university semester.


              (3) The award given, whether undergraduate or postgraduate
                  degree or vocational qualification, is from the
                  university or TAFE providers and not from the OLA as is
                  the case for the UK's Open University.


              (4) Students can choose subjects from a range of providers
                  with full credit transfer between them.


              (5) No face to face contact is required.


              (6) Through OLA, there have been innovative approaches to
                  distance learning like home-based science experiments,
                  artistic courses involving performance etc.


              Australian universities have increased use of on-line courses
              and learning services. They have used a range of flexible
              teaching and learning approaches, ranging from print-based
              materials, through audio and video tapes, CD-Roms,
              teleconferencing and video-conferencing. The use of on-line
              teaching and learning is growing in on-campus courses and off-
              campus.


         3. Higher education funding
              As universities are autonomous bodies set up under State
              legislation, the allocation of Commonwealth operating grant
              funds between various faculties/courses is a matter for
              individual universities to determine.


              The existing funding framework was introduced following a
              major review of higher education policy and financing
              arrangement in 1998. The main features of the current
              framework are:


              (1) Provision of operating resources as a single bloc
                  operating grant for a specified level of student load
                  within the context of an educational profile that covers
                  its teaching and research activities. Operating grant
                  also include a capital, research quantum and Indigenous
                  Support funding components.


              (2) Allocation of resources in the context of a rolling
                  triennium which ensures that institutions have a secure
                  level of funding on which to base their planning for at
                  least three years.


              (3) Allocation of research funding primarily on a competitive
                  basis ($452,4 million in 2000).


              (4) Capital funding ($39,4 million in 2000).


              (5) An accountability framework provided essentially by the
                  yearly submission of educational profiles.


              While the Commonwealth provides the bulk of university funds
              ($5,72 billion in 2000), higher education institutions are
              essentially autonomous organisations that are responsible for
              the distribution of funds between faculties and schools based
              on their own assessment of priorities and needs.


         4. Operating Grant


              Operating grants consist of four components:
              (1) A teaching related component.


              (2) Indigenous Support Funding.


              (3) The Research Quantum (RQ) component.


              (4) A capital component (capital roll-in).


              The teaching related component forms the largest part of the
              operating grant. In 2000, the value of teaching related
              component is approximately $4,46 billion compared to $22,7
              million for the Indigenous Support Funding, $223 million for
              the RQ component and $267,3 million for the capital component.


              The teaching related component provides funds for the general
              operating purposes of the institution. This includes academic
              and non-academic staff salaries, minor works and equipment,
              etc.


              In 2000, operating funding for higher education institutions
              was allocated in the context of two targets:


              (a) A total of fully subsidised places (previously total load
                  target) which defines the student places in Equivalent
                  Full-time Student Units (EFTSU) for which an institutions
                  is funded in a given year of the relevant triennium.


              (b) Undergraduate fully subsidised places (previously
                  undergraduate target) which defines the minimum places
                  (EFTSU) dedicated to undergraduate teaching activity in a
                  given year.


         5. Educational profiles


              Educational profiles are one of the key elements of the
              Commonwealth's accountability framework for higher education
              institutions. The process is annual and is established under
              legislation (The Higher Education Funding Act). The process
              enables the Commonwealth to be assured of a financial health
              of the sector that institutions are spending Commonwealth
              funds in accordance with the conditions of their grants.


              Prior to the consultations institutions are asked to provide a
              range of statistical data and other information to the
              Department. The requirements are approved by the Minister and
              usually include:


              (1) Statistical data on students for the current year and the
                  next triennium.


              (2) Data on commencing and all students in Commonwealth
                  subsidised places by course type (undergraduate,
                  postgraduate, higher degree etc).


              (3) Data on all students included in first table who are
                  studying off campus.


              (4) Data on non-overseas fee-paying undergraduate and
                  postgraduate students by course type.


              (5) Data on all students by funding source.


              (6) A capital management plan which shows projected capital
                  income and expenditure, projected loans and debt
                  redemption.


              (7) Three other plans outlining strategies and performance on-
                  equity, Indigenous education and quality assurance and
                  improvement.


              Institutions are also asked to provide their audited financial
              statements for the previous year and extract from their
              strategic or business plans which focus on their goals and
              priorities, strengths and market targets.


              The data is required mid year. It is then analysed within the
              Department and consultations with individual institutions are
              scheduled for August and September. Once the consultation
              round is completed, the Department briefs the Minister on
              outcomes and provides recommendations on funding. The
              Minister's decisions are announced in the higher education
              statement for the forthcoming triennium, usually released in
              mid December.


         6. Capital development pool


              Since 1994 the large part of higher education capital funding
              has been rolled into institutional operating grants. However
              the government maintains the Capital Development Pool,
              currently at the level of S38,75 million per annum, allocate
              to "special capital projects". The Minister recently announced
              Capital Development Pool allocations for 2000 and 2001.


              The main type of "special capital project" has been the
              construction of new campuses in suburban growth corridors and
              regional centers, usually in response to demand and student
              place growth. Some 45% of the CDP since 1994 has gone to
              Queensland where growth has been greatest. Most new campuses
              are affiliates of established universities, although the
              recently independent University of the Sunshine Coast was
              largely constructed from CDP funds.


              In 1998 the government announced that from 2000 onwards, the
              CDP would be redirected to provide more funding to electronic
              delivery infrastructure projects to facilitate flexible mode
              delivery and "virtual" education services. The intention of
              the new CDP objective is to assist Australian universities to
              be better positioned to compete nationally and international
              in flexible delivery of education services and to provide
              greater choices and opportunities to students.


         7. Research Funding


              The policy statement on research and research training
              announces 4 components in terms of Commonwealth approach:


              (1) Competitive Research Scheme: Universities and researchers
                  working within them should see themselves as active
                  participants in national and regional development through
                  the advancement of knowledge and its application to meet
                  social needs through commercial means or public policy
                  measures. New knowledge, new opportunities highlighted
                  the need for a coherent policy framework for maximising
                  the national returns to investment in research in
                  Australian higher education. Competition between
                  researchers provide advice to government on strategic
                  policies on research and research council.


              (2) Performance-based funding: This was proposed to support
                  institutional research and research training and received
                  widespread support. The Government believes that this
                  approach will best recognise and reward those
                  institutions that provide high-quality research training
                  environments and support excellent and diverse research
                  activities.


              (3) Regional support: Higher education institutions play a
                  vital economic, social and cultural role in their local
                  communities, generating a wide range of employment
                  options and contributing to the development of regional
                  Australia.


              (4) Accountability and quality assurance: This approach is
                  consistent with the Government's commitment to
                  strengthening the international competitiveness of higher
                  education institution while reducing regulation and
                  intervention in universities' activities.


         8. Registration, Accreditation and Quality Assurance of Higher
              Education Institutions


              States and Territories are responsible for the establishment
              of universities; accreditation of higher education courses and
              registration of non-self-accrediting providers and protection
              of the term "university".


              (1) Establishment of universities: Thorough review of the
                  institution is done by an independent, expert panel; do
                  evaluation against agreed national criteria and
                  professional associations and peer assessment mechanisms
                  integral to assure quality standards.


              (2) Accreditation of courses: Titles and characteristics of
                  higher education awards (i.e. Bachelor, Master) are
                  specified/protected under the AQF, assessment of intended
                  course and provider undertaken by expert panel,
                  States/Territories maintain public registers of
                  accredited course and registered providers.


              (3) Protection of term "university": All States and
                  Territories protect the term "university".
         9. Closer links with AQF


              The AQF lists all institutions accredited by
              States/Territories and the Commonwealth provide higher
              education courses. The State and Territory accreditation
              bodies work closely with the AQF to ensure approved
              institutions and courses are listed on the AQF registers, and
              to improve communication on common issues.


         10.     Other elements of framework


              DETYA plays a key role in maintaining a high quality higher
              education sector through the -


              (1) publication of institution's Quality plans;


              (2) publication of benchmarks and performance indicators; and


              (3) Australian University Teaching Committee - awards
                  excellence in teaching and provides grants for teaching
                  projects.


         11.     Australian Universities Quality Agency


              It is an independent national body, which conducts assurance
              audits of self-accrediting institution and State/Territory
              accreditation authorities. It also provides public reports of
              outcomes of audits and report on relative standards of the
              Australian system.


         12.     National protocols for higher education approval processes


              Most State and Territories have legislative provision
              governing the recognition on non-self accrediting institutions
              who wish to offer courses leading to higher education awards,
              the approval of courses offered by non-self accrediting
              institution and mechanisms to approve the establishment and
              operation of institutions wishing to operate as universities
              within their jurisdiction. All States and Territories,
              excluding the external Territories, protect the use of the
              term "university" in legislation regulating the use of
              business name.


              While there are many similarities in how States and
              Territories manage the recognition of Universities and the
              accreditation of courses offered by non-self accrediting
              institutions, there is no nationally agreed protocol of common
              principles underpinning the management of these functions.


         13.     Teacher Training


              Teacher education in Australia is fundamentally conducted in
              universities. In 1960 there were education colleges which were
              staffed by State government. The general training requirement
              is 4 years. No uniform salaries, they differ from State to
              State.


     Q.     Questacon - National Science and Technology Centre


         The delegation attended the cocktail function "A Science Festival
         to South Africa" hosted by Can Trade Board and the Australian
         National University followed by a one hour tour of Questacon.


         Their involvement with the proposed tour of "Science on the Move"
         to South Africa will be to provide some of the theoretical
         "underpinnings" of science communication with the general public.
         In particular, they are conscious of the need to portray
         indigenous science and technology in the programme and, with
         Questacon, will ensure that this aspect of the science circus
         shows and exhibits is not overlooked. In the longer term, they are
         looking forward to the possibility of working with young South
         Africans to present a circus that is culturally aware, locally
         based and at the forefront of the international science
         communication movement.


         1. Background


              The Science on the Move programme provides a rich tapestry of
              experiences for people of all ages to appreciate the impact of
              science and technology on their everyday lives.
              The multifaceted programme is presented in an entertaining and
              interactive manner, contributing to and supporting not only
              formal school education, but also non-formal community
              education.


              The programme builds on a high successful tour of nine South
              Pacific countries during 1997 - Marshal Islands, Kiribati
              Republic, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Fiji, Solomon Islands, Cook
              Islands, Tonga, and Western Samoa.


         2. Objectives


              The programme addresses both short and longer term development
              issues. South Africa currently has little or no access to
              programmes of this kind which, in other regions of the world,
              have been used extensively to raise awareness of science and
              technology and their importance to development.


              In the short term, the programme provides a broadly-targeted,
              cost-effective community and school education programme
              designed to make a substantial, widespread impact, thereby
              establishing a significant baseline for follow-up activity in
              this field. The programme has the potential to reach many
              thousands of people in each venue, raising awareness of
              science and technology. This, in longer term, contributes to
              the development of a climate of understanding, valuing and
              support - in social, political and economic contexts - for
              science and technology and their significance to development.


              The programme can incorporate strategic, targeted, capacity-
              building elements which invest the development of key
              professionals (such as teachers) so that, after the programme
              has concluded, South Africa can continue to build on the
              experience. In this way, the programme can build capacity and
              skills of teachers in South Africa so that they can develop,
              in ways which are appropriate to local cultural contexts,
              interactive programmes to promote and support the development
              of scientific and technological literacy through formal and
              non-formal education.


              The specific objectives of the programmes are to -


              (1) promote general community awareness and understanding of
                  science and technology and their relationship to everyday
                  life and to environment, population and development
                  issues through the provision of interactive exhibitions
                  and programmes focusing on hands-on experiences;


              (2) increase skills and capacities of primary and secondary
                  teachers through professional development and training in
                  the area of hands-on, interactive approaches to science,
                  technology and environment education, thereby supporting
                  and enhancing existing and emerging programmes of
                  curriculum renewal which advocate this approach; and


              (3) build and support a network of professional within South
                  Africa in order to support the development of scientific
                  and technological literacy, not only within the formal
                  schooling sector, but also within the non-formal
                  education sector, with strong links to programmes such as
                  UNESCO's regional pacific programmes (through Australia's
                  centre for Public Awareness of Science) and to existing
                  science communications networks.


         3. Programme


              The Science on the Move programme consists of the following:


              (1) The hands-on, interactive exhibition entitled Science on
                  the Move: The exhibits focus on a variety of science
                  phenomenon, including environment and population issues.
                  This exhibition is easily set up in major population
                  centers, rural or remote areas. Local people are trained
                  by experienced circus staff as 'explainers' to assist
                  visiting school groups and members of the public as they
                  interact with the hands-on exhibits, providing
                  interpretation in local languages as necessary.


              (2) Science demonstration shows: These entertaining shows
                  present science as it relates to everyday life and to
                  important environment and population issues. In both
                  major venues and the smaller, regional venues, local
                  people can be trained to assist circus staff with the
                  presentation of science shows. This helps to overcome any
                  language/cultural variations, particularly in the more
                  isolated locations.


              (3) Teacher training and professional development workshops:
                  Based on Questacon's popular hands-on minds-on workshop
                  programmes across Australia and the Pacific, these
                  workshops can be provided to assist primary and junior
                  secondary teachers to implement interactive learning
                  strategies within their classrooms, encouraging greater
                  use of hands-on, activity-centred approaches as promoted
                  by curriculum renewal processes already underway in South
                  Africa.


         4. Educational challenges and opportunities


              Substantial programme of educational reform at basic education
              level are at various stages of implementation in many
              countries The task of effecting a significant philosophical
              and pedagogical change from a predominant "education for those
              proceeding to higher education" position to an 'education for
              all' position presents many problems in relation to the
              curriculum reform process.


              One of the key challenges of new science and technology
              curricula is to organise learning experiences which, rather
              than being predetermined in the manner of a syllabus, are
              customised and more responsive to students' existing knowledge
              and experience. The interactive approaches to learning
              originally developed by Questacon to support curriculum change
              in Australia and South Pacific schools, are a feature of the
              teacher development workshops in the Science on the Move
              programme. The workshops will not conflict with existing
              initiatives, rather they will enhance and support existing
              programmes of curriculum development and implementation in
              South Africa.


              Another key challenge of new science and technology curricula
              is to generate first-hand experience of science phenomena
              through hands-on activities. Hands-on approaches have often
              been difficult to implement in schools for a variety of
              reasons, including large class sizes, lack of specialist
              equipment and insufficient training of teachers to acquire
              skills in the provision of hands-on, practical experiences.
              The Science on the Move programme focuses on providing models
              and ideas for hands-on approaches to learning science. The
              teacher training workshops provide teachers with strategies to
              incorporate hands-on, interactive activities for their
              students without the need for specialist, expensive equipment.


              Science centre exhibitions and other public programmes play an
              important role in raising general community awareness of
              science and technology, that they are an integral part of our
              everyday experience and that support for science and
              technology is essential for the social and economic
              development of the country. This programme has been designed
              to provide a strategic initiative for generating community
              support for science and technology in general, and science and
              technology education in particular.


     R.     Australian National University and Student Association -
         official view by Director: Finance and Business Services, Mr A
         Bunsell, and Director, Division of Student Recruitment and
         International Education, Dr M Vargese


         This university was established in 1948 to be the Australian
         national research powerhouse. It was established by State
         legislation. It has been at the leading edge ever since and
         continues to attract quality staff and students from Australia and
         from around the world. It responds to Australian needs through its
         research, the contribution it makes to cultural, scientific,
         economic and technological debate and the quality of its
         graduates. The university's postgraduate and undergraduate courses
         (including honours and combined courses) offer depth and breadth.
         The graduate school spans the whole university with a broad range
         of 40 graduate programmes and the university offers its own
         English language courses and foundation studies programmes through
         the ANUTECH Education centre.


         In 1972 the government started to fund the university, 50% from
         the government and other 50% from research grants. All
         undergraduate degrees are offered over three years while a double
         degree is done over four years. Double degree in science and law
         is done in more than four years.
         The one exception about ANU, is that it was set up by the
         Commonwealth Parliament.


         1. Funding


              However, most funding for universities comes from the
              Commonwealth and therefore the government policy is the focus
              of attention. Within Parliament, education issues are
              frequently discussed during question time as well as in
              debates.


              The university receives $400 million each year. Funding from
              the Commonwealth and profiles are driven by the student
              numbers. The student loans amounts to $750 000. Funding is
              only applicable to Australian students and not for
              international students.


              Universities are funded from various several sources:
              Commonwealth government funding; State government funding;
              student contributions; investments; endowments; contracts and
              consultancies; and donations. The largest of these sources is
              Commonwealth funding.


              There has been considerable debate and no consensus on the
              appropriate balance of public and private financing of
              education in Australia. The government has control over equity
              on distribution of funds. Lot of students have to take part-
              time jobs and are provided with welfare services available to
              them. The government contributes to youth allowance of $260
              per fortnight.


              Annual conferences are held each year where policies for
              national union are discussed, looking at how the universities
              are funded, issues sustaining students themselves while they
              are in universities etc, as there should be control on
              funding.


              Postgraduates have to pay the Higher Education Contribution
              Scheme (HECS) upfront. They have a new evaluation of teaching
              system where they have to complete a questionnaire. They can
              evaluate their research work by completing the ANUDEC
              (Australian National University Document Evaluation Course).
              They also publish their magazine four times a year, specifying
              how the university is dealing with policy issues, and this
              form of communication is regarded as the most channel of
              communication strategy amongst students.


         2. Research funding


              It is funded primarily through the Australian Research
              Council, an independent government agency on the basis of
              national competition and peer review. The Council is currently
              being reorganised so that a new National Competitive Grants
              Programme can be established with two elements:


              (1) "Discovery" which will focus on basic research.


              (2) "Linkage" which will support national and international
                  collaboration.
              This funding will be made to universities and also to "other
              eligible research institution".


              Universities also receive money from the Commonwealth to
              support research through the Institutional Grant Scheme which
              is intended to provide general support for research and will
              be based on the success in attracting research income from a
              variety of sources (60%); attracting research students (30%)
              and the quality and output of publications (10%).


              Funding for research training is based on the numbers of
              research students completing their degree (50%); research
              income (40%) and the quality of output publications (10%).


         3. Fees


              Students pay 27% cost of the degree in advance. $12 million is
              earned through student's fee, while $22 million is earned from
              the government. Fees are paid in 3 bands:


              (1) Social Science   $3 678


              (2) Science and engineering     $4 932


              (3) Science, law and dentistry  $5 937


         4. Involvement in distance education


              Monash and the University of New England are heavily involved
              in this area. Developments in information technology make this
              an increasingly attractive option for universities,
              particularly as a source of revenue.


         5. Quality assurance programmes


              Universities have primary responsibility for matters of
              quality through responsibility to their councils for the
              quality of their education provision and the use of external
              examiners for assessing higher degrees by research and for
              some honours degrees.


              The Commonwealth Government is directly or indirectly involved
              in quality issues through peer review mechanisms which operate
              in relation to research funding (managed by the Australian
              Research Council); the collection of sector wide efficiency
              and effectiveness indicators which are published annually; and
              the requirement that universities publish a research and
              research training management plan setting out, for example,
              areas of research strength, graduate outcomes, and links to
              industry.


              In addition, a quality assurance process is currently being
              set up by the Commonwealth Government:


              (1) The core will be an external audit based on detailed self-
                  assessment, including comparisons of standards. This
                  audit will be conducted every five years on a rolling
                  basis.


              (2) State and Territory processes will also be subject to
                  periodic audit.


              (3) The process will be managed by the Australian University
                  Agency which will have as its main role the verification
                  of claims made by institutions.


         6. Student funding and government bursaries


              (1) Undergraduates receive a scholarship, AUSTUDY, which is
                  usually means tested against their parents' income, but
                  are required to contribute to the cost of their education
                  through HECS, depending on the discipline enrolled in,
                  costs (which may be paid up-front or deferred until after
                  graduation) vary from approximately $3,500 to S5,8000 per
                  year.


              (2) All postgraduate coursework, students at the ANU pay
                  tuition fees which vary significantly depending on the
                  course. The most expensive, an MBA, costs $27,500 per
                  year.


              (3) Most postgraduate at the masters and doctoral levels are
                  funded through the following:


                  (a)  Australian Postgraduate Award (APA) - these are
                       highly competitive scholarships.


                  (b)  University scholarships which are equivalent in
                       amount to APA scholarships.


                  (c)  Australian Postgraduate Awards (Industry) which are
                       part of a programme aimed at encouraging research
                       collaboration between universities and industry.


                  (d)  International Postgraduate Research Scholarship
                       which aim to attract high quality overseas research
                       students to take up study in the country's areas of
                       research strength.


         7. Exchange programmes between Australia and South Africa


              There do not appear to be any awards offered by the South
              African Government for Australians to study in South Africa as
              there are for example, award offered by the Canadian
              Government.


              However, the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan
              "enables men and women of high academic promise from
              Commonwealth countries to benefit from advance study in a
              Commonwealth country other than their own" and could
              presumably apply to Australia students wishing to study in
              South Africa.


              There are exchange arrangements between individual
              universities in Australia and South Africa.


              As, according to Dr M Vargese, there are basic financial
              problems to fund student exchange programmes. There should be
              scholarship provided to students to get full academic credits.
              It has also noted that South African students are not willing
              to study at ANU, they have interest for exchange in USA and UK
              for international studies. Asian students are fully sponsored,
              they pay for themselves. ANU have strong links with East Asia.


              Dr Vargese felt imperatively important that there is a need to
              negotiate with both governments (SA and Australia) on student
              exchanges programmes as at present there are no agreement
              between them.


              The student exchange is seen as the best way to increase the
              interest of African studies by Australian students and both
              countries have to look at the postgraduate level for these
              exchange programmes.


              She also recommended that students should be given full
              academic credit for studies undertaken at Australian
              universities and the PHD students must do field work.


         8. Olympic games


              They have sporting committees in the campus dealing with
              sporting activities.


         9. Teacher evaluation


              The students do not use the outcomes when they evaluate
              teachers. Law students in the faculty take independent
              evaluations. The evaluations serves as an incentives to most
              teachers which also serves promotional factor.


         10.     Gender imbalance


              There are also women in engineering faculty who encourage
              other women to joint it. The schools encourage students to
              take various range of subjects in universities.
         11.     Cross-cultural issues on campus


              Most students organisations affiliated with student
              association have international student societies and
              indigenous associations which look at the interests of both
              international and indigenous students. There is quite an
              amount of support.


         12.     Aboriginal students


              They mostly come from rural and lower areas. They have no
              interest in student organisations. All they want is
              recognition as individuals and not aboriginals.


         13.     Governance


              The peak decision-making forum of the ANU is the university
              council. Two boards (the Board of the Institute of Advance
              Studies, and the Board of the Faculties) advise the council on
              academic matters.


         14.     Support services


              A number of areas support university staff and students. These
              include the library, computing support, building and
              environmental infrastructure and maintenance, health and
              counselling, study skills, the Centre for Educational
              Development and Academic Methods, and a range of service and
              facilities provided by the ANU students Association and the
              postgraduate and research students association.


              The university campus has conference facilities, child care
              centres, financial organisations and retail outlets.


         15.     Teaching and Research


              There is a wide variety of academic disciplines within the
              university where teaching and research are conducted, ranging
              from departments of faculties and research schools to various
              centers and programmes.


     S.     Canberra Institute of Technology (CTI) - official view by Dean
         of Faculty of Engineering and Construction, Mr R Rose, Ms T Van
         Leeuwen and the Project Officer: International Services Unit, Mr N
         Hamey


         This is a TAFE institute established in 1970. It is a largest
         government institution offering a wide range of vocational courses
         in English, Foundation Studies, Accounting Computing, Business
         Studies, Drafting, Design, Multimedia, Electronic Animation,
         Fashion, Hotel Management, Tourism, Journalism and Media, Child
         Care, Science, Sports Studies, Electronics and Engineering.


         Teaching within the institute is managed by five faculties and one
         school. The faculties and school are based on one of the six major
         campuses and offer degree, advanced diploma, diploma and
         certificate level courses which have been approved by the
         Australian Government.


         The Institute Faculties and School are: Faculty of Applied
         Science; Faculty of Communication and Community Services; Faculty
         of Engineering and Construction; Faculty of Management and
         Business; Faculty of Tourism, Retail and Hospitality and School of
         Applied Arts and Design.


         Their qualifications are recognised in Australia and
         internationally by appropriate services to International students
         including information on courses, airport reception, hostel and
         homestay accommodation placements, orientation programmes and
         tutorial and study skills programmes.


         Teaching methods are advanced and geared to a multicultural
         classroom. They also offer a wide range of tertiary education and
         training courses. Each year over 15 000 students enrol in CTI
         courses.


         Students wishing to further their studies at universities, credit
         arrangements are in place with Australian National University and
         the university of Canberra and a number of interstate and
         International universities. These credit arrangements offer a fast
         track to a degree programme. Flow of students in the university of
         Canberra is very slow. The institute has developed further links
         with industries and other institution to offer in-service training
         and these links are seen as very important. It is well streamed
         resourced.


         1. Staff complement


              There are 400 teachers, 400 general staff and 800 part-time
              staff members.


         2. Curriculum Development


              In 1989, they moved from competency based approach to VET and
              assessment which primarily focus on what a person can do;
              knowledge component undervalued in first version of standards;
              an integrated and holistic assessment; and national standards
              and national curricula.


              They have also developed competency standards within the
              industry and are task based.
              (1) Training packages


                  They describe skill outcomes required by people working
                  at different levels in an industry area and competencies
                  are aligned to qualification levels with assessment
                  guidelines. They are nationally recognised qualifications
                  - certificate 1 to Advanced Diploma in the Australian
                  Qualification Framework (AQF). These packages are
                  developed by industry two or three training packages per
                  industry, with extensive consultation with all
                  stakeholders. In June 2000, 55 training packages were
                  endorsed.


              (2) Implementation of Training packages


                  There were 175 qualifications from 23 training packages
                  in semester 1, 2000. At least six more packages will be
                  implemented in 2001. These do not give information on
                  learning pathway, but develop the "learning pathway" for
                  each qualification, taking into account how they will
                  deliver the training and assess the students. They also
                  have partnerships with workplaces for implementation.


              (3) Programme development


                  CTI uses a Programme Reference Group to advise on
                  programme development. These programmes can be the
                  following:


                  (a)  CTI-developed and accredited programmes.


                  (b)  Accredited programmes developed interstate and
                       adopted by CTI.


                  (c)  Programmes designed to deliver training package
                       qualification.


                       The outcomes should suit the industry.


                  (d)  Learning Resources.


                       There is a need for good learning guides, like role
                       of teacher and learning solutions Department;
                       production of learning guides and online delivery and
                       learner support.


                  (e)  Library and learning centre.


                       There are six campus libraries. Each library has 2
                       PCs with internet connections. They also have print
                       based resources, electronic resources, information
                       literacy and internet access for students.


                  (f)  Teacher Education.


                       The institute offer teacher education programmes and
                       the focus is on initial and continuing teacher
                       education. It also enhances the professionalism of
                       teachers.


                  (g)  Articulated suite of programmes.
                       They are workplace training; workplace assessment;
                       certificate IV in assessment and workplace training
                       (well recognised by the industry); graduate
                       certificate in tertiary teaching and learning and
                       graduate diploma in tertiary teaching and learning.


         3. Australia-SA Educational Linkage programmes


              They have links with the Rural Water Quality project in
              Saulspoort Region in North West, conducted at Witswatersrand
              Technikon. The project will cease its work in July 2000 and
              the report will be finalised.


     T.     International Development Programme (IDP) Education Australia -
         official view by Chief Executive, Ms L Hyam, General Manager:
         International Projects, Dr E Derviniotis and Ms R Stoke


         IDP was established in 1932 by Australia's universities as a non-
         profit company, providing assistance to education system overseas.
         Located in 31 countries, it provides access to education and
         promotes the use of Australian education expertise, and
         facilitates the enrolment of international students in Australia
         and supports the delivery of Australia education off-shoot. Its
         activities include project management, fellowship administration,
         student advisory services, application processing, publications,
         exhibitions, promotions, annual international education
         conference, and English language, teaching and testing.


         IDP international projects are widely recognised for its high
         quality services in design, monitoring and evaluation, planning,
         technology transfer, training, technical assistance, studies,
         research and development and institutional strengthening .
         International projects have developed an international reputation
         for the quality of its work and its professional approach to
         international project management. They bring a high quality blend
         of experienced international project management, technical
         expertise across a number of sectors and the ability to identify,
         select and field the most appropriate consultants to implement
         projects successfully.


         1. Background


              The Australia-South Africa Institutional Links programme is
              undertaken by agreement between the South African Department
              of Education and the Australian Agency for International
              Development (AusAID) within the framework of the Technical
              Cooperation Agreement between South Africa and Australia. The
              (SA Vice Chancellors Assoc.) SAUVCA and Committee of Technikon
              Principals act a conduits of information between the South
              African institutions and the programme. IDP Education
              Australia manages the programme.


              The programme commenced its operations in June 1996 and will
              operate for eight years with an estimated Australian
              Government input of around $6,8 million. SA and Australia
              institutions contribute counterpart resources, primarily in
              kind.
              IDP Education Australia focus on three areas, namely,
              Administration of consultants (contract delivery); Management
              of consultants (delivery of expertise) and Management of
              expertise (delivery of solutions).


              They are networked in 54 offices around the world and are
              dedicated to student work. They have rendered successful 380
              projects and implementation of these project is very risky as,
              according to Dr Derviniotis, to have a successful project,
              there should be transparency; active participation; a common
              vision; convergence of goals; value added process; know-how
              management; experience management and sustainability.


         2. Programme description


              (1) Programme goal


                  The programme has a goal of assisting in increasing the
                  capacity of South African higher education institutions
                  to participate in the reconstruction and development of
                  SA, particularly the integration of education and
                  training, through the establishment of linkages between
                  Australian and SA higher education institutions.


              (2) Programme components


                  (a)  Project Development: Call for proposals for funding,
                       assessment of proposals.


                  (b)  Community Education Development Projects: Focus on
                       development in SA, such as -


                       (i)   establishment of in-service training programme
                             for teachers;


                       (ii)  establishment of outreach programmes from the
                             institution to the community; and


                       (iii) provision of new forms of training and services
                             to the community.


                  (c)  Institutional Development Projects: Focus on
                       strengthening SA institutions through curriculum
                       development, development of new teaching programme
                       and activities or the development of new
                       organisational units or support services in the
                       institutions.


                  (d)  Research and Development Projects: One project
                       involves collaborative research and development with
                       strong relevance to the community and to the RDP
                       priorities.


                  (e)  Economic Policy Planning and Administration Project:
                       Focus on strengthening skills in economic policy,
                       planning and administration, as well as developing
                       capabilities of SA higher education institutions to
                       deliver training and co-operative activities
                       promoting the utilisation of these skills.


                  (f)  Seed-funding activities: African institutions,
                       because of lack of contacts in Australia and limited
                       familiarity in writing proposals, had the opportunity
                       to choose to apply for Seed-Funding to support visits
                       to Australian institutions and return visits, plus
                       workshops on proposal writing.


              (3) Programme guidelines


                  These guidelines set out the parametres for links
                  projects. Priority sectors and possible fields within
                  those sectors are identified in the guidelines. The
                  programme primarily funds travel.


              (4) Reporting and programme co-ordinating committee
                  IDP Education Australia, as the managing contractor, is
                  responsible for general co-ordination and monitoring of
                  the links projects and the previous seed funded
                  activities. Phone contacts/visits are made to each
                  Australian participating institution during the
                  implementation of an approved project to discuss progress
                  and any issues in administration. IDP is required to
                  submit annual plans, and six-monthly report to AusAID in
                  a format approved by AusAID. Links projects are required
                  to report to IDP to meet these same AusAID requirements
                  within an agreed timeframe.


              (5) Programme Co-ordinating Committee


                  It is established in SA. It normally meets at least once
                  a year to review progress in project Components, deal
                  with policy and administration problems and assess
                  workplan for the Programme activities in the next period.
                  It has members from Australian Agency for International
                  Development (Pretoria), the SA Department of Education,
                  the SAUVCA, Committee of Technikon Principals and IDP
                  Education Australia. Reports on the progress of each
                  project must be submitted by institutions to IDP for
                  these meetings.


                  The delegation was also informed that the SAUVCA's Chief
                  Executive Officer Ms P Kotecha
                  has information on a university student mobility
                  programme for the Indian Ocean region.


              (6) Expected benefits


                  The major benefits are in facilitating implementation in
                  SA's reconstruction and development programme, which is
                  expected to have major social and economic benefits for
                  the large population of SA.


                  It is intended that a sustainable link be established
                  between SA, Southern African and Australian institutions
                  participating in linkages under the programme. Other
                  mutual benefits to participating institutions include the
                  internationalising of institutions, staff, students,
                  curricula and the increased capability to operate in an
                  international environment.


                  It was envisaged that the IDP SA in Johannesburg should
                  organise a meeting to discuss the projects.


     U.     Visit to New Zealand


         On arrival on 1 July 2000, the delegation was warmly welcomed by
         our Honorary Consul of Republic of South Africa, Mr G Fortuin, at
         Wellington airport, New Zealand.


         On 2 July 2000, a meeting was held at Mr Fortuin's residence with
         the Associate Minister of Maori Affairs, the Hon T Turia. These
         were the areas that were covered:


         In New Zealand there are 5 Associate Ministers/Deputy Ministers, 3
         of which are Maoris. The Hon T Turia is the Associate Minister for
         portfolios of Correction, Health, Housing and Social Services,
         representing the Maoris in Parliament.


         There are 500 000 indigenous people out of 8,3 million New Zealand
         population. Racism still exists against Maoris, as a result in
         some areas, children find it difficult to attend and learn at
         various schools. There is reluctance of indigenous people of not
         performing well in schools although there are few schools which
         teach children in their own language.


         About 10% of their land was taken from them and the settlement
         process to address the stealing process is about 30%. People here
         live in poverty, children are extremely violent, they are jailed
         for burglary and theft. Majority of them, are committing serious
         offences and crimes and lot of children are incarcerated.


         She believes that children should be taught in a way that they can
         learn their own language and be given various skills and be
         encouraged to use their mother tongue. The government at present,
         want to control their development.


         There are 130 Maori teacher training programmes each year. The
         medium of instruction in Maori schools is English. They are
         trained on how to become teachers. They have Maori language in
         each school and they have an advantage of teaching the Maori
         language, and this is seen as an incentive.


         NZ$16 million have been allocated by the government to train
         teachers to teach the Maori language. Status of indigenous
         language is recognised in the country.


         1. Bridging the gap programme


              NZ$ 250 million have been budgeted to cover social and
              economic development. They ascertain on what the problems are,
              and budget funds to solve those problems. The government
              decides on who will get funding. There is also a budget called
              "social development" which is put aside to assist on social
              development. The Prime Minister is very concerned on what the
              Maori people want. He prefers one budget to be managed by the
              group of Ministers to determine where funds should be
              allocated.


              The tribal people have their board which determine strategic
              development. At national level, there are Maori Councils,
              Maori Women Congress and there is no legislation that governs
              them. The congress represents the tribes and is trusted by the
              people because it is people-driven.


     V.     Ministry of Education, Wellington - official view by Senior
         Manager: Learning and Evaluation Policy, Ms F Kelly and Senior
         Manager: Curriculum Division, Mr C Brown
         There are 2 700 schools in New Zealand - 2 350 primary schools
         (Year 1-8) and 350 secondary schools (Year 9-13). They have State
         schools, Private Schools and Integrated Schools. Year 1-8 is a
         primary phase while Year 1-10 is the general education. Compulsory
         curriculum ends in Year 10. School education is free up to Year 13
         and there is no Kindergarten. The government provides subsidies
         for pre-school education from three to five years, and from five
         to ten years. Formal schooling starts when a child is five years
         old.


         There are 8 universities, polytechnics, colleges of education and
         3 Wananga (Maori tertiary institutions) universities - the medium
         of instruction is the Maori language. Teachers are trained and
         qualified. The polytechnics (training colleges) run programmes for
         school leavers and these are accredited by the NZ Qualification
         Authority.


         All schools are self-managing, having Board of Trustees elected by
         parents with the term of office of 3 years. This board also
         includes student representatives and the government does not have
         authority over it.


         1. New Zealand Curriculum


              It comprises of a set of national curriculum statements which
              define the learning principles and achievement aims and
              objectives which all New Zealand schools are required to
              follow. It builds on the positive features of past curriculum
              experience. It is the official policy for teaching, learning
              and assessment in New Zealand schools. It is the
              responsibility of boards of trustees to ensure that schools
              satisfy the requirement and expectations. Every school charter
              and proposed charter must include the aim of meeting and
              following the learning principles and achievement aims and
              objectives.


              It sets out national directions for schooling and provides for
              consistency in classroom programmes throughout the country. It
              describes the framework for learning and assessment which
              links learning experiences within the total school curriculum
              in a coherent and balanced way.


              It recognises that all students should have the opportunity to
              undertake study in essential areas of learning and to develop
              essential skills. Such learning will enable them to develop
              their potential, to continue learning throughout life, and to
              participate effectively and productively in New Zealand's
              democratic society and in a competitive world economy.


              It seeks to raise the achievement levels of all students and
              to ensure that the quality of teaching and learning in New
              Zealand schools is of the highest international standard. It
              identifies for boards of trustees, teachers, students,
              parents, and the wider community a progression of desirable
              standard of learning throughout the years of schooling,
              against which student's progress can be assessed.


              It recognises pre-school learning experiences and post-school
              education and training opportunities. It links school-based
              learning with the world outside school.


              The New Zealand Curriculum applies also to -


              (1) all New Zealand schools, including kura kaupapa Maori, and
                  special education schools;


              (2) all students, irrespective of gender, ethnicity, belief,
                  ability or disability, social or cultural background, or
                  geographical location;


              (3) all years of schooling, from new entrants to the
                  completion of schooling; that is from years 1 to 13.


         2. School curriculum


              It consists of the ways in which a school puts into practice
              the policy set out in the national curriculum statements. It
              takes into account of local needs, priorities, and resources,
              and is designed in consultation with the school's community.
              In the1980s comprehensive reviews of the curriculum,
              assessment, and education administration were carried out and
              there were major consultations. The process was then followed
              by the curriculum framework in 1993.


         3. Essential Learning Areas


              The New Zealand Curriculum specifies seven essential learning
              areas (language and languages, mathematics, science,
              technology social sciences, the arts, health and physical well-
              being) which describe in broad terms, knowledge and
              understanding which all students need to acquire. All seven
              learning areas are essential for a broad and balanced
              education. Schools must ensure that all students undertake
              continuing study in all the learning areas during each of the
              first ten years of schooling. Schools must also maintain a
              balanced curriculum in the final years of schooling (Years 11,
              12 and 13), recognising the diverse educational and training
              needs of students at these levels.


              Schools may achieve a balanced and broad curriculum in a
              number of ways; for example, by organising their programmes
              around subjects, by using an integrated approach, or by using
              topic or thematic approaches. Schools have the flexibility to
              plan programmes to meet their particular needs; for example,
              kaupapa Maori programme, English programmes for speakers of
              other languages, or Pacific Island language courses. In
              whatever way programmes are organised, they must incorporate
              the knowledge and understanding described in all seven
              learning areas.


              The essential learning areas are broad, recognisable
              categories of knowledge and understanding. They provide the
              context within which the essential skills, attitudes, and
              values are developed.
              Other important areas of study, such as the environment, and
              culture and heritage, are included in a number of the
              essential learning areas. These essential areas are
              interrelated. Any activity which students engage in, will draw
              on more than one learning area. For example, a study of sound
              may focus primarily on science, but may also contribute to
              students' development in the arts, technology, and
              mathematics. In planning programmes, schools need to
              understand and make use of the connections between the
              learning areas.


         4. Essential skills


              The New Zealand Curriculum specifies eight groupings of
              essential skills to be developed by all students across the
              whole curriculum throughout the years of schooling. These
              categories encompass other important groups of skills, such as
              creative skills, valuing skills, and practical life skills.
              These essential skills are:


              (1) Communication skills - communicate competently and
                  confidently by listening, speaking, reading, and writing,
                  and by using other forms of communication where
                  appropriate.


              (2) Numeracy skills - calculate accurately.


              (3) Information skills - identify, locate, gather, store,
                  retrieve, and process information from a range of
                  sources.


              (4) Problem-solving skills - think critically, creatively,
                  reflectively and logically.


              (5) Self-management and competitive skills - set, evaluate,
                  and achieve realistic personal goals.


              (6) Social and co-operative skills - develop good
                  relationships with others, and work in co-operative ways
                  to achieve common goals.


              (7) Physical skills - develop personal fitness and health
                  through regular exercise, good hygiene, and healthy diet.


              (8) Work and study skills - work effectively, both
                  independently and in groups.


              All the essential skills are important if students are to
              achieve their potential and to participate fully in society,
              including the world of work.


         5. Framework


              The New Zealand Curriculum Framework describes the elements
              which are fundamental to teaching and learning in New Zealand
              schools. It states the principles which give direction to all
              teaching and learning. It specifies seven essential learning
              areas which describe in broad terms the knowledge and
              understanding which all students need to acquire. It sets out
              the essential skills to be developed by all students and
              indicates the place of attitude and values in school
              curriculum. It gives direction to the development of more
              specific national curriculum statements which describe in more
              detail the required knowledge, understanding, skills, and
              attitudes. It also outines the policy for assessment at school
              and national levels.


         6. Implementation of curriculum


              The intension for implementation of curriculum is to how to
              achieve the outcomes and to have impaired schools to be
              innovative in the system. Assessment is part of learning
              cycles, that is informative to help children and to refocus
              teachers. Teachers must have subject knowledge and to
              understand the curriculum on OBE. In order for the teachers to
              deliver, there should be more textbooks and materials, and
              thorough knowledge on the subject one has to teach. Students
              should also be provided with core material and textbooks.


              In New Zealand, teachers are provided with learning
              equipments, materials in classrooms in all schools to give
              them support. The Department has highly skilled working force
              and professional staff. NZ$10 million was allocated on
              programmes on the development of teachers and school advisers
              to have ongoing support for them.


         7. Role of teachers in curriculum development


              Teachers are extensively involved in the setting up and
              writing of the policy document in different stages of the
              processes. Teacher unions participate in the process with the
              broad consultation in the teaching profession. The Ministry
              advises on the development of policy.


         8. Funding of schools


              The State funds the State schools and subsidise the private
              schools. Due to the state of collapse, the Integrated schools
              were integrated by the legislation of Parliament.


     W.     Whitireia Community Polytechnic - official view by CEO, Ms D
         Dale, Director: Corporative Services, Mr B Miller and Director:
         Customer Services, Ms V Collins


         On arrival, the delegation was warmly welcomed at the reception by
         the delegates from Te Wananga Maori and escorted to powhiri in Te
         Onepu (main hall). The delegation was given some guidance about
         the protocol and expectations and on where to sit and when to
         speak.


         This community was led by the Te Wananga Maori Chief, Mr A Author
         and the Whitireia community, singing their Maori traditional
         songs. The Chief's brother who died early this year, was the
         founder of this community.


         Prof Mayatula gave an overview of the objective of the study tour,
         addressing them in his own language, isiXhosa. They also expressed
         themselves in their own language.


         The Whitireia Community Polytechnic is a government- funded
         tertiary institution. Established in 1986, it is known for
         producing work-ready graduates who have found employment both in
         New Zealand and overseas. They have 3¬†500 students, 1 900 full-
         time and 1 600 part-time.


         They have 3 campuses and the main campus is in Porirua, sitting at
         the edge of the scenic Porirua harbour, which is 20 km north of
         Wellington city. It prides itself as the centre of education
         excellence with bi-cultural and multicultural identity of
         students. There are 10 schools within the polytechnic which offer
         arts, business and management, catering and hospitality,
         computing, further education, Maori Education and career
         development, nursing and health studies, office systems and
         tourism, teacher education and training and technology. They also
         offer nursing programmes at degree level and at universities, they
         continue at the Master's level.
         1. Enrolment


              22% of student population are Maori students and the majority
              of them come from the Pacific Island.


         2. School of technology


              This school was established in 1998 to focus on the
              development of technology-related programmes. Encompassing
              technology in its broadest sense, it offers full-time
              programmes in computer support, horticulture and landscaping,
              and automotive engineering. In 2000 they will be extending
              these programmes to include electrical engineering, a broad
              trade skills programme and a range of part-time courses to
              extend people already working in these fields. All full-time
              programmes are approved by the NZQA and where appropriate, the
              relevant industry training organisations.


         3. School of Maori education and career development
              This school has programmes aimed to help all students to gain
              a greater understanding of things of Maori, and help return
              them to their heritage. It offers the following courses:


              (1) Te Tohu Mutunga Kore (Total Immersion te reo Maori).


              (2) Nga Tapuwae (Advanced te reo Maori).


              (3) Poutama (Maori Art and Craft).


              (4) Te Huakirangi 1 & 2 (Information Technology Systems).


              (5) Toi Whakaata 1& 2 (Film and Television).


              (6) Te Kukune (Maori Sports, Music and Performance).


              (7) Paerangatiratanga (Maori Business Administration).


              Entrance requirement depends on the programme.
         4. Student fees


              Each student has to pay a school fee of NZ$2 500 each year.
              57% is funded by the Ministry of Education, 23% by the
              student, and 20% from contract, private sector and local
              business.


              NZ$1 million for international education comes from
              international students as fees.


         5. Placements


              They have close links with the target sector, students are
              kept relevant to the industries. Employment rate is very high,
              majority of students are able to get employment after
              completing the course. New Zealand has quality management
              system which is accredited to all the programmes which meets
              the international standards.


     X.     Victoria University of Wellington - School of Education: Te
         Putahitanga o te Matauranga - official view by Head of School of
         Education, Prof C Hall, Manager: Faculty of Humanities, Ms K
         Jermyn, Ms B Craig, Mr J Irving and Mr D Brown


         1. Overview of New Zealand system - Synopsis of OBE


              The model of education provision and delivery operated by the
              NZ Government is known as OBE. It is a comprehensive model of
              educational organisation which covers virtually all spheres of
              the operation of the NZ education system. The following sets
              out the main parameters for OBE:


              (1) Description


                  OBE comprises in its simplest form, the declaration of
                  the intended outcomes (objectives) of an education system
                  or operation, the design and implementation of a
                  programme or activities aimed at achieving these
                  outcomes, and the monitoring of the actual outcomes
                  against the intended ones.
              (2) Domain of operation


                  OBE is a comprehensive system of educational
                  organisation. It covers the contractual relationship
                  between the Government and providers (and other
                  educational bodies); the organisation and management of
                  schools; curriculum design and implementation; assessment
                  of student work; staff development and appraisal, and the
                  audit and review of institutional performance operating
                  within the system.


              (3) Contractual relationship between government and
                  educational providers


                  The government purchases services from institutions.
                  Institutions declare their intended outcomes or adopt
                  centrally defined objectives or standards (these may
                  sometimes be defined in legislation such as those to do
                  with health and safety); institutions designed their own
                  delivery, institutions are then monitored and held
                  accountable for meeting the declared/prescribed outcomes.


              (4) Curriculum


                  In respect of curriculum and assessment, learning
                  outcomes are specified in New Zealand Curriculum
                  Framework unit standards; institutions design programmes
                  which embed these outcomes; students are assessed against
                  these outcomes; where external qualifications are
                  involved, internal assessment of student work is
                  moderated to ensure that a common standard has been
                  applied across providers; at the primary school level,
                  considerable pressure is being exerted to put in place a
                  system of national assessment.


              (5) Rationale


                  OBE is based on several premises, although in practice
                  many of these are contestable. The key premises include
                  the following:
                  (a)  Transparency - the purchasers or customers of an
                       education service should have a clear understanding
                       of what they are buying or receiving.


                  (b)  Choice - customers should have choice in what they
                       purchase.


                  (c)  Decentralisation - control over the design and
                       operation of an educational service should be
                       devolved to educational providers and their
                       communities.


                  (d)  Accountability - those responsible for the delivery
                       of a service should be accountable for ensuring that
                       they meet expectations and provide a quality service.


              (6) Assessment


                  OBE is strongly associated with standard-based
                  assessment. Standards are defined in terms of either
                  competency (pass/fail) or achievement levels, and
                  students are judged against criteria which indicate
                  whether the required standard has been met.


              (7) Students


                  OBE is said to be student-centred in focus because it
                  gives students clear information about what is expected
                  of them. Proponents of OBE also stress the importance of
                  students working at their own pace. However, the autonomy
                  provided to learners is of a "procedural" kind - the
                  focus is more on "how" they learn rather than "what" -
                  and does not align with the autonomy provided under other
                  models of teaching and learning. As practised in NZ, OBE
                  is in fact strongly "content-centred" in focus.


              (8) Content/knowledge


                  OBE is a relatively closed system of education in respect
                  of knowledge generation and change. It tends to focus on
                  existing knowledge, skills and values. It is most
                  appropriate in situations where accepted truths, specific
                  competencies, particular methods and proven techniques
                  are being taught and assessed.


              (9) Professional development and teacher appraisal


                  Under OBE, professional development and appraisal systems
                  typically involve a meeting between teachers and their
                  managers to clarify expectations and training needs; a
                  statement of objectives or standards that teachers should
                  meet; monitoring of teachers against these objectives or
                  standards over a specified period of time; a review
                  meeting, a written report on the teacher performance
                  including recommendations for further professional
                  development; and repeat of the previous loop including a
                  revision of the objectives.
         2. Methodology for implementation and practical problems in
              schools


              Large number of teachers have too much workload to manage OBE
              and assessment. Teachers are under enormous pressure to manage
              the demand. They spend less time with students in the
              classrooms, and more time on administration and this result to
              difficulty for them to manage the students. They have less
              time to record and to make reports, they are constantly
              engaged in review work. Within schools, they are relatively
              well resourced with curriculum learning and teaching
              materials, and well trained.


         3. Role of universities in curriculum development


              They bring curriculum writers to schools and universities to
              develop the curriculum.


         4. Lack of achievement on Maori communities in education


              Maori communities always feel that they should be given jobs
              to do for themselves, there is lack of autonomy in certain
              communities. They strongly believe that the potential is there
              to see their own education. They can have greater chance for
              achievement and change.


              Until 1968, there were separate systems (Maori and other State
              school system) operated by Europeans for Maoris (most of them
              attended the Europeans schools). There is strong request for
              Maori status or authority to manage their education.


         5. Teacher training


              In New Zealand, there are 37 teacher colleges and are based in
              major cities and some are incorporated in universities due to
              infrastructural problems. Some disperse their training in wide
              range of locations. Teachers are trained in teacher colleges
              and universities takes responsibility for further education
              and training. They do offer in-service training programmes;
              and about 70-78% primary and secondary teachers are trained by
              the institution.


         6. Requirements for teachers


              A minimum requirement for teachers is 3 years Bachelor degree,
              which is accredited by NZQA and a Registration Board and 1
              year teacher training (if one is a graduate). They must teach
              for 2 years before registration by the Teacher Registration
              Board. Universities do not provide teacher training. Degrees
              done from teacher colleges are more focused on teaching
              programmes and are basely aimed for teaching.


         7. Student funding


              All institutions receive funding for students from the
              government. They pay for their tuition fees and can apply for
              refundable loans. Some of them get student allowances
              depending on parental income. There is a body (Work and Income
              NZ) responsible for allocations of funds to students, no
              university handle this area. All loans generate interests and
              is paid back in a form of taxation.


         8. Funding of university


              Allocation is given to university per student including
              research. If the student numbers decreases, the allocations
              become lesser. NZ$2,3 million is available if the university
              does not raise fees.


         9. Drop in enrolment


              There was 2% overall drop in science and humanities, except in
              law and commerce faculties.


              There is NZ Vice Chancellors Committee to discuss issues to be
              brought up to the government in which in return, the
              government gives the signal to push back the competitive
              approach in universities and schools.


         10.     Link between university-ministry-parliament


              The changes in the education system in 1989 through Act of
              Parliament, have led strong powers to universities. All
              institutions receiving funding from the State, need to report
              to the Ministry.


         11.     Quality assurance


              Quality assurance is set up by the NZ Vice Chancellors
              Committee. The Academic Audit monitor the range of systems to
              see whether they achieve what is aimed to be achieved.


     Y.     Parliament of New Zealand, Wellington - official view by
         Minister of Education, the Hon T Mallard


         He is the Minister responsible for the portfolios in Education,
         State Services, Sport, Fitness and Leisure, Education Review
         Office and Associate Minister of Finance.


         There are 120 Members of Parliament in the House of
         Representatives in New Zealand Government. There is no written
         constitution, no provincial system and the Bill of Rights is not
         the supreme law of the country. New Zealand is an easy country to
         make laws. The caucus approves legislation before it is introduced
         in Parliament.


         According to him, the previous government did not give bulk of
         money for education system in NZ. At present, large amounts have
         been allocated and divided to fund poor schools with an aim to try
         to turn a natural projection to these schools.


         Presently, they are working on the most controversial enrolment
         legislation, which will provide provision for district boundaries
         to draw up enrolment schemes. It is controversial because it is
         aimed at selecting people according to their family units.


         There is a strong debate in the House on what should be the
         relationship between University and Parliament. To set up a
         university, one needs to have an approval from the Minister of
         Education. 60% of the university funding comes from the
         government, with full academic freedom but it is very limited.


         The delegation proceeded to the Speaker's Gallery of Parliament
         where they were introduced to the House of Representatives and
         observed the question time. Education Amendment Bill was
         introduced and discussed.


         Due to debate and discussions in House, the delegation could not
         meet with the members of the New Zealand South Africa
         Parliamentary Friendship Group.


         1. Select Committee on Education and Science Committee: House of
              Representatives


              The Committee, under the leadership of the Chairperson, Ms Liz
              Gordon had constructive discussions, and the following matters
              were covered:


              (1) General overview


                  Over 30 years, Maori education has been identified as a
                  big problem. Native schools were abolished, and moved to
                  authoritative and colonised based system. There was quite
                  a big division within Maori communities, and their cities
                  are too white. There are a number of Maori Immersion
                  schools which provide Moari medium education in Maori
                  language, and there has been great improvement in Maori
                  education. There was a perception that schools in rich
                  areas are the best, and parents prefer and choose to take
                  their children to those schools.


                  Poor schools are allocated bigger budgets than rich and
                  affording schools. The new legislation, Education
                  Amendment Bill will enhance the upliftment of poor
                  schools, as there are 10 categories of schools in New
                  Zealand. There is extra funding allocated to schools to
                  purchase materials and equipment and other educational
                  needs.
              (2) Funding of schools


                  Private schools had an increasing funding for the past 10
                  years. The government gives more funding to public
                  schools.


              (3) Cultural diversity


                  Racism and economic division still exist in New Zealand.
                  No recognition of traditional authority - the problem is
                  to define what Maori tradition is. The government is now
                  trying to close the economic gap.


                  The effectiveness of local government needs to be
                  desired. The commitment is not on the Chief but in the
                  sub-tribe.


              (4) Links between university and parliament


                  There are 8 universities in NZ including 1 technology
                  university. All universities are public and fully funded
                  by the government. 10 000 women graduate each year. Each
                  institution chooses its own way on how to collect its
                  fees from students. There were lot of protests by
                  students on the introduction of the fee system by the
                  universities, they had to borrow money from loan schemes
                  (from central government) which are interest-free to
                  further their studies. The student debt is NZ$420
                  billion, which is more that the government expenditure.
                  The government intends to introduce free education.


     Z.     University of Auckland, Auckland - official view by Vice-
         Chancellor, Dr Hood, Head, Massey University, Prof N Watson, Dr J
         Hinchcliff, University of Technology and university officials


         1. New Teaching and Learning Technologies


              The University of Auckland is a campus-based university. It
              must respond to the global revolution which is transforming
              the way knowledge is stored, accessed, disseminated, analysed
              and presented, or risk being left behind in educational
              developments. Three years ago, it recognised the increasingly
              important role of technology and sought to encourage
              flexibility in teaching and learning modes.


              It will build on its capabilities in multimedia and related
              educational technologies, integrating these into its
              undergraduate and postgraduate programme design, delivery and
              support. It will become rapidly responsive to changing
              information systems and capture the benefits of technology for
              staff and students.


         2. Changes in government policy


              In November 1998, the Government issued the White Paper on
              tertiary education which proposes major changes to the funding
              of teaching and research in the tertiary sector, the
              governance structures of universities, quality assurance
              processes and the regulatory environment. It is clear that
              universities exist in an environment where Government, as a
              major funder of education, exercises considerable influence
              over future direction. The university must make its voice
              heard in policy and decision making. It must demonstrate to
              Government and the wider public the value of world-class
              higher education to the nation.


         3. Distance education


              It is provided at universities in New Zealand.


         4. Financial constraints


              Public funding cuts have imposed severe financial constraints
              on the University and forced it to make very difficult
              financial decisions. As these financial constraints will
              contribute for at least the next two years, the University
              must find other sources of revenue. All of their financial
              strategy must be guided by academic considerations. Staff and
              students must feel assured that financial decisions are being
              made in an open, transparent and responsible manner.


         5. Relationship with other education institutions


              In 1995 the University was developing a network of
              relationships with three polytechnics in Auckland, Northland
              Polytechnic, the Auckland College of Education and the
              Auckland Consortium for Theological Education. Several changes
              have occurred within this network. The relationship with the
              Auckland College of Education has largely been severed as it
              plans to link with Massey University. The relationship with
              the Manukau Institute of Technology became a formal agreement
              in 1997 and there are proposals to develop this alliance
              further.


              The competitive tertiary sector demand that the University
              examine very carefully its relationships with other
              educational institutions. It has re-examined its mission,
              goals and strategies taking into consideration the challenges
              and opportunities.


              Institutions develop their own development programmes. 100
              different degree programmes have led institutions to agree to
              be mergers. The Government will establish tertiary advisory
              committee to describe the structure of the institutions,
              quality, advise and support will determine the structure of
              the tertiary sector.


         6. Community relations


              Communities have traditionally looked at universities for
              intellectual guidance and stimulus. This is a role now shared
              with other institutions and organisations. The challenge for
              the University is to build strong community relationship,
              demonstrate and provide leadership, expert opinions, critical
              thinking and comment, professional training, custodianship of
              a range of collections and national treasures and
              opportunities for lifelong learning.


     AA.    Comments and recommendations


         1. The Committee must pursue interaction with the    Department of
              Education and other identified bodies and interest groups like
              NSFAS, and this Report must be a resource in order to engage
              different structures and institutions of learning.


         2. The Committee must undertake visits to the provinces to monitor
              how OBE is implemented or whether there are improvements of
              past performance.


         3. The Committee must follow up the possibility of the "Science on
              the Move" project being brought to South Africa.


         4. The Committee needs to pick up, in particular, on the student
              exhange programmes, where the government needs to have some
              agreement with Australia.


         5. The Report should be regarded as a basis for further
              discussions and investigations.


     BB.    Conclusion


         The Committee is satisfied that it attained most of the objectives
         indentified by the study tour to both Australia and New Zealand.


     CC.    List of participants


         1. NSW Department of Education and Training: Sydney.


         2. NSW Minister for Education and Training, the Hon J Aquilina.


         3. Sydney Institute of Technology: Director, Ms M Persson;
              Director: Aboriginal Studies, Mr J Darney, and executive
              staff.


         4. Riverside Girls High School, and principal Ms J King and school
              executive.


         5. University of Sydney.


         6. Education Queensland International.


         7. University of Queensland: Graduate School of Education.


         8. The Speaker of the House of Representative, the Hon N Andrew:
              Parliament House, Canberra.


         9. The President of the Senate, Senator the Hon M Reid.


         10.     The Senate, Standing Committee on Employment, Workplace
              Relations, Small Business and Education.


         11.     House of Representative Standing Committee on Employment,
              Education and Workplace Relations.


         12.     Committee on Education: Legislative Assembly, Australian
              Capital Territory.


         13.     Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs.


         14.     Australian National University and Student Association.
         15.     Canberra Institute of Technology and Student Association.


         16.     IDP Education Australia.


         17.     Mr G Fortuin, Honorary Consul for Republic of South
              Africa, New Zealand.


         18.     Associate Minister of Maori Affairs, the Hon T Turia.


         19.     Ministry of Education, New Zealand.


         20.     CEO, Ms D Dale and Staff of Whitereia Community Technikon.


         21.     Whitereia and Maori communities.


         22.     NZ Minister of Education, the Hon T Mallard.


         23.     Victoria University, Wellington.


         24.     Parliament of New Zealand, Wellington.


         25.     University of Auckland, Auckland.


         26.     Massey University, Auckland.


         27.     High Commissioner, Dr B G Ranchod, SA High Commission,
              Canberra.


         28.     Deputy High Commissioner, Mr E Grobbler, SA High
              Commission, Canberra.

                            MONDAY, 26 MARCH 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:

    The following changes have been made to the membership of Ad¬†Hoc
     Committees, viz:


     Filling of Vacancies on Commission for Gender Equality:


     Appointed: Newhoudt-Druchen, W S.
     Discharged: Bhengu, N R.

    The following changes have been made to the membership of House
     Committees, viz:


     Rules:


     Discharged: Makuyane, T L.

    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
     Committees, viz:


     Constitutional Review:


     Discharged: Jana, D P S.


     Defence:


     Appointed: Oosthuizen, G C.


     Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
     Disabled Persons:


     Appointed: Nel, A C (Alt).
     Discharged: Jana, D P S.


     Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women:


     Discharged: Maphalala, M A.

      The following changes have been made to the membership of Portfolio
     Committees, viz:


     Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Appointed: Arendse, J D (Alt); Kasienyane, O R; Zita, L.
     Discharged: Masala, M M.


     Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Appointed: Gcina, C I (Alt); Newhoudt-Druchen, W S (Alt).
     Discharged: Ncube, B N Z.


     Communications:


     Appointed: Kgarimetsa, J J (Alt); Lekgoro, M K; Maziya, L M.
     Discharged: Ngaleka, E.


     Correctional Services:


     Appointed: Durand J (Alt); Ngaleka, E; Oosthuizen, G C; Smit, H A.
     Discharged: Maziya, A M; Morkel, C M.


     Education:


     Appointed: Gaum, A H (Alt); Geldenhuys, B L.
     Discharged: Mogale, E P; Schippers, J.


     Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Appointed: Arendse, J D (Alt); Ndzanga, R A.
     Discharged: Hendrickse, P A C; Mokaba, P R.


     Finance:


     Appointed: Moloto, K A.
     Discharged: Van der Merwe, S C.
     Foreign Affairs:


     Appointed: Mokaba, P R; Sigwela, E M; Hendrickse, P A C (Alt).


     Health:


     Appointed: Ngaleka, E (Alt).
     Discharged: Mpehle, M.


     Home Affairs:


     Appointed: Beukman, F; Pretorius, I J (Alt).
     Discharged: Van Jaarsveld, A Z A.


     Housing:


     Appointed: Durand, J; Rhoda, R T (Alt).
     Discharged: Ngaleka, E; Odendaal, W A.


     Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Appointed: Bakker, D M (Alt); Camerer, S M; Mahlawe, N.
     Discharged: Gaum, A H; Jana, D P S.
     Labour:


     Appointed: Blaas, A; Durand, J (Alt); Mohai, S J (Alt).
     Discharged: Bakker, D M; Maphalala, M A.


     Minerals and Energy:


     Appointed: Xingwana, L M T; Ngaleka, E (Alt).
     Discharged: Mokaba, P R.


     Provincial and Local Government:


     Appointed: Kgarimetsa, J J; Mahlawe, N (Alt).
     Discharged: Mpaka, H M.


     Public Enterprises:


     Appointed: Masala, M M (Alt); Mnandi, P N (Alt); Mpaka, H M (Alt).


     Public Service and Administration:


     Appointed: Mbulawa-Hans, B G (Alt).


     Public Works:


     Appointed: Schippers, J; Van der Merwe, A S (Alt).
     Discharged: Gcina, C I; Kasienyane, O R; Mpehle,¬†M;¬†Nel,¬†A¬†H.


     Social Development:


     Appointed: Mars, I; Middleton, N S (Alt).
     Discharged: Gandhi, E; Mbulawa-Hans, B G.


     Sport and Recreation:


     Appointed: Mbulawa-Hans, B G.
     Discharged: Moropa, R M.


     Trade and Industry:


     Appointed: Moloto, K A (Alt); Moropa, R M (Alt).


     Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Appointed: Arendse, J D; Mothoagae, P K (Alt); Ndzanga, R (Alt).
      The following changes have been made to the membership of Standing
     Committees, viz:


     Private Members' Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions:


     Appointed: Mahlangu, G L (Alt); Mshudulu, S A (Alt).
     Discharged: Ncube, B N Z.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of the Independent Development Trust for
         1998-99 [RP 6-2001];


     (b)    Financial Statements of the Temporary Employees' Pension and
         Provident Fund for 1997-98 and 1998-99 [RP 9-2001];


     (c)    Financial Statements of Refsa (Pty) Ltd for the period ended 14
         July 1998 [RP 22-2001].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on the
     South African Sports Commission Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2001] (National
     Assembly - sec 75), dated 20 March 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having considered
         the subject of the South African Sports Commission Amendment Bill
         [B 2 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 2A - 2001].

                           TUESDAY, 27 MARCH 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Public Enterprises on 22 March 2001 submitted a
         draft of the Eskom Conversion Bill, 2001, and a memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Labour
         and Public Enterprises, respectively, in accordance with Joint
         Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 27
         March 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Eskom Conversion Bill [B 16 - 2001] (National Assembly -
              sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises -
              National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              22116 of 2 March 2001.]

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


        Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 27 March 2001 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     Housing Amendment Bill [B 7B - 2001] (National Council of
              Provinces - sec 76(2)).


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing
         of the National Assembly.


        Bill, as amended, passed by National Council of Provinces on 27
         March 2001 and transmitted for consideration of Council's
         amendments:


         (i)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 11D - 2001] (National Assembly
              - sec 76).


         The amended Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for a report and recommendations on the Council's
         amendments.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of the President's Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 7-
         2001];


     (b)    Financial Statements of the State President's Fund for 1997-98,
         1998-99 and 1999-2000 [RP 14-2001].

2.    The Minister of Social Development:


     (a)    Report of the Ministerial Committee on Abuse, Neglect and Ill-
         treatment of Older Persons, Volume 1 (Main Report).


     (b)    Report of the Ministerial Committee on Abuse, Neglect and Ill-
         treatment of Older Persons, Volume 2 (Provincial Reports).

