---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 June 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2001-06-14
---

THURSDAY, 14 JUNE 2001
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Before we
proceed, I just want to remind hon members that a determination has been
made in terms of the time allocated for the moving of any motion. Any
motion that exceeds one and a half minutes will be interrupted. I am merely
reminding hon members; the Whips should have informed them.

Ms C BOTHA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the DA -


  (1) notes that the SAA scandal ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! In terms of
this House there is no DA, hon member. Could you correct that?

Ms C BOTHA: Thank you, Chairperson. I will correct that. I hereby give
notice that I shall move at the next sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the SAA scandal will cost the taxpayers hundreds of
       millions of rands and that it is the duty of the Minister of Public
       Enterprises to oversee the SAA;


  (2) calls on the Government to take the necessary political and legal
       responsibility and, specifically, to remove Minister Stella Sigcau
       from Cabinet for her failure to exercise her responsibilities
       properly at the relevant time;


  (3) calls on the chairperson of Transnet, Louise Tager, to resign; and


  (4) enquiries from Minister Radebe why he has taken so long to become
       aware of the extent of the disaster and seeks his assurance that
       similar expensive shocks do not await taxpayers in respect of other
       public enterprises.

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at
the next sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with concern the shocking facts published in today's Cape Times
       on the gap between rich and poor in Cape Town, where in terms of per
       capita income and disposable income blacks are still earning less
       than whites;


  (2) further notes the impact of HIV/Aids, illiteracy and unemployment
       which has emerged in a report entitled Cape Town's Economy: Current
       Trends and Future Prospects, where the number of deaths is expected
       to rise to 62 000 from 2000 to 2005 and 40 000 deaths a year by 2015;


  (3) also notes that the above will lower the rate of economic growth and
       reduce the economically active population; and


  (4) calls on the provincial government to note the above as a matter of
       priority to the province.

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the Durban police have impounded 700 imported second-hand
       vehicles, destined for illegal sale, at Durban harbour storage
       facility on Wednesday;


  (2) also notes that these luxury vehicles, imported mainly from Japan,
       were destined for other Southern African markets;


  (3) further notes that the importers fraudulently authenticated
       authorisation which indicated that the vehicles had left South
       Africa, while they in fact remained in the country; and


  (4) welcomes this breakthrough by South African Police Services and
       resolves to encourage the SAPS to continue to clamp down on these
       fraudsters who rob our country's revenue services of billions of
       rands.

              RESUMPTION OF AIR STRIKES BY GOVERNMENT OF SUDAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K D S DURR: Mr Chairman, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the government of the Sudan has announced that it will
       ``resume'' air strikes against the South and West in the Sudan;


  (2) further notes that, after announcing a halt to air strikes on 24 May,
       there have been at least eleven well-documented aerial attacks on
       civilians during the so-called halt - in Acumcum, Adet (twice),
       Bararud, Lumon, Mapel, Marial Bai, Nyamlell, Tonj (twice) and Yabus,
       displacing 57 000 people, joining the millions already displaced; and


  (3) calls upon the Minister of Foreign Affairs to encourage the warring
       parties to suspend violence and to get around a table for talks about
       talks, leading to a forum that will provide a negotiated solution to
       the problems of Sudan.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion? [Interjections.] In the light of the objection,
the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will now
become notice of a motion.

  ACQUISITION OF PREMIER FISHING SOUTH AFRICA (PTY) LTD BY SEKUNJALO GROUP
                             WITH HELP FROM IDC

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs A M VERSFELD: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the IDC funded the Sekunjalo Group acquisition of Premier
       Fishing South Africa (Pty) Ltd and that this company had a
       significant presence in the Saldanha Bay community on the West Coast
       while still owned by the Premier Fishing Group of South Africa;


  (2) also notes that since Sekunjalo took over the company (with IDC
       support), their total staff employment of approximately 1 200
       employees has been reduced by almost 500;


  (3) further notes that most of these retrenched employees are from the
       West Coast communities of Saldanha Bay and Port Nolloth;
  (4) believes that former employees are still awaiting some moneys owed to
       them and that the IDC has a responsibility and duty to provide
       funding to worthy business initiatives that focus on sustainable
       community development in all areas of South Africa;


  (5) therefore calls on the Minister of Trade and Industry to ensure that
       the company, Premier Fishing Group of SA (Pty) Ltd, is investigated
       so that the public and the department can know who the IDC funded -
       the workers, or a few privileged individuals who have enriched
       themselves; and


  (6) takes note that the IDC cannot be an institution of privilege and
       individual enrichment without benefiting the South African society at
       large.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion? [Interjections.] In the light of the objection,
the motion will not be proceeded with. It will become notice of a motion.

       STATEMENTS OF DR IKE NTSIKELELO NZO ON VIOLENT CRIME SITUATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note of the statements of Sebokeng-based specialist
       psychiatrist, Dr Ike Ntsikelelo Nzo, son of the former Foreign
       Affairs Minister, the late Mr Alfred Nzo, in respect of the present
       totally unacceptable violent crime situation in South Africa and the
       terrible effects thereof on him and on the South African public;


  (2) also notes that Dr Nzo contemplates emigrating and that thousands of
       professional South Africans like Dr Nzo emigrate annually from South
       Africa because of the unacceptable violent crime situation;


  (3) further notes that violent crime in South Africa affects all the
       people in South Africa extremely negatively ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Can members in
that corner please keep peace, because we cannot hear the proceedings?
Proceed, hon member.

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I continue:


  (4) resolves to use all the powers at its disposal, especially in respect
       of its oversight function and holding the Government accountable in
       terms of section 92(2) of the Constitution, so that the number of
       violent crimes in our country can be reduced drastically as soon as
       possible; and


  (5) requests Dr Nzo and other South Africans who contemplate emigrating
       please to reconsider and to rather help to build a prosperous, open-
       opportunity society in our country in which every law-abiding person
       is free, responsible, equal before the law, safe, secure, and has the
       opportunity to improve the quality of his or her life.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion? [Interjections.] There is an objection, and in the
light of the objection the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion
without notice will now become notice of a motion.

     CONGRATULATIONS TO PRESIDENT ON SUCCESSFUL VISIT TO UNITED KINGDOM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) expresses its heartfelt congratulations on President Mbeki's
       successful visit to the United Kingdom;


  (2) notes the enormous and overwhelming reception for our President in
       the United Kingdom;


  (3) further notes that the joint communiqu√© between President Mbeki and
       Prime Minister Tony Blair, whose partnership would aim to prevent
       conflict -


       (a)  spreads benefits of technology and research;


       (b)  strengthens democracy and human rights;


       (c)  ensures that African countries have a more effective voice in
           international institutions;


       (d)  reduces barriers to trade;


       (e)  encourages private sector development assistance;


       (f)  tackles HIV/Aids;


       (g)  ensures reforms to the world trade access to world markets; and


       (h)  closes the widening gap between rich and poor countries;


  (4) acknowledges the commitment of Britain to the implementation of the
       objectives of the Millennium Africa Recovery Plan; and


  (5) recognises that these are crucial for our own economic development.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

       ACHIEVEMENT OF FREE STATE SCHOLAR ACCOMMODATED IN NATAL SCHOOL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Me C S BOTHA: Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad, op die vooraand van die viering van Jeugdag, kennis neem -


  (1) van Moferefere Lekgetha, seun van 'n Vrystaatse plaasarbeider, wat
       toegang tot 'n Vrystaatse skool geweier is omdat sy taalgebruik
       volgens die skoolhoof nie goed genoeg was nie;
  (2) dat -


       (a)  daarna in 'n Natalse privaatskool vir hom 'n plek gevind is;


       (b)  hy vanjaar matriek daar skryf; en


       (c)  hy gekies is vir die Natal Skole Rugby A-span en in Julie aan
           die Cravenweek gaan deelneem; en


  (3) verder, dat ons die les hieruit onderskryf, om geen kind of jongeling
       geleenthede te ontneem om redes van kortstondige politieke gewin nie,
       waardeur nie alleenlik die Vrystaat en die kinders nie, maar die hele
       gemeenskap die onvermydelike prys sal betaal.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Ms C S BOTHA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That, on the eve of the Youth Day festivities, the Council notes -


  (1) that Moferefere Lekgetha, the son of a Free State farm labourer, was
       denied access to a Free State school because, according to the
       principal, his command of the language was not good enough;


  (2) that -


       (a)  he was thereafter accommodated in a private school in Natal;


       (b)  he is writing matric there this year; and


       (c)  he has been chosen for the Natal Schools Rugby A-team and will
           be participating in the Craven Week in July; and


  (3) furthermore, that we subscribe to the lesson to be learnt from this,
       that no child or youth should be deprived of opportunities for
       reasons of short-lived political gain, for which not only the Free
       State and the children, but all of society will pay the inevitable
       price.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                         25TH ANNIVERSARY OF 16 JUNE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that Saturday, 16 June 2001, is the 25th anniversary of the June
           16 Soweto uprising;


       (b)  that this day is of historic significance as young people in
           Soweto and later throughout the country resisted the apartheid
           policies and Bantu education system;


       (c)  the defenceless and unarmed youths who selflessly gave their
           lives for the liberation of our people; and


       (d)  that the heroic struggles and sacrifices of this youth
           generation played an important role in the building of a new
           nonracial, nonsexist and united South Africa;


  (2) commemorates the 25th anniversary of June 16; and


  (3) calls upon the youth to unite in action to fight racism, poverty and
       the scourge of HIV/Aids with the same commitment and dedication
       demonstrated by the generation of 1976 in the struggle against
       apartheid.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Thank you. All 10
provinces have voted in favour. I therefore declare ... [Interjections.]
Hon members, I cannot allow this noise. I cannot allow it.

Ten provinces have voted in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed
to.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, on a point of order: We only have nine
provinces. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Thank you! Nine
provinces have voted in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 PROMOTING AND CELEBRATING UNITY AND RECONCILIATION OF YOUTH IN SOUTH AFRICA
          AND REMEMBERING 25th ANNIVERSARY OF 1976 SOWETO UPRISING

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I take this
opportunity to welcome the hon the Minister as well as to thank her for
agreeing to participate in the debate on this most important matter. I
therefore call upon the hon the Minister to address this House and hope Mr
Van Niekerk will not interrupt her.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, and
the National Council of Provinces, I want to start today's debate by
dedicating it to one young man and to all South African youth, reflecting
the diversity and working towards unity in diversity of all South African
young people. Solomon Mahlangu was sentenced to death by hanging on 2 March
1977. He was actually hanged on 2 March. Solomon Mahlangu was one of the
1976 youth. He was too young to die. Let me quote him:


  My blood will nourish the tree that will bear the fruits of freedom. Tell
  my people that I love them. They must continue the fight.

I thought it was pertinent to raise this today as we are looking at united
action to fight racism, poverty, the scourge of HIV/Aids, and to deal with
matters of unemployment, the challenges around education and with building
a nonracial, nonsexist democracy. Central to the successful building of
such a democracy is our youth.

I want to proceed by, at this stage, quoting our President when he raised
the question on 5 April this year at quite an important national gathering.
He asked:


  Why did our youth perform heroic feats of struggle in 1976 and later
  years? Why does our country owe them a permanent debt?
  The country had no possibility to make progress in social spheres -
  political, economic, social, cultural - because white minority rule had
  become a heavy chain on all development. A victorious democratic
  revolution was a necessary precondition for everything that favoured and
  was in the interests, both of the country and the overwhelming majority
  of our people; that the democratic revolution could not succeed, and
  therefore further progress could not be achieved, unless the oppressed
  were prepared to sacrifice in an unprecedented manner, because the ruling
  group and social forces it represented were firmly opposed to and feared
  change.


  The recognition of this reality had come earlier in our history with the
  decision to wage an armed struggle. The situation demanded that the
  oppressed people as a whole understood that they could not delegate the
  task of struggle to somebody else, while they waited for victory day, so
  that they could join the celebrations. Hence, in the centrality of mass
  struggle in our strategy for victory of the national democratic
  revolution, the youth added enormously to that mass struggle.

I think today we should remind ourselves why we owe our youth a permanent
debt, but, above all, why we must ensure that the youth play a proactive
role in the transformation of South Africa in building the nonracial,
nonsexist democracy this country so desperately needs.

We have come some way since 1976 in recognising the rights and uniqueness
of our youth, in providing for their developmental needs and in creating a
critical niche for them to be heard and contribute to the building of our
nation.

The National Youth Commission, as we are all well aware, was established in
June 1996 as part of a comprehensive plan of Government to address the
challenges facing young men and women in our country. A national youth
policy was formulated, which provided the basic tool for the establishment
of youth development programmes throughout the country.

With the testing of the programmes and policies since 1997, a new youth
policy framework is in its final stages of completion. This framework is
based on principles, such as redressing imbalances, gender inclusivity,
combating racism, and youth participation and responsiveness. It asserts
that youth development requires the support of all sectors and role-players
towards the goal of achieving a holistic and integrated approach to youth
development.

In addition to the policy, there are numerous actions that have started
being put in place. I think today we should, once again, acknowledge that
it is seven years since 1994, 25 years since 1976. We should, hence, look
at the kind of interventions that have started out. We should look at the
role of this institution - Parliament - in giving the impetus to extending
the implementation of programmes on scale, in order to turn around some of
the complexities that we are facing and that youth are facing.

Let me make reference to one of those areas - youth unemployment. Between
1970 and 1995 formal employment increased by just under 20%, to about 9
million, of young people. We are talking about formal employment; we are
not talking about informal employment. We determined that employment data
indicated that the key structural shift that has taken place in the economy
over the past 24 years, has been one that moved from a dependence on
primary sectors, which have been in decline over the past two decades while
simultaneously witnessing a rapid rise in the growth of the services
sector.

I think what we should acknowledge, having noted that, is the fact, when we
look at youth unemployment and hence the challenge to redress racism in our
country in a real sense - and going back to the figures I noted, it was not
just youth unemployment, it was unemployment in general - that the youth
make up 70% of the unemployed, that 33% of unemployment applies to young
people between the ages of 16 and 24 and, that, of course, when we look at
the racial differentials in the unemployment rates, we are talking for the
25 to 34 age group. African unemployment is 24%, and 2,5% for whites. Why
do I raise that?

I do not raise this for us to simply lament this issue. I raise this today
for us to, once again, remind ourselves of the challenge we confront 25
years after June 16, 1976; and to remind ourselves that education is key to
all young people in order to ensure, through appropriate education and
skills development, that they are able to enter the economy that is
changing in the appropriate manner.

I think the second point that we should raise here today is the fact that
1976 was a major lesson that we have to consider when looking at how we
unite in our diversity. Language could not be a catalyst if divisibly
utilised. It could lead to the kind of implosion that may be
counterproductive to our building of a nonracial, nonsexist democracy.

When we look at this institution today, we need to say to ourselves that it
is different. Earlier today I read the Hansard of 1997. If hon members
should venture to go back to Hansard and read the debate of 1976, it makes
for interesting reading. It reflects that many of the representatives from
that House were unwilling to take into account the reality of what our
country faced at that point.

Let us look at the challenges and realities that face us as a democracy.
What do we do collectively to change it? Through ``Oom Gov'', Comrade Govan
Mbeki, one of the foremost intellectuals and outstanding fighters for
justice who, at one stage, played a central role in youth affairs, we are
fortunate to have in this Parliament many of the youths of 1976 and the
earlier years, although a lot older now than then.

The former president, Mr Nelson Mandela, was also part of this institution
in the spirit of the Youth Leaguers who were willing to play a role in
making a difference. Shall we not ensure that we take forward that spirit
in a constructive way? Let us ensure that we take forward, in a different
manner, the struggle that Solomon Mahlangu asked his people to continue
with. Today ``his people'' are all the people of South Africa, irrespective
of race, age, disability or gender.

Let us have the courage to take forward the struggle for the likes of
Solomon Mahlangu and those who lost their lives. Let us, at the same time,
remember mothers on different sides of the struggle who lost sons. We have
the opportunity to coalesce and take forward the struggle for progress: a
struggle for progress for the youth of this country, a struggle for
progress that will make a real difference.

Let us see today, in this debate, whether we have the courage to let the
blood of Solomon Mahlangu indeed water the tree of freedom for our country.
[Applause.]

Mr B WILLEM: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members of this House, June 16
this year is a remarkable time in the history of this country because it
marks 25 years since the Soweto uprising.

Comrade Minister Essop Pahad announced the theme for this year's Youth Day
as ``Nonracialism: A youth vision for the 21st century.''

Most of us sitting in this Chamber can give a personal account of the dark
days of the Soweto uprising. I take the floor today as a proud
representative of the titanic army of liberation, the glorious army of
liberation, the army of South Africa, the ANC. I rise, fully aware of the
overwhelming support that this, the oldest liberation movement in Africa,
enjoys inside and outside this Chamber for its programmes and progress and
the changes it has made since 1994.

These changes are, of course, not felt by the opposition because they were
born with silver spoons in their mouths. This country was a paradise for
them and it was a hell for us. The ``Dom Alliance'' sowed seeds of
destruction for a long time and they left the country in ruins. Now they
blame us for the ruin they themselves created.

I would like to deal with something that has been mentioned many a time,
namely history. I want to tell the opposition that history takes and it
gives. History has claimed a lot of our people who were killed by the
racist white regime, but it has also given us wisdom.

Today we know how to reconcile our country. When one talks about
transformation, one talks about changing what apartheid has done and what
we want to do in our own country. All along the line, history was based on
us, and now we are making our own history. The opposition may complain, but
we are going to do what we want to do.

Apartheid has done damage to us. Verwoerd himself said in 1953 that
Africans had no right to learn mathematics and other subjects that would
undermine the supremacy of white people. We therefore became garden boys
who drew water and worked for the whites. If one did not do that, one went
to prison, or underground, or was killed. That is what happened in this
country of ours. That is why, today, we are attempting to create one nation
from people who, for years, were indoctrinated, cajoled, coerced,
intimidated and forced to believe that they belonged to a superior nation.

They believed that their tribe was exclusive and pure and ran the risk of
contamination by members of other tribes. They believed that by divine
ordination their tribe was destined to rule, and was endowed with superior
intellect over others.

It is tragic that some accepted this and internalised it. Others rejected
it and internalised resistance to it. There are those who cannot understand
why, suddenly, no one is looking up at them with envy. They insist that
nothing has changed for them, because our primary goal is to change the
lives of those who have been, and are still, suffering the effects of the
system of the NP which the DP secretly hopes to reinvent.

The ANC has fought for change and continues to fight for change to bring
about a better life for all - all whites, blacks and everybody. It has been
a long and bitter struggle for the African people to be recognised as bona
fide members of the human race - cursed, brutally murdered, socially
ostracised by the white regime.

I am a victim of the apartheid regime. I was shot while fighting for the
liberation of our country. The pain we suffered, the racial discrimination
we endured, finally paid dividends. Today we are free.

Most of us had no youth to speak of because of the uprising, because
instead of silencing us as those bullets intended to, it made us more
determined and invincible. Perhaps it was our youth, but we did not think
that we would die fighting for what we believed in. This determination of
young people to liberate our country from the stranglehold of racism and
inequality is not the exclusive domain of the Soweto uprising.

We can look back at our history and marvel at our mothers and fathers, who
stood strong in the face of such wide-scale oppression and still taught us
the real values of life. We thank our leadership in Government, who have
loudly and clearly, through every piece of transformative legislation and
policy, ensured that our youth will never again be discriminated against.

Today we celebrate with our young people the new possibilities that have
opened up for them. No longer will they be forced, as we were, to endure
the atrocities of apartheid. Today our young people, when they do not like
what is happening, have the freedom to voice their opinion without fearing
for their lives.

I want to thank our comrades who gave up their lives in 1976 and throughout
all the years of struggle so that we could live in freedom. [Applause.]

Dr P J C NEL: Voorsitter, ek is die pa van drie kinders en vier
kleinkinders, dus l√™ die jeug my baie na aan die hart.

Ons kom uit 'n verlede waarin ons 'n verdeelde nasie was. Vir die grootste
deel van die twintigste eeu het wit, swart, bruin en Indi√´r kinders in
aparte skole skoolgegaan. Wit kinders is bevoordeel deur die stelsel. Die
onderwysbeleid van die regering van daardie tyd het aanleiding gegee tot
die Soweto-opstande, een van die donkerste dae in ons geskiedenis, 'n
gebeurtenis wat nooit moes plaasgevind het nie. Dit het die lewens van
talle jongmense onherroeplik verander. Dit het gebeur omdat die regte van
'n bepaalde groep van ons jeug misken is.

Ek wil vandag by die regering van die dag pleit om nie weer die foute van
die verlede te herhaal nie. Laat ons nooit Sowetodag vergeet nie. Laat ons
liewer 'n monument bou wat kan dien as 'n simbool van dit wat nooit weer
mag herhaal word nie, en wat ons daaraan sal herinner dat versoening nou 'n
werklikheid moet word.

Jeugdag moet 'n dag van hoop wees vir almal, nie net vir die jeug nie, maar
ook vir die ouer mense, want as daar hoop is vir die jeug, dan is daar ook
hoop vir die ouer mense dat hulle op hulle oudag versorg en nie misbruik of
mishandel sal word, soos wat tans die geval is nie.

As ons wil verseker dat dit wat gebeur het nooit weer gebeur nie, sal ons
moet omsien na die regte van ons jeug, en sal ons moet sorg dat die waardes
wat bevorderlik is vir nasiebou reeds op skoolvlak by ons kinders ingeskerp
word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[Dr P J C NEL: Chairperson, I am the father of three children and four
grandchildren, therefore the youth lies very close to my heart.

We come from a past in which we were a divided nation. For the greatest
part of the 20th century white, black, coloured and Indian children
attended separate schools. White children were privileged by the system.
The education policy of the government of the time gave rise to the Soweto
uprisings, one of the darkest days of our history, an occurrence which
should never have taken place. This happening changed the lives of many
young people irrevocably. This happened because the rights of a certain
group of our youth were disregarded.

Today I want with plead to the Government of the day not to repeat the
mistakes of the past. Let us never forget Soweto Day. Let us rather build a
monument which could serve as a symbol of that which should never be
repeated, and which should remind us that reconciliation should now become
a reality.

Youth Day should be a day of hope for everyone, not only for the youth, but
also for the older people, because if there is hope for the youth then
there is also hope for the older people that they will be taken care of in
their old age and that they will not be abused or ill-treated as is
presently the case.

If we want to ensure that that which happened will never happen again we
will have to see to the rights of our youth and we should ensure that the
values which are conducive to nation-building should already be impressed
upon the children at school level.]

An important value conducive to nation-building which we must impress on
the hearts and minds of our children is that rights imply duties. One does
not simply have a right, one also has a duty, a responsibility.

In a country with a violent society like South Africa, it is of the utmost
importance to impress the need to solve conflict in a nonviolent manner on
the hearts and the minds of our youth. We have to teach them the skills to
do so already at school level. The health and the wellbeing of our youth
must be one of our highest priorities. This task seems almost impossible if
one takes into consideration the impact HIV/Aids, drugs, child abuse and
crime in general have on the lives of our youth.

HIV/Aids poses the biggest single threat to our youth and nation-building.
It is estimated that 300 000 learners at schools in South Africa will die
in the next 10 years. According to a study executed by Sadtu, it was found
that an average of 40 teachers per month die of Aids.

The fact that the transmission of HIV/Aids is largely due to immorality
makes it also of the utmost importance that moral standards and values be
impressed on the hearts and minds of the learners and the teachers. A
report recently compiled by Human Rights Watch on the sexual abuse of young
girls in South African schools states inter alia that some girls as young
as nine are being gang-raped in toilets by classmates, or drugged and
molested by teachers in dormitories.

I am very grateful that the Department of Education has since then
announced the pilot projects to empower teachers to deal with the problem.

'n Ander baie ernstige gevaar waaraan die jeug vandag blootgestel word, is
die dwelmgevaar. Die gebruik van lewensgevaarlike middels soos koka√Øne en
opium blyk deesdae 'n alledaagse gebeurtenis by skole te wees.

Ek wil, ten slotte, vandag hulde bring aan die jeug van Suid- Afrika, veral
aan di√© wat ten spyte van al die aanslae waaraan hulle blootgestel was, en
nog steeds is, bo uitkom. Hulle is die room van Suid-Afrika, en ons is
trots op hulle prestasies. Ek is bewus daarvan dat daar sommige van die
jeug is wat daaraan dink om die land te verlaat. My boodskap aan hulle is
om asseblief weer te dink. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Another very serious danger to which our youth are exposed today, is the
danger of drugs. The use of perilous substances such as cocaine and opium
seems to be an everyday occurrence at schools.

In conclusion I want to pay tribute today to the youth of South Africa,
especially to those who, despite the assaults to which they are exposed,
still come out on top. They are the cream of South Africa and we are proud
of their achievements. I am aware of the fact that some of the youth are
thinking of leaving the country. My message to them is to please
reconsider.]

They should reconsider before they leave the country. We need them in South
Africa. We need their skills. What we need most, more than ever, is a new
pioneering spirit that only young people can really lead with.

A British statesman once said:


  Almost everything that is great has been done by youth.

We say viva the youth! Viva! [Applause.]

Mr T B TAABE: Chairperson, hon members of this House, it is exactly 25
years ago today - this being the occasion of the anniversary of the Soweto
uprisings, an occasion on which young people of this country remember with
fondness the heroes and heroines of our struggle - that those selfless and
gallant fighters of our struggle paid the ultimate price by laying down
their lives so that all of us who sit in this Chamber could find ourselves
where we are.

One of the reasons for these selfless and gallant fighters of our struggle
paying the ultimate price was precisely their steadfast refusal to accept
what we considered, at that time, sawdust education. They overwhelmingly
reasserted the view held by the majority of our people that we needed to
employ all the means necessary and available at the time to defeat the
morally repugnant and abhorrent system of apartheid in this country.

It was these selfless leaders of 16 June 1976 who, through their heroic
actions, propelled the struggles of the oppressed majority to the greatest
heights and subsequently produced the majority of leaders who are today
driving the process of transformation in this country. For this, we should
and must lift our banner in memory of the Tsietsi Mashininis, the Solomon
Mahlangus and many others who disappeared without trace up to this very
day. We had hoped that through a process as helpful as the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission was we would have the opportunity ourselves as
South Africans to know the truth about some of our comrades.

Other sections of our society did not rise to this challenge, for we
recognised ourselves that the route we wanted to take with regard to the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission was not the most definitive and
comprehensive period which the TRC itself was covering, nor did we
understand it to be a court of law. To us it was an important contribution
on the way to truth and reconciliation in this country.

It would be a fitting tribute to these heroes and heroines of our struggle
for us to continue in the struggle to dismantle what remains of apartheid
practices and attitudes in our society. It must be said that without this
major step, the one we took via the the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, reconciliation would have been transient and, indeed, a very
odd or false hope on the lips of fools.

We entered the new millennium having had our formal political freedom,
brought about, to a very large extent, by this single, most important event
which took place on 16 June 1976. It is this event that ushered in a new
era of peace and justice in this country. The foundation has indeed been
laid for our society to develop into a truly nonracial and nonsexist
society.

We would therefore be failing in our duty and, indeed, committing political
hara-kiri of the worst kind, if we ourselves did not continue to implement
our programmes for transformation in this country. As the ANC, we
understand this full well. We must, therefore, deepen and sharpen our
resolve to attain continued peace, democracy, human rights, and
socioeconomic development in this country, to improve the material
conditions of the youth and, indeed, to provide lasting security for all of
our people.

The ANC, and indeed the masses of our people who fought against this
morally repugnant system of apartheid, value this achievement, a victory
that was not easily or soon attained. Our people were prepared, and still
are, to reconcile with our erstwhile oppressors, but would defend - this
point must be made - this victory in this country with all the means at
their disposal. We dare not fail the heroes and heroines who laid down
their lives on 16 June so that all of us could sit in this Chamber this
afternoon.

All of these victories will be meaningless if we do not confront the
complex challenges facing us a nation, across the political divide and
spectrum. These tasks are made all the more urgent and the difficulty of
implementing them further compounded by the massive social disparities that
we inherited as a country after 1994.

The apartheid state - it must be said - was set up to entrench racial
disparities. They had a well-oiled machinery in place which was there to
serve the interests of the minority at the expense of the majority of our
people in this country. Because it was illegal and illegitimate, this
apartheid machinery, through its racist practices, relied on criminal
actions to shore up its fortunes, and pulled the rest of society into the
maelstrom of crime and corruption. This we will change, whatever it takes.

The central challenge, therefore, remains the doubling and redoubling of
all our efforts to fight the demon of racism in our country, to create a
truly nonracial South Africa so that the poorest of the poor in our
country, of whom the majority are Africans, are accorded a humane and
respectable quality of life.

The masses of our people rightly pronounced in Kliptown, Johannesburg, in
1955, on the occasion of the Freedom Charter, that: ``The doors of learning
and culture shall be opened.'' We meant that young people of this country,
such as Andrew Babeile, would be where they belong, in the classroom, and
not in the jail cells where they find themselves this afternoon, precisely
as a result of provocative and racially inspired assaults on them.

When we said that the doors of learning and culture shall be opened, we
meant that the likes of the late Tshepo Matloga, from the Northern
Province, would also be in the classroom this afternoon, preparing
themselves to be playing a very constructive role in the reconstruction and
development of this country, which is what 16 June, in the main, was all
about. They are no longer with us. As young people in this country, we will
and must continue to channel our anger - the point has got to be made again
- properly to fight the demon of racism in all its manifestations. We will
be committing a monumental blunder and, indeed, a historical error of
great, enormous proportions if we do not continue with this noble fight.

We will use the moral and political legitimacy we enjoy as the ANC to
defend the gains we have made in creating a nonracial society, although
certain parties, which have no hope of assuming power in this country, at
least not in the next 80 years, will continue to employ clandestine and
very innocuous means in order to subvert this agenda. We will stop them in
their tracks.

Racism exists, and we must use our battle cry, the very battle cry we used
in the mid-80's, namely ``attacking the enemy on all fronts'', to ensure
that we unleash our anger on the demon of racism in this country. No amount
of self-induced amnesia will change the reality of the existence and the
continued perpetuation of racist practices against our people in this
country.

Our hope for the future, therefore, depends on our resolution as a nation
to deal with this demon. When we succeed in changing the status quo in
respect of racially bigoted mindsets and attitudes, we shall not only be
improving our own quality of life, but also be laying the foundation for a
future for our children and grandchildren, a future filled with hope. We
must, therefore, reinforce our own hope in the future of this country and,
indeed, the future of our nation.

The optimism of hard work and a brighter future shall prevail over the
pessimism of armchair whining from certain parties in this Chamber. As
Comrade Madiba, our very dear leader, an icon of the struggles of the
peoples of South Africa and the father of the nation, once said: (Hansard:
Joint Sittings 1999, col 22)


  As we confounded the prophets of doom, we shall defy today's merchants of
  cynicism and despair. We shall ... fully dismantle apartheid and achieve
  true reconciliation. Our hopes will become reality. The foundation has
  been laid - the building is in progress. With a new generation of leaders
  and a people that rolls up its sleeves in partnerships for change, we can
  and shall build the country of our dreams.

We should therefore make bold to say: Aluta Continua! Long Live June 16,
long live! [Applause.]

Mr H T SOGONI: Mr Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, the event of 16
June 1976 is now part of our rich history. On that day, black children made
a clear statement to the government of the time and to the world that they
would defend - and so they did - with life and blood, their right to be
taught in the language of their choice, and rejected with vigour the
imposition of a medium of instruction and learning that bolstered the
policies in which the affected had played no part.

Their message was conveyed and the world acknowledged. Our children claimed
victory for themselves, but, most remarkably, also for the generation of
learners that came after them. The price they paid was, admittedly, a heavy
one, but today the nation still echoes the noble cause for which some of
those children died. Some were maimed, some were deprived of further
learning opportunities and were forced to leave their country of birth.
Today's debate therefore gives us an opportunity to salute them as heroes
who made things happen, who achieved perhaps more than anyone before them
did.

Political liberation, however, did not mean total victory for the youth. It
only served to create for the youth a political environment and legitimacy
conducive to pursuing other facets of liberty. New challenges have emerged.
Basic human rights are guaranteed for all, but some rights are still denied
to some of the youth. Let me concede that this is not by design, but due to
some shortcomings or certain inadequacies.

The principle of equality, for instance, is not yet upheld if the youth in
rural areas and townships are still subjected to numerous health and other
social problems, due to high poverty levels. Respect for human dignity and
freedom and security of the person remains a dream when young girls are
raped and murdered, and schoolgirls continue to live in fear of constant
sexual abuse by fellow students and teachers. Equal opportunities cannot be
attained when there is still an unequal distribution of resources.

Perhaps the most serious and deadly challenge that faces the youth today is
HIV/Aids. Statistics released on HIV/Aids infection are quite alarming.
People between the ages of 15 and 49 are reportedly the most affected. The
fact that 1 600 new HIV infections occur per day is considered to be
unacceptable. However, the UDM is not pessimistic about the future of the
youth. We know that the youth are also aware of the challenges that face
them. They have already expressed their concerns at various levels of
government, through defined channels and institutions that were
constitutionally created to promote effective communication and dialogue
between the youth and the Government.
The UDM celebrates Youth Day, by conveying a message of hope for a better
future to the youth, a future whose solid foundation was laid by those
before them who sacrificed their youthful days for national duty in order
to liberate themselves and the country. On this day we encourage the youth
to continue to strive for the improvement of their status and, in the
process, break down the barriers of race, colour and class and secure the
final victory of the struggle they started more than 20 years ago.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I take this
opportunity to welcome the hon the Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and
Technology, Dr B S Ngubane, and call upon him to address this House.

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Mr Chairperson,
before I join in this very important debate, I would like just to correct
what Mr Nel, an hon member of this House, stated, namely that HIV/Aids is
caused by immorality. I am afraid if we go along with this definition, we
will certainly drive this disease underground, because we will inhibit
openness among the people who are living with HIV/Aids. For control
purposes it is very important that there is no stigmatisation of those
people.

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The MINISTER: Today gives us an opportunity to reflect on the very
important role that youth movements and youth organisations have played in
the history and politics of our country. Many prominent leaders, the former
Head of State of South Africa, Mr Nelson Mandela, and the leader of the
IFP, Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi, were in the ANC Youth League and this is
where they formed and cut their political teeth.

Also, movements such as the BCM produced people like Steve Biko who today
we also remember, because after 16 June 1976, he was arrested the following
year, and four months after 16 June 1977, he was killed by apartheid. We
also remember people like Jenny Schoon, who was a prominent member of
Nusas, which was a student movement at the universities, particularly white
universities, that struggled to move university authorities to stand firm
against apartheid in education. She was also killed by a parcel bomb in
Angola.
Of course, there are stalwarts such as Abe Ngcobo of the PAC who was very
prominent in the formation of that organisation and also came from the
youth wing of the ANC. We can go on. I have mentioned all of this, because
I do not know how many other countries have a national day to celebrate and
honour the youth, but I would imagine that South Africa is one of the very
few. This is appropriate, because South Africa's youth, as I have said,
have always played an exceptional role in our country and continue to do
so. This surely must mean that they are entitled to a national day of
recognition.

The year 1976 is lodged in the consciousness of all South Africans in a
complex way that evokes both pain and pride, both anger and honour. On
Saturday we will be marking the 25th anniversary of the 1976 Soweto
uprising. This day holds an important position in the country's history for
a number of reasons. The day of 16 June 1976 was one that proved to be a
turning point for South Africa and ushered in a new phase of active
resistance against apartheid. Any country whose police service and army
shoot unarmed young people condemns itself in the eyes of humanity, and
South African firmly entered that category of countries.

This period gave birth to a generation of black consciousness inspired
activists. Many of them left the country to join uMkhonto and Apla to fight
and resist apartheid whilst in foreign lands. Bantu education, with its
overcrowded classrooms, inadequately trained teachers and separate,
inferior universities, was meant to shatter morale and for many years it
did precisely that. However, on 16 June 1976 thousands of students marched
against this iniquitous system and fought back when faced with police
brutality. Hundreds died in the violence that ensued over the next few
days, but the youth of South Africa would not be intimidated or beaten into
submission.

The Soweto uprising had a ripple effect, with pupils and students around
the country venting their anger openly. Here in Cape Town protests happened
in Langa, Guguletu and Nyanga. These students were joined by coloured
pupils and students from the Western Cape universities and training
colleges. Over 60 young people died here in Cape Town in these protests
during August and September of 1976. These young people knew that non-
racialism could only become a reality once black people realised their own
worth and right to equal treatment. Their struggles were key in building
nonracialism and in finally securing the democracy that we are enjoying
today.

We now have a Constitution that stipulates, amongst the rights to be
enjoyed by all South Africans, the right to an equal education and to learn
in the language of one's choice. We have a National Youth Commission that
is responsible for co-ordinating government programmes to ensure that the
needs of the youth are met. We have a democratically elected Government,
working to better the lives of all South Africans. Yet we still face a
massive legacy of inequality that affects all South Africans, not least our
young men and women. Approximately 39% of South African society is aged
between 14 and 35 years. Young people, therefore, form a substantial
portion of our society.

In so many ways the lives of young South Africans are better now than they
were previously. Yet our youth are still faced with a number of hardships.
We are still dealing with the legacy of a system that did not afford the
majority of young people the opportunity to develop to their full
potential. Our young people still face poverty, unemployment, a lack of
sufficient education and training opportunities, high levels of crime and
violence and the threat of Aids and other diseases. We know, for example,
that young people are contracting Aids at a far higher rate than other
sections of our population.

In 1976 the youth took responsibility for bettering the lives of all South
Africans. We now have a responsibility to the youth. The reconstruction and
development of our society cannot occur unless our young people are
supported in reaching their full potential. This is the responsibility of
Government, as well as that of civil society. Churches, schools, youth
groups, political parties and the private sector all have a responsibility
to our youth. I am talking here not of the responsibility of a parent, who
assumes responsibility for a young person, but of that of an adult, who
provides moral leadership and the means and resources for the youth to be
able to develop themselves.

I believe that arts and culture have a key role to play here in encouraging
self-respect and personal development through the exploration of creativity
and self-expression. The introduction of arts education into the curriculum
and the building of arts centres that will promote formal and informal arts
and culture education represent a key advance in encouraging the potential
of our youth.

In the oldest African independent church in the country, the Amanazaretha
of Shembe, in KwaZulu-Natal, we have a stirring example of a creative
cultural response to the damage inflicted on African youth by colonialism
and apartheid.

In the early 20th century, with the fabric of our communities ravaged by
loss of lands, labour migration, alcoholism and other evils, the prophet
Esaiah Shembe reintroduced among his young followers the concept of
ukubuthwa, regimental enrolment for the defence of the nation against an
external threat. For these youths of yesteryear, standing as they did at
the brink of the consuming furnace of industrialisation, he also emphasised
the critical need for self-respect and mutual respect between the sexes.

Today we stand to learn much from this example of an early renaissance of
precolonial African values and self-regard at both communal and individual
levels. Just as we were proud of the young women and men who stood up and
fought against oppression in 1976, we need to recognise and celebrate the
heroic role that is being played by many of our young people in South
Africa today.

South Africa has huge numbers of households that are headed by children.
Young people are involved in a number of different capacities in their
communities, volunteering to help in providing leadership in a myriad of
different ways. And it is young people who are leading the way in building
nonracialism in South Africa. Those of us who were young in 1976 were not
brought up to be colour-blind. We were made all too aware of race and its
relation to access and power. We therefore rely on those who are growing up
in the new South Africa to lead the way in building a truly nonracial
society.

On 16 June 1976, the students of one school in Soweto painted the following
slogan at the entrance to their school: ``Enter to learn, leave to serve.''
I think that this slogan captures much of the spirit of the 1976 uprisings
- a spirit that must be honoured not only as an important point of our
history, but also as a key strategy for building our future.

What the students who painted this slogan knew was that young people have a
role and a responsibility as active citizens of their society. I have heard
recently of teachers in primary schools who are teaching pupils born after
1990. In many cases these children do not understand, and often have never
heard of, apartheid. They are doubtful when told about things such as
separate park benches for black and white. They cannot relate to the story
of the student uprising of 16 June 1976.

In one way, this is a sign of how far we have travelled towards some
semblance of normality. Yet I believe that a balance has to be reached.
Children and young people should have the right to enjoy their youth. This
was the right that was tragically denied so many of our young people during
the years of apartheid. Yet it is also important that the youth see a role
for themselves in building South Africa.

At an address in the Windybrow Theatre last week, Fanyana Mazibuko spoke
about the role of young people in today's society. He was a teacher at the
Morris Isaacson High School during the 1976 uprising. He spoke about the
youth of today facing an even more formidable enemy than that faced by the
youth in 1976. The enemy today is more difficult to identify, and far more
insidious. The enemy, according to him, is our complacency.

In too many communities apathy has developed. The number of people involved
in community structures is far lower than during the years of apartheid.
Yet now is the time that the real work needs to be done: the work of
educating people about sexually transmitted diseases and ensuring that our
education system is performing properly, combating poverty and
unemployment, fighting crime and making nonracialism a reality.

It is now time for the youth to come together and fight the enemy of
complacency, inactivity, indolence and crime. The youth also have a role to
play in turning the African Renaissance into a reality. Along with the
pride in and respect for oneself, comes a pride in and respect for one's
country and heritage. At the moment in South Africa, we have too many of
our youth paying allegiance to the culture and traditions of North America,
and seeing their own heritage as second rate in comparison to the offerings
from across the Atlantic.

However, I believe that this is starting to change as our young people
begin to develop their own art forms, and to learn about their heritage.
Kwaito music borrows from rap, yet it is distinctively South African, and
denotes a pride in celebration of South African talent and culture.

Kwaito also shows us that the youth of this country are able to transcend
historical boundaries of race, class and geography and unite around common
interests and forms of expression. As young people learn about our heroes
and the significant events in our history, I believe they will come
together with a greater sense of self-worth and pride in being South
Africans.

This is the true gift of those who stood up and opposed apartheid in 1976.
They stood for a society in which nonracialism and the freeing of human
potential could become a reality. Their actions should continue to remind
us of the importance of believing in one's own self-worth and right to
equality, as well as the importance of intergenerational responsibility and
respect.

The theme of Youth Day this year is, ``Nonracialism: A youth vision for the
21st century.'' I hope that the youth will learn from those who went before
them that nonracialism is something worth fighting for, and that they have
a key role to play in bringing it about. This is their responsibility to
themselves and to the country as a whole.

It is my dedicated task as Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and
Technology to promote the learning and understanding of science, but also
to promote the development of our innate talents as creative people. To
this end, we shall work with the NCOP and the provinces. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I would like to inform the hon the
Minister that I have just received a note from an hon member asking me to
request the Minister to demonstrate kwaito. I have written back to the hon
member to indicate that I could not make such a request to the hon the
Minister. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, I think
the rules of the House do not permit it. [Laughter.]

Ms P C P MAJODINA: Chairperson, my greetings to Minister Fraser-Moleketi
and Minister Ngubane. I would like to thank the Chairperson for allowing
us, the young lions, to participate in today's debate in this august body.

We debate Youth Day in a free, democratic, nonracial, nonsexist country
which was a dream of the 1976 youth 25 years ago. I salute these young
martyrs who sacrificed and laid down their lives for this freedom that we
all enjoy today through their slogan of ``Freedom or death, victory is
certain. Forward ever, backwards never.''

We must be proud that we are making a mark on how to mobilise for this day,
not as an end in itself, but as a part of a struggle to take youth
development to greater heights. Yesterday it was a foreign country. Now,
the future belongs to us, the youth of this country.

This form of commemoration of the history of South Africa has been meant to
delegitimise and destroy the system of institutionalised, discriminatory
and unequal development in our country, with special reference to the
youth.

It is against this background that I call upon the youth to unite in action
to fight racism, poverty and the scourge of HIV/Aids with the same
commitment, vigour and dedication demonstrated by the 1976 youth.

The youth must uproot all the demons of racism. We can no longer afford
racism. It has cost our country billions, because it is barbaric, inhuman,
unholy and extremely reactionary. We, as legislators, must ensure that
youth unemployment is reduced by providing opportunities to the youth, and
that they become involved in meaningful economic activities and be
integrated into our overall economic strategy. We must create conditions
that develop self-esteem and responsibility amongst the youth and empower
them to play a meaningful role in society.

It is a matter of fact that young people are vulnerable to various
diseases. It is our duty to educate them and promote the ABC strategy:
abstain, be faithful and condomise. In our communities we must encourage
Aids volunteers to assist the hospice and to be Aids counsellors. We must
provide more equitable access to health.

Young people are, by nature, energetic. They are impatient for change. They
are a significant group in any society and they hold invaluable potential.

On this day I also call on the international community to stop the use of
child soldiers and child labour. Through you, Madam Chairperson, I would
like to make a special appeal to Minister Mdladlana to pursue the Northern
Province farmer who is clinging to child labour and thus producing lots of
peanuts. He must face the full might of the law, because he has gone to the
extent of selfishly making profits at the expense of children of between 12
and 14.

It is imperative that the forthcoming world conference against racism be
more representative of young people. The future belongs to us. We are the
future.

Tolerance is needed to build a society that is free of racism. Tolerance
comes from respecting the differences between people and respecting human
rights, democracy and the rule of law. Tolerance also means that we
recognise that all people are equal, regardless of how they look, how they
behave and how they speak.
We call on all criminals who abuse children and make them ashamed of being
young to stop it, because their days are numbered.

The future belongs to the youth and no one can stop them. The youth of our
country must not be divided on racial lines, as was the case with our
parents. We must defy those stereotyped parents who still cling to the past
because wa lala, wa sala [those who sleep get left behind]. A country that
does not value its youth is doomed, but South Africa values its youth.

Lastly, in those days some of us were in jail, but it is thanks to the
youth of this country that we are here today. [Applause.]

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, hon Ministers, colleagues, I will start by
quoting, with apologies, William Shakespeare, the Bard of Avon:


  All the world's a stage,
  And all the men and women merely players:
  They have their exits and their entrances;
  And one man in his time plays many parts,
  His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
  Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
  And then the whining school-boy, with his satchel
  And shining morning face, creeping like snail
  Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
  Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
  Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
  Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
  Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
  Seeking the bubble reputation
  Even in the cannon's mouth.

Youth: the lover, the soldier - what a romantic description of young men
and women when they emerge from childhood and from their schooldays. It is
a universally accepted notion that young men and women, some still sporting
pimples on their fresh faces, are ready to take on the world. They become
impatient and brook no nonsense from any quarter that may attempt to
control their whims and fancies. Most adopt belligerent poses. They are
bundles of irrepressible energy.

Today we celebrate, as South Africans in a new democracy, the 25th
anniversary of the 1976 Soweto rebellion, which catapulted angry young men
and women into the forefront of the liberation struggle.

When we survey the political landscape of South Africa since the 1800s, we
find a common thread in the history of the struggle against colonialism. We
look at the Great Trek of the Afrikaners away from the Cape into the
interior, away from what they perceived to be harsh treatment by the
British, from an element of language intrusion which was anathema to them.
Later again we find the rebellion of the Afrikaners against Lord Milner's
policy of anglicisation, the Uitlander question - again, the diminishing in
importance of their mother tongue.

These dark episodes in South African history only underline the fact that
people - young people - are prepared to pay the ultimate price against
language imperialism, as the young Afrikaners paid in the concentration
camps during the Anglo-Boer War.

Wars and rebellions have a nasty habit of plucking young men and women from
the threshold of adult life. Do we still remember Bob Dylan's plaintive
song bemoaning the terrible toll the Vietnam War took on young Americans? I
quote:
  Where have all the flowers gone?
  Long time passing
  Where have all the flowers gone?
  Long time ago


  Where have all the young men gone?
  Gone for soldiers every one
  When will they ever learn?
  When will they ever learn?


  Where have all the soldiers gone?
  Gone to graveyards every one
  When will they ever learn?
  When will they ever learn?

The Vietnam War casualties and deaths ran into millions on both sides. Can
we forget the students of Kent University being mown down by the
intransigent state police for their protest against participation in the
Vietnam War? Nor can we forget the mowing down of Chinese students in
Tiananmen Square in Beijing by the formidable Chinese state police, again
because students dared to protest in support of democracy.

Our young men and women too, the flowers of Soweto, sacrificed their best
years in the fight for justice for all. A whole generation was lost.

The 1976 student rebellion against the apartheid regime was really an
extension of the struggle against language imperialism, when the youth of
Soweto demonstrated their unwillingness to have the teaching of Afrikaans
foisted upon them. It could well have signalled the birth of a new great
trek, but instead we were blessed with the birth of a new democracy.

The diversity of our cultures and religions makes a kaleidoscopic tapestry
of our society. The youth of South Africa stand at the threshold of
exciting times ahead. They have acquired a space which they must use to the
maximum for the optimum development and transformation of society.

This anniversary must flash in neon lights the urgency of unity and
reconciliation among the youth of South Africa. The youth of South Africa
have a wonderful and unique opportunity to harness their immense talents in
the interests of reconciliation and interracial harmony. Let us show that
the victims of the Soweto uprising did not sacrifice their lost generation
in vain.

We have to build a society free from racial strife, free from language
deprivation, free from cultural stultification. A bold new world beckons.
Over to the youth of our republic. The ball is in their court. [Applause.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chairperson, I am speaking after a poet, and it will not
be easy for me to match his standard.

Chairperson, hon Ministers, my colleagues the permanent delegates, comrades
and friends, I would like to express our sincere appreciation to you,
Chairperson, and the Whippery for having acceded to our request to have
this important debate today.

My heart is filled with sadness when I think of the many of our comrades
and friends who should have been with us today but could not be here
because of what apartheid did to them. Having said that, our belief remains
the same: that we will, in our various capacities, continue the tradition
of our movement and be active participants in the youth movement to the
extent of ensuring that what they fought for is consolidated and defended
at all times.

They are assured of our intention to utilise all contributions they made
prior to the democratic order of 1994. Those inputs will not miss our
attention. They will guide us and inform our deliberations. That will
result in achievable youth development programmes, that we have adopted and
that we are still going to adopt.

The idea of a united, nonracial, nonsexist, prosperous and democratic
society must be the guiding ideal of every young South African. Our young
people have shown in practice that they are capable of leading the way in
uniting young people across political, class and race barriers to build a
united South Africa; of deracialising South Africa towards a truly
nonracial society; of ridding our society of gender oppression; of
democratising South Africa; and of ensuring a better life for all. One has
only to look at the last two national congresses of the ANC Youth League to
see the truth of this.

In March 1998, at the conference of the ANC Youth League we had a high
delegation from the IFP youth brigade, represented by their secretary and
chairperson. At our conference in Bloemfontein, youth organisations that
historically represented white youth were also in attendance. Clearly, all
this should be indications of young people being serious about building a
country which is free of racism, who believe that unity cannot be allowed
...

These two congresses have proven that our youth are ready to honour the
memories of our fallen young lions, by fighting against racism, sexism,
xenophobia, tribalism and all forms of discrimination; taking an active
part in the political, social and economic life of our society; and
contributing to the unity of all South Africans, black and white.

Our theme for this year is ``Nonracialism: A youth vision for the 21st
century''. As a tribute to all young people who lost their lives 25 years
ago, let me, then, try to concentrate on the issue of nonracialism, as it
is the theme for this year. We have a duty as young people of this country
to work tirelessly to ensure that our nation is transformed into a truly
nonracial, nonsexist and united country at peace with itself.
Amongst many challenges confronting us in this century is the scourge of
racism which has been at the apex of the agenda of the ANC since its
establishment in 1912. It is of historical record that our unfortunate past
was preponderant with laws that classified whites as humans and Africans as
nonhumans. The past education system, which triggered the 1976 revolt, was
excellent at teaching us to be aware only of our differences, rather than
to share in our commonalities. This was an unjust political system that
remained with this nation for decades and only six years ago did the
massive selfless and relentless effort culminate in the realisation of the
ideals that inspired the formation of the ANC.

All of us would agree that, while we have attained our liberation, the path
to a truly nonracial and democratic country is strewn with many hiccups. If
we do not attend to those areas of concern, as encapsulated in the national
youth policy document which is still to be adopted by this Parliament, we
would betray the wishes of those who lost their lives 25 years ago.

The sole purpose of this demon, called racism, is to nullify or impair the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of our rights as
human beings and our fundamental freedom in the social, economic, political
and cultural fields, or in any other field of public life. This is the type
of life young Africans, in particular, and blacks, in general, have endured
for decades. It is wrong and it remains wrong.

It is transparently clear that the reason we have to expend more effort on
intensifying our campaign against racism is that it has the potential to
reverse the gains we have made since we took power. Granted, our Statute
Book no longer reflects racist laws, and I would like to express our
profound gratitude to our public representatives, both in the national
Parliament and provincial legislatures, for their efforts in repealing laws
intended to perpetuate the apartheid system - but, at the same time, we
would be being disloyal to the wishes of our people if we remained silent
on exposing all forms of racism in our society.

To those on the opposition benches who stubbornly refuse to admit the
existence of racism, let me try to relate just a few of the racist
incidents that have occurred around the country. In Vryburg, where Andrew
Babeile is from, white teachers refuse to teach black students mathematics
and to give computer lessons. Black students are barred from playing
certain sports. In other cases in the same town, two women were found
guilty of committing an offence at work. The black woman was found guilty
and fired, while her white colleague received a warning and continued to
work for the company. [Interjections.]

At the public library at Coligny, white patrons do not want to be served by
black librarians. A black domestic worker in the town says that she has to
wear plastic gloves when she works in a white person's house. Her boss
tells her to wash in cold water and, whilst she does so, he sits down and
watches her. [Interjections.] At Ottosdal, white nurses refuse to wash
black patients, and black nurses are overlooked for promotion in favour of
white nurses. In Rietvlei, the local high school provides transport to
white students only, and all communication is carried out in Afrikaans,
despite the fact that there are a number of black students.

In other areas many of our young comrades are stripped naked to be painted
all over their bodies. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Chair and colleagues, I think that those who have
already spoken said very well what the role was that the youth played in
our struggle for liberation. Perhaps to add anything to that, I think,
would actually sort of disturb that good exposition.

I thought that perhaps it was important that one reads the other side of
the flip chart, which says that there is consensus that from 1976 to 1990
our youth did indeed play a role in our struggle, which no one can actually
deny. However, there was an element which cracked up in that process, an
element of negativism and nihilism which, unfortunately, became a kind of a
disrespect for human dignity, disrespect for elders, disrespect for
parents, disrespect for human life and disrespect for property. This is
natural, as one communist leader said that nothing on earth has only one
position, but everything has a dual position that is positive and negative.

That kind of element was unfortunate, so much so that our youth were
actually taught, amongst other things, to kill, to maim, to commit all
sorts of acts of vandalism, to use drugs, to hate and, as a result, there
was a kind of a moral decay. For instance, killing took place in various
forms.

There was killing by necklacing. There was killing by forcing people to
drink petrol. There was killing by guns, etc. There is a consensus right
now amongst local leaders that this is a culture that needs to be replaced.
It is a culture that needs to be replaced with a culture of positivism, a
culture that will promote a spirit of goodwill, a spirit of responsibility,
a spirit of respect for human dignity, a spirit of respect for the law and
the rule of law. This spirit should also be of love and comradeship, and be
a spirit of discipline.

When we say that our youth are actually our future leaders, we mean that we
need to have a quality kind of product, quality leaders, who will lead this
country in a manner that is respectable. Of course, we do need to teach our
youth, and not what we see on our TV screens through Yizo Yizo II, which
shows some very unpalatable scenes. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr G A LUCAS: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers present here, hon members, I
just thought that I must say to the hon Bhengu that the majority of our
young people are disciplined, they value high moral standards and, above
all, they are very positive about our country. I think that there are some
very few loose elements which continue to paint a very bleak picture of the
role young people are playing in society. I think that that negativity, by
ourselves as public representatives, we must do away with.

The month of June is characterised by events of a very historical
significance for the people of our country and the whole world. A few days
ago, on 1 June, children blessed our Parliament with a clear message of
hope, in terms of the theme: ``Hear our voices,'' in celebrating
International Children's Day. That message and, indeed, their happiness did
give us comfort and reassured us that we are on the right track.

Again, on 26 June, patriotic South Africans will once more observe another
historic anniversary: the 46th anniversary of the Congress of the People
which took place in Kliptown on 26 June 1955. Indeed, it was a real
people's congress, a real people's parliament and, for that fact, the first
truly nonracial and nonsexist people's parliament. Even the brutality of
the apartheid regime and its security forces could not stop our people from
gathering for that historic event.

Out of this historic event we gave birth to the Freedom Charter, the
people's charter. Indeed, today our Constitution and other progressive
policies that we have passed are a reflection of the aspirations of the
people who gathered in Kliptown in 1955. We owe it to this generation and
others to make sure that the goals of the Freedom Charter are realised.

The debate of today calls upon all of us to observe another historic
milestone, again in June. No wonder the youth of our country have declared
this month, ``The month of youth action.'' Two days from now all South
African youth and the entire nation shall observe the 25th anniversary of
the heroic 1976 uprising.

This day will once again bring sad memories to our lives. It will once
again remind us of the brutality of a system which could not care less
about the lives of our people; and which was prepared to kill, torture,
imprison, destroy families and even poison us in pursuit of its sustenance.
However, we proved that side by side, collectively, we can defeat an unjust
system.

What started as a peaceful protest against an oppressive inferior education
system turned into a blood bath as the gun-crazy apartheid regime responded
to the demands of an unarmed mass of young people with guns filled with
deadly bullets. They maimed our people, destroyed their future and, above
all, never apologised for what they did. In fact, there is no remorse
amongst them.

When the '76 generation said, in the true spirit of the Freedom Charter,
``Let the doors of learning and culture be opened for all, let there be
equal education for all,'' the masters then did not respond favourably,
instead resorting to extreme measures.

The theme of building nonracialism, a youth vision for the 21st century,
clearly identifies the legacy which this generation needs to be remembered
by - that of eradicating racism, sexism, xenophobia and all other forms of
discrimination. These must be our strategic tasks and we must attain them
at all cost.

I wish to raise the issue that today, whilst I was on my way to Parliament,
I was listening to Radio Metro. There was a song that was playing, which
really disturbed me. It was saying: ``Makwerekwere'', I am not sure what. I
think that that is the kind of thing that we really need to deal with,
because those are derogatory words that we really need to get rid of. Radio
Metro is one of the instruments that reaches the majority of young people
in the country. If it can play this type of music, what kind of attitude
and society are we trying to build? I think, as our Ministers are here,
that that is an issue, because Radio Metro is a station run by the state
broadcaster. This is an issue that needs to be taken up to make sure that
we really deal with it once and for all.

The scenes of Potgietersrus Primary School refusing to admit black learners
should never happen again. The incident at Bryanston where white students
stabbed a black student in the eye should never happen again. The painting
of a young black girl with white paint by a white manager of a Pep Store in
the Northern Province should never be repeated. The exploitation of black
children through child labour on a farm in the North West province should
become a thing of the past.
We owe it to the generation of 1976, and others who came before and who
came after them, to continue to champion the cause of the youth of our
country against acts of racism in our schools, workplaces, and in society
as a whole.

The conditions which the youth of our country, especially the black youth,
find themselves in require urgent attention, not only from Government but
also from the private sector and society as a whole. We should challenge
the private sector and persuade them to begin to become more creative in
addressing the issues of youth unemployment, the lack of skills and the
whole range of socioeconomic issues that affect our youth.

It is my view that Government alone cannot deal with issues of youth
development without the progressive role that the private sector is
supposed to play. I think those are the issues that we must address with
the private sector.

Above all, we should support the initiatives by the youth of our country
when they say that they demand jobs, they demand better services, and, most
importantly, when they demand that the private sector take them seriously.

Another feature of society which continues to mostly affect young black
people, especially those from poverty-stricken backgrounds, is the limited
educational opportunities presented to them, especially at the higher
education level. I am from the Northern Cape, a vast province, which still
today does not have an institution of higher learning. We are the only two
provinces, with Mpumalanga, which are still suffering. If we are serious -
and this is not really a call on Government, because I think the Government
alone cannot do certain things - we can collectively, in a partnership,
begin to address issues of key interest to the youth of our country and
begin to build the necessary skills that our economy requires, that our
society requires. I say this because I come from a deprived province and
from a disadvantaged background. I do believe that we can, as a collective,
address some of the issues that affect our society.

For instance, when one goes to the Northern Cape there is a school called
Tlhomelang and a school called Diamantveld, both of which are in Kimberley.
When one compares the two schools one will begin to realise seriously vast
differences. In Tlhomelang the majority of school kids are from poor
families, but when one goes to the Diamantveld school the situation is the
contrary. One will never find a situation in which people, learners,
educators and parents of Diamantveld children put their energy and
resources into having the ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, it is a source of great hope to me that there
is such a consensus in the House around this important event in our
country's history. It is a joy to see that consensus yeasting out in our
country.

I would have preferred to replace the words of the motion, where it reads
``to fight racism, poverty and the scourge of HIV/Aids'' with ``to build a
nonracial, prosperous and healthy society''. I believe that both the hon Mr
Bhengu and Mr Raju are right: What South Africa needs now, if we are really
to honour the Solomon Mahlangus of this world and honour their memory, is
to stop fighting and struggling, to take hands and to build a free,
prosperous and contented nation; a nation that reaches for the stars with
the idealism of youth, the sort of place that people want to visit and
marvel at, the sort of place people want to invest their lives and money
in, a place where young South Africans wish to stay, not to leave.

What do we do about it? That is the big question. What we have to do is to
create a positive atmosphere and paint the background to the canvas on
which the youth can paint the foreground in their lives.

Ronald Reagan was a great president, because he made America optimistic.
Every morning the people got out of bed in America and said ``yes'',
instead of ``no'' or ``maybe''. That was because he inspired a sense of
confidence in the country. That is what he did. It had an enormous impact
on the prosperity of that country and set them upon a growth path on which
they are only now beginning to falter.

I believe that we need a new dream, a new goal, a great new national
enterprise aim, a national consensus around which we can all build. We know
about unemployment and the high levels of HIV/Aids amongst the youth. The
question is: How do they, and we, escape from the jaws of despair?

What we in South Africa need, in my humble opinion, is to accentuate the
positive, to exchange hopelessness for hope, despair for optimism,
uncertainty for confidence, division for unity, racism for reconciliation,
violence for peace. Those are some of the things that we need to do.

If one is not confident, not optimistic, if one does not have faith in
one's country, one is never going to be part of building it. That is a
reality of life and any contribution we make to reduce faith or promote
division or create fear, is to strike at the heart of our country's future.

People all over the world are honouring our President now. I hope we are
all delighted to see it. It is not only our President that is being
honoured so magnificently in the United Kingdom, it is our country that is
being honoured.

We need to build upon that inheritance. We need to be worthy of the
confidence that people have in us, we need to maintain the momentum of 1994
and what happened beyond that. Our new inheritance is not about somebody
putting the sweet fruits of the struggle before us, but about the
opportunities that liberty has given a proud and free South African people.
That is what it is about.

Churchill, when addressing parliament in a debate just after the war when
his country was ravaged, said, ``We cannot break up the foundations of this
state and use the pieces as missiles in party warfare.''

In other words, he was saying that there were limits upon the division that
can exist in a parliament and that ultimately we all must be builders. I
believe that we have focused too long on everything that was wrong ...
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, hon Ministers who are here, hon House, much has
been said this afternoon. It is something that affects me personally
because many of the youths that were involved in the uprising came from my
youth club and from Morris Isaacson High School just across the street from
me.

They were children I knew personally. Although it was a Soweto uprising, it
did not end in Soweto. The uprising spread throughout the country. I would
love us to commemorate it as a national uprising of young people throughout
the country. It did not pitch indigenous children against others; there
were children of all races who came up in support because they were
resisting the oppression, the racism of the time.

What hurt most was that those students were all dressed in their school
uniforms. They had planned to march peacefully to Orlando Stadium. As they
were marching peacefully, over 50 members of the police force came in vans
and trucks and overwhelmed them with guns and teargas. It reminded me of a
old poem that I used to read, called The Charge of the Light Brigade. A
part of it reads:


  Cannon to the right of them,
  Cannon to the left of them ...
  Volley'd and thunder'd ...
  Into the jaws of Death ...
  Rode the six hundred.

That is just like it was. It was as if they were coming to exterminate
vermin. One wondered what kind of people these were that had no conscience
- unarmed schoolchildren with hardly a spear, hardly a knife. The only
things they could use for defence were dustbin lids to protect themselves
from the gas cannon fired at them, or to return the canisters of teargas
that were thrown at them.
This was done by people who claimed to be religious, who claimed to be the
chosen people of God. How could they treat children like that? We wondered
whether they had children themselves. Today, although 25 years have passed,
it is still a very painful thing. Up to this day we have not seen much
change in attitude to life from those who had privileges during that time.

The youth of today are in a more difficult situation than the youth of
1976. Then they were fighting only for equal rights and against the
imposition of Afrikaans which was pushed down their throats. The youth of
today are faced with unemployment, disease and despondency. We need to find
ways in which we can comfort our youth because the majority of them are
still very loving, caring and sharing. They are not the only ones in the
world with problems.

As Yizo Yizo shows, it is not only African children; white, coloured and
Indian children all have problems. The youth of today need to be morally
strong. They should not so easily be bribed with money, liquor, sex and
corruption. They are battered daily by the media that show them that sex is
the main thing in life in order to corrupt and dissuade them from the
bigger vision of who they are meant to be.

These are the problems that they face today. They are faced with issues and
their material comforts seem to be primary, rather than the spiritual
things that go with one's material life.

We urge that we as a Council must begin not just to celebrate the day to
remember it, but to implement some of the decisions that we take here. We
should make sure that people do not just pass good decisions, but there
should be a change of heart.

One can pass all the good regulations in this country and all the laws, but
if there is no change of attitude, change of heart, it makes it difficult
for those good laws to be implemented. On the other hand, if people change
their hearts and attitudes and there is no change to the regulations, it is
discouraging and they will not progress.

I am most thankful for this year's contributions. We as the ANC say that we
could easily have said to the young people, ``Return evil with evil. You
have seen how we have suffered. Let them suffer in the same way.'' We have
never done so. In countries like Yugoslavia and Ireland, they still have
problems finding ways of relating with people with whom they fought.

Today our youth are leading us, they are leading us in their music, in
their conferences, in their sport; they bring us together and we must begin
to stand together so that when we suffer, we suffer together, and when we
rise, we rise up together. We must move away from giving first preference
to Caucasians when it comes to jobs and promotions.

Our young people are still the ones creating changes for tomorrow. If one
goes to the colleges, universities and technikons, they are the ones who
are demonstrating, fighting for things to be right. The white students do
not support them. They stay at home and they study. They get jobs first.
Tomorrow, when things are done, they will be benefiting from the struggles
of our own kids who struggled and went to demonstrations.

Our own African kids have problems getting scholarships and funding. In
some institutions, when they have bank loans, they are the ones that are
made to fail so that they will not have bank loans again. These are some of
the examples of racism that I can mention. There are many. But I am saying
we must begin to look at the positive things.

We must begin to join hands with people all over the world, for they made
us what we are. We did not do it on our own. We had the solidarity of
people all over the world. Even today they are concerned about us, just as
we are concerned about them. Therefore, today must be a day of dedication,
as next week we will also be thinking about the Freedom Charter that was
written in Kliptown in 1955. Those are things that I have been involved in,
and they mean a lot to me.

I think of brothers and sisters, young men and women, who now hold very
high positions, and who came from the struggle of 1976. However, there are
many of them who still suffer. Some are maimed, some have no jobs, some
have training and experience, but no employment. We must remotivate them so
that they can begin to create jobs for themselves, and not wait to get a
job coming their way.

We must stop making our nation the source of making money. Almost every
nation comes to South Africa to make money out of us. They come from
Pakistan, Asia and Yugoslavia. When are we going to do things on our own? I
am urging that we be self-reliant and very proud, not be copycats of
everything that is American. Most of the stuff that we copy from America is
negative. Even in America they do not accept those things.

When people come from overseas, they must see something that is typically
South African in our television presentations, and in the activities around
them. They want something that is African. So I am urging that we must not
be afraid and ashamed of who we are. Our young people can teach us and we
can teach them. We are blessed in South Africa in that the old and the
young do not fight each other; they complement each other, they work
together. With these words we pray that this struggle to make a new South
Africa will continue to be where it is from now until the end of time.
Amen. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! The presiding officer is prevented from
joining the hurly-burly of the debate, but I note with interest the
attachment of members to Western literature. I note Shakespeare, Coleridge
and Churchill. I have not heard Ndebele, Themba, Tlali or Head. Perhaps the
next speaker, the Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology can
advise us here.

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Chairperson, I
think it is something that we must take as our own weakness. We need to
have a book festival in the country. We need to have African films, coming
from all over the continent, to popularise them.

I hope that this is going to start, because tomorrow we are going to be
launching South African films at the national cultural history museum in
Pretoria, sponsored by our film and sound archives. Every Wednesday we will
be showing a South African film. I hope that we will bring in African films
as well. This will be open to the public, particularly to schoolchildren.

There has not been a drive to popularise African writers, African films or
African poets. We should be celebrating people like Dr Serote. I take note
of the message from this Council and am thankful for it, because it is on
occasions such as these that we must use the opportunity to actually think
deeply about the meaning of the changes that have taken place in this
country. We have to reflect on what is required of us to sustain those
changes, and really create a firm cultural foundation for future
generations.

Last night we launched the archives at the University of the Western Cape.
They reflect our past, our history. They are keeping the lessons of history
alive for the coming generations so that our people who will come after us
will value the contribution of our heroes and heroines.

I recommend that members of this House make use of this archive at the
University of the Western Cape. They should visit it, learn from it and
popularise it, because history is the foundation for the future. We do not
necessarily want to reflect on the painful past, but we have to remember it
so as to plan for a more effective future.

I thank the members for having participated so vigorously in the debate. I
thank my colleague, the Minister for the Public Service and Administration,
for leading us in this debate. I hope this becomes a tradition, an annual
event, that the NCOP conducts this very important discussion and dialogue
for the whole country. [Applause.]
The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Chairperson
and colleagues in the House this afternoon, I am going to start with a
quote from the Bible in Afrikaans.

Spreuke 18 s√™ [Proverbs 18 says:]:


  Die woorde van 'n mens kan diep waters wees, 'n bruisende stroom, 'n bron
  van wysheid. [A person's words can be a source of wisdom, deep as the
  ocean, fresh as a flowing stream.]

I think if we have listened to many of the inputs today, we should say to a
large degree that we have a sense of us working towards building a
nonracial, nonsexist democracy, bearing in mind, and I would like to
emphasise this, that the revolutionary capacity of our youth cannot be
challenged by anyone, least of all us in Parliament, especially in the
NCOP.

I would want to elaborate on why I raise that particular issue, and I
actually want to take up something that Comrade Archie, the hon member from
the Northern Cape, raised when he said, ``It is our responsibility as
public representatives to be positive.'' It is our responsibility to take
forward a positive message which does not still need to be crafted. It is
there. The vision is captured in our Constitution.

In the policies of this Government and its overall principles it is clearly
stated. We have stated it in a very positive manner. I just wish to remind
us, because we, at moments, seem to be doubting whether there is that
common vision. I quote from the preamble:


  We, the people of South Africa,
  Recognise the injustices of our past;
  Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land; Respect
  those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
  Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
  diversity.
  We therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this
  Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic so as to - ...
  Lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government
  is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected
  by law ...
     Nkosi Sikelel'iAfrika. Morena boloka setjhaba sa heso. [God bless
     Africa, God bless our nation.]

I think there is a need for us always to come back to what is the
foundation, what underpins our being here. Why do we commit ourselves
through celebrating the 25th anniversary of Youth Day in this manner
through a debate? It is not to try and deny our past. It is not trying to
suggest that certain things did not exist, but it is precisely to
acknowledge that past and to say never again will it happen. But at the
same time, accepting that our past has led to an extent of traumatisation
of our society, we need to take the lead and reflect that, as public
representatives, we have the insight and drive to ensure that we no longer
carry youth, as on the chest of Rev Chabaku, where we have the Hector
Peterson image.

We do want to ensure that the Public Service itself will become the central
machinery with a changed culture, but that transformed culture will not
happen on a voluntary basis. It will happen through the hon members'
engagement, as representatives of our people.

The Public Service needs to reflect that change by ensuring better service
delivery and that there are no victims of any form of discrimination any
longer. By being a constitutional democracy, we have committed ourselves to
follow the Constitution, which is a positive answer in ensuring that we
provide support for the revolutionary capacity of our youth.

The revolutionary capacity should not be seen as negative. It is about
ensuring that the youth continue to act as a mass force for revolutionary
change and the fundamental reconstruction and development of our country.
However, it requires the support and guidance of everybody, in the spirit
of Batho Pele, in the spirit of Ubuntu, which puts the understanding of
``Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu'' [no men is an island] at the centre. Together
we shall make a difference. We should not assume that by being negative
ourselves we are going to change our country and make it positive.

I want to conclude by saying that the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, which will be
held in Durban from 31 August to 7 September, will be preceded by a youth
summit, which will take place on 26 and 27 August. It will involve youth
representatives from all over the world. Our youth must ensure that through
their representatives, they lead. Much as we are aware that we are involved
in processes of change, the youth of this country and of this region still
understand what it means to struggle. Struggle is not fighting, it is but a
movement for change. To struggle is to facilitate change, because change is
not going to come when others bring it about on our behalf, and I spoke
about that in the opening.

Our youth representatives should ensure that they come to that youth summit
with concrete input on how to make a difference, how to ensure change and
how to thank the peoples of the world - we must be very careful about
xenophobia - for the role they played together with the people of South
Africa who struggled to bring about the democracy that we need to build in
a real sense.

This debate is necessary. I believe the debate has been positive and that
it brings up our diversity. I hope that our input will contribute to
ensuring that we do make a difference, in a positive manner, in the
reconstruction of our country into the kind of country that our youth would
be proud of. [Interjections.]

Debate concluded.

      EXPORT CREDIT AND FOREIGN INVESTMENTS RE-INSURANCE AMENDMENT BILL

              (Consideration of Bill and of Report on thereon.)

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, after World War II, when the infrastructure and
economies of many countries all over the world were heavily destroyed, the
rich and powerful economies that embarked upon the process of rebuilding
the economies and infrastructure of the smaller countries of the world
started huge export projects, capital goods and so forth, to the smaller
economies. The business organisations and companies of these big economies
required insurance for the projects that they were undertaking in these
countries, across the borders.

The biggest problem at the time was that when companies decided to send
millions of dollars or rands worth of equipment and projects to other parts
of the world, they were not sure whether they would receive their returns.
They were also not sure whether those governments, countries or economies
were good for the debt. Out of that emerged a very innovative way in which
countries managed to start spending money across their borders and feeling
safe about it: the process of credit guarantee and reinsurance, which is
what this Bill is all about.

As the process of credit guarantee and reinsurance was taking place,
international trade began taking place with greater frequency and at a
higher level. So the globalisation that we witness today, the very big,
world economy with trade taking place across borders as if it is just
normal practice, had its roots in the way in which capital expenditure and
trade took place after World War II.

In 1957, the South African government enacted an Act called the Export
Credit and Foreign Investments Re-insurance Act. In terms of that Act, a
mechanism was created which was called the Credit Guarantee Insurance
Corporation. All the different banks and financial institutions of our
country came together to create insurance instruments, insurance mechanisms
and products, which could be utilised by anybody who wished to invest or
trade outside our borders.

Whenever the Credit Guarantee Insurance Corporation provided insurance for
an organisation, it asked the Government to underwrite that insurance, in
other words, to reinsure everything they did. In other words - just for the
benefit of the members of the House - if, before this Bill, I were to
export 100 drilling machines to any other country - Mozambique, Angola, the
US, whatever the case may be - I would approach the Credit Guarantee
Insurance Corporation and tell them I was exporting these machines, which
cost me R10 million, and I would like to have insurance because I would
like to know that my money would be returned. The Credit Guarantee
Insurance Corporation would go to the Government and ask the Government,
particularly the Department of Trade and Industry, whether they would
underwrite the insurance that they would give to Mr Moosa when he exports
his mechines. The Government would then underwrite that.

That process has resulted in the Credit Guarantee Insurance Corporation not
taking any risks but making lots of commission and money. At some point the
SA Government became wise to this and asked itself the question: Why are we
paying commission to the CGIC and to the banks to do all this, when, in
fact, we could do it ourselves?

So the Government has decided, with this Bill, to create the Export Credit
Agency. What this agency will do is provide direct insurance to the
economy, from the Government's side, without going through a go-between in
the form of the CGIC, and the Bill we have before us creates that.

There have been some issues that came up in the discussions that I have to
address. One of the questions is: If the CGIC is taken away, what happens
to the small organisations and businesses that are doing day-to-day trade
across our borders? What this Bill does is that it does not close down the
CGIC, in other words, it does not take away all the business of the CGIC.

We have divided the Credit Guarantee Insurance Corporation into two
categories with this Bill. One category is the day-to-day short-term
insurance - in other words, if I am exporting T-shirts across the border
and I need some guarantee for that, the CGIC will still continue doing
that. International best practice is that organisations like CGIC all over
the world provide that kind of insurance.

But if, as an organisation, we were to embark on a big project, say for
example, the Mozal gas pipeline project or the project that we are doing in
Yugoslavia in the Far East where we are exporting a lot of our technology
from Sasol and so forth, then that would be insured by this new Export
Credit Agency. It simply creates this agency and, in the process, also
creates powers for the agency to develop a reserve fund, and makes sure
that the agency has the power to deal with claims, its own fees, costs, and
so forth.

The view is that this agency will save the Government something to the tune
of R20 million per annum, in the form of commission fees and so forth.
Also, with the creation of this agency, the Government itself will be able
to scrutinise these projects in more detail.

Those are the few words that I, as the chairperson of the committee, have
to say on this Bill. Some views have been expressed by the opposition
parties - I am sure they will make declarations. But, from the side of the
ANC, we support this Bill and call on the House to vote in favour of it.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Declarations of vote:

Dr E A CONROY: Agb Voorsitter, kollegas, die doel met hierdie
wysigingswetsontwerp is in der waarheid die skepping van 'n statut√™re
liggaam, naamlik die uitvoerkredietagentskap, wat noue bande met die
Departement van Handel en Nywerheid sal h√™. Hierdie agentskap sal die
herversekeringsaktiwiteite oorneem wat tot op hede deur die bestaande
kredietwaarborgversekeringskorporasie gere√´l is, en dit in 'n tyd waar daar
hard gespook word om ondernemings wat in staatsbesit en onder staatsbeheer
is, te privatiseer. Hoewel die agentskap nie direk enige bestaande re√´ls en
ooreenkomste sal verbreek nie, word hierdie soort van staatsinmenging deur
ander lande as 'n onregverdige handelspraktyk beskou en sal dit toenemend
in die opset van die W√™reld Handelsorganisasie in omstredenheid gedompel
word.

Die redes wat vir die voorgestelde verandering aangevoer word, hou nie
water nie, aangesien enige nadele en tekortkominge in die bestaande stelsel
maklik met onderhandeling reggestel en uitvoerkredietversekering sodoende
in die kader van die privaatsektor behou sou kon word. Die Nuwe NP beskou
die wysiging as 'n terugwaartse stap en sien dus nie sy weg oop om hierdie
wetsontwerp te steun nie. (Translation of Afrikaans Declaration of vote
follows.)

[Dr E A CONROY: Hon Chairperson, colleagues, the purpose of this amending
Bill is in fact the creation of a statutory body, namely the Export Credit
Agency which will have close ties with the Department of Trade and
Industry. This agency will also take over the reinsurance activities which
until now have been regulated by the existing Credit Guarantee Insurance
Corporation, and this at a time when everything is being done to privatise
businesses which are owned by the state or under state control. Although
the agency will not directly violate any existing rules or agreements, this
type of state intervention is regarded as unfair business practice by other
countries and will increasingly be plunged into controversy in the
framework of the World Trade Organisation.
The reasons given for the proposed change do not hold water, since any
disadvantages and shortcomings in the existing system could easily be
rectified with negotiations, and by doing so export credit insurance could
be kept within the framework of the private sector. The New NP regards the
amendment as a step back and does not see its way clear to support this
Bill.]

Mnr J L THERON: Geagte Voorsitter, die DP verklaar dat ons ons ten volle
vereenselwig met die sentimente soos uiteengesit deur die agb kollega
Conroy van die Nuwe NP. Die DP stem dus teen die wetsontwerp. (Translation
of Afrikaans declaration of vote follows.)

[Mr J L THERON: Hon Chairperson, the DP declares that we identify fully
with the sentiments as set out by the hon colleague Conroy of the New NP.
The DP thus votes against the Bill.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, in the view of the ACDP we should be
streamlining the current private process and improving on it, as far as
export credit is concerned, and not nationalising it.

We have one of the oldest and most successful and one of the few profitable
credit guarantee agencies in the world, of which we can be justifiably
proud. The agency has expressed its wishes to reform itself and create new
capacity in order to take on new challenges in Africa. And what is the
department doing? It is nationalising this body, and we are against that.

We need to provide extra capacity to cover political risk, to support
business in order to develop the subcontinent. However, Governments are
notoriously poor at making good political judgments. Our preferred option
would have been to reform the CGIC.

I want to say - I hope I am not being prophetic, but I would like to have
it on Hansard, and that is why I am standing up today - that there is no
quicker way to lose money, and lose it in buckets, than to give political
risk cover in unstable environments. People have lost billions in Africa,
and I know what I am talking about because I used to be chairman and chief
executive officer of such an organisation myself.

Politics have to be developed for ethical investments. Arms, tobacco,
alcohol, child labour, slave labour and despotic jurisdictions are to be
avoided. There is big money involved, and we need to be skilful and
knowledgeable and have incorruptible people to do the job. Any exporter
will export anywhere, that is if the Government of South Africa is going to
pay the Bill when the contract fails or the country goes up in smoke. We
have to be very, very careful.

We do not need huge offices, with the same people from the DTI, or from the
CGIC that are doing a good job now moving into this new organisation for
much more money than what they earned before, using expensive consultants
and earning exorbitant salaries and incurring mammoth travel costs.

This organisation is only going to deal with probably 10 deals a year. We
do not need a huge infrastructure for that. They can meet occasionally, as
the Board of Trade did. Because public money is involved and losses would
constitute off-budget expenditure, there needs to be transparency and
disclosure to Parliament, as we are ultimately responsible for the losses.
With reservations, we abstain from voting on this Bill.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We shall now proceed to voting on the
question.

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, the ANC wishes to make a declaration.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The ANC did not indicate, but I will allow it
now that it has woken up.

Mr M V MOOSA: Oh, I thought that we were entitled to make a declaration
before the vote.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Each party is entitled to do so, but I asked
whether any party wished to make a declaration, and only three parties out
of the seven indicated their wish to do so. However, you may proceed.

Mr M V MOOSA: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I have a very short
declaration regarding the Vote. As far as the ANC is concerned, we
established from the department whether it would be able to undertake this
responsibility. We had absolute assurances from the department and the
professionals involved in the Department of Trade and Industry that they
do, in fact, understand this particular area of industry and that they will
be continuing to do so.

The Government has all along been covering risks on credit insurance. The
fact that it is creating its own agency to do so is nothing new. Whether
the CGIC or the Government did so, the risk is covered by the Government.
From that point of view, all that the Government is doing, is finalising
processes now, in order to streamline the agency. The ANC supports this
Bill.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party and New National Party dissenting; African Christian
Democratic Party abstaining).

                           PATENTS AMENDMENT BILL

              (Consideration of Bill and of Report on thereon)

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, this is a very short and technical Bill. Some
time ago, Parliament gave attorneys the right to appear before the High
Court, not only before magistrates' courts, and so forth. In keeping with
that, a whole number of processes in which attorneys are generally involved
had to be revised.

One of the processes that has as yet not been dealt with is the the one
which requires representations, in respect of patents, to the patents
authorities of our country. What this Bill does, is that it extends the
right to appear before the commissioner who hears patents matters, not only
to advocates and specialised agencies that are accredited, but also to
attorneys who have the right of appearance in the High Court. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:30.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           WEDNESDAY, 13 JUNE 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 12 June 2001 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     "Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal" Act Repeal Bill [B 30
              - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75).


2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs. The report of the Auditor-General contained in the
         following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Trade
              and Industry for 1999-2000 [RP 66-2001], including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33
              - Trade and Industry for 1999-2000 [RP 142-2000].


         (b)     Executive Summary of the Report of the Department of Trade
              and Industry for 1999-2000 [RP 66-2001].


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy and to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs:


         Report of Mintek for 1999-2000.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Office of the Auditor-General on the Budget of Income and
     Expenditure for 2001-2002 [RP 60-2001].

2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     Draft Regulations relating to Chapters 5 and 6 of the Municipal Systems
     Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), submitted in terms of section 120(7)(a)
     of the Act.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
     and to the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration for
     consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on the Patents
     Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 12
     June 2001:


         The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having considered the
         subject of the Patents Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2001] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to
         the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
     Study Tour to Western Cape, dated 27 February 2001:


     The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
     undertaken a study tour to the Western Cape on 16 and 17 October 2000,
     reports as follows:


     A.     Objectives


         The Committee has in the course of the year visited eight
         provinces in order to assess and evaluate the progress made with
         land claims and land restitution. The Constitution states that any
         person or community, or a direct descendant of such person, who
         was dispossessed of any right in land by virtue of a racially
         discriminatory law, shall be entitled to claim back that right.
         This does not mean that a person can simply lay claim to the land
         of his or her choice. The person must first lodge a claim with the
         new Commission on Restitution of Land Rights.


         The objective of these visits was to find out first-hand from the
         people who were unfairly dispossessed and who were involved in the
         process, what their views were. The Western Cape tour was the
         final provincial visit undertaken.


         Upon request by the Committee, the Commission of Restitution of
         Land Rights drafted a programme of areas to visit in the Western
         Cape over a two-day period.


         The following were members of the delegation: Rev P Moatshe
         (Chairperson); Dr E A Conroy; Mrs B N Dlulane (present on 16
         October); Mr M L Mokoena; Mr R Nyakane; Mrs J N Vilakazi (present
         on 17 October).


     B.     Monday, 16 October 2000


         Mr Sandile Swartbooi and Mr Siretsi Moruakgomo, both of the
         Commission on Restitution of Land Rights, accompanied the
         delegation to the various areas visited on the day.


         1. District Six Museum


              The delegation met with Mr Noor Ebrahim, a staff member of the
              museum and also an ex-resident of District Six, before the
              forcible removals of families from the area in 1966. The
              delegation was taken on a tour of the museum to get an
              understanding of the community of District Six in the
              apartheid days.


              District Six was an area of Cape Town at the foot of Table
              Mountain, close to the harbour and the city bowl. It was an
              area where blacks, whites and coloureds lived as a community
              and together created a rich mixture of different cultures.
              Most of the people who lived in District Six, were of the
              working class. They wanted to live close to the city, harbour
              and factories where they worked. The early part of the 19th
              century saw the outbreak of the bubonic plague and the first
              forced removals from District Six. Thousands of black people
              were forced out and over 2¬†000 houses were demolished and
              rebuilt. As the city and the population continued to grow, the
              municipality did not provide adequate water and refuse
              facilities. Roads were left to deteriorate and landlords took
              little interest in the maintenance and upkeep of their houses.
              The government used this neglect to refer to District Six as a
              slum, in order to justify removals based on race.


              In 1950 the Group Areas Act was passed by the government,
              which classified people in racial groups. In 1966 District Six
              was declared a "whites only" area. Between 1966 and 1980, 60
              000 people were forcibly removed from District Six and their
              homes and shops bulldozed to the ground. District Six then
              became Zonnebloem. Families and friends were split up and
              moved to the Cape Flats. The memory of District Six is proof
              that people of different religions, nationalities and racial
              groups can live together.


              Mr Noor Ebrahim belongs to one of many families who are
              currently involved in claiming restitution as a result of
              having lost their homes in District Six during the apartheid
              era.


              A memorandum was sent to the Minister for Agriculture and Land
              Affairs, requesting approval for land restitution damages for
              the claimants of District Six. The Minister's approval is
              pending. Mr Ebrahim indicated that when monetary compensation
              is paid out, it will be divided amongst all the descendants of
              each family entitled thereto. It is understood that each
              family would receive an amount of R15 000 as compensation.


         2. Franschhoek


              The delegation met with Ms Joan Japhtha, who is a member of
              the committee comprising community members dealing with the
              land claims issue for the area.


              During the apartheid era, Franschhoek North was known as Le
              Rouxdorp, where both coloureds and whites resided together.
              However, when the Group Areas Act was introduced, Le Rouxdorp
              was declared a coloured community. All the coloured families
              (18) of Franschhoek were then moved into Le Rouxdorp and the
              white people were moved to other areas and given attractive
              compensation packages. Coloured homeowners in Franschhoek
              owned large properties, but were paid low compensation for
              their land.
              18 families were evicted from Franschhoek and had to rent
              houses when they were forced to move to Le Rouxdorp, and the
              small amounts they had received as compensation for the loss
              of their homes were used to pay for the rent, which left very
              little for anything else.
              Ms Japhtha indicated that the land restitution has been a five-
              year process, but that it was the "end of the road now", as
              the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs had approved the
              restitution claim for Franschhoek North and the claims would
              soon be paid out. Ms Japhtha stated that she expected it to
              vary from family to family - would they prefer monetary or
              land compensation? She noted that claimants opting for land
              compensation would receive only a plot of land, with no
              services attached to it. Money would have to be spent to build
              homes on those tracts of land. Ms Japhtha also indicated that
              a development company wanted to purchase the land to build a
              golf course. It approached the committee and indicated that it
              wanted a win-win situation.


              Ms Japhtha informed the delegation that there was a special
              committee, comprising of residents of Franschhoek North who
              are dealing with the issue of restitution. The committee has
              also enlisted the assistance of a lawyer to represent the best
              interests of the community. She also stated that there had
              been problems with the local council, who initially refused to
              allow the claims through, as they argued that it was not
              accountable for the loss of land of the community. When the
              committee employed the services of a lawyer, the claims were
              passed. However, the committee has lodged an objection against
              the council, whom, it felt, appeared to be backing off and did
              not have the interests of the community at heart. The
              Commission on Restitution of Land Rights were to meet with its
              Legal Resource Centre that evening to discuss the problem,
              after which a meeting was to be called with the Franschhoek
              local council. The parliamentary delegation agreed that the
              discussions should take place between the Department and the
              council, and that the committee and claimants should not be
              involved in that process. The parliamentary Committee would
              also like to know the outcome of the consequent meetings with
              the local council of Franschhoek.


         3. Meeting with Western Cape Commissioner
              The delegation had a short lunch meeting with the Western Cape
              Commissioner of Restitution of Land Rights, Mr Alan Roberts.


              Mr Roberts indicated that his office has been inundated with
              approximately 500 daily calls on issues of land restitution.
              He praised his employees as good workers who put in long hours
              of overtime and who were interested in the subject matter they
              were dealing with. All the employees of the Commission were
              contractually employed and not paid enough for the amount of
              work they put in, and hence quite often the Commission would
              lose good workers, who had no option but to seek better
              salaries because they had families to support.


              A claim must relate to a dispossession, which took place after
              19 June 1913. In addition, claims had to be lodged within a
              period of three years from 1 May 1995. Once a claim has been
              lodged, the Commission will advise the owner of the land being
              claimed and all other interested parties. Notice of the claim
              will also be published in the Gazette and forwarded to the
              relevant Registrar of Title Deeds. This would enable a
              prospective buyer of land to see whether it was the subject of
              a pending land claim.


         4. Riebeeck Kasteel


              The delegation met with Mr Lameyer, Mrs Botes, Mrs Kriel and
              Mr Daffnee, who are members of the Oukloof Land Claim
              Committee of Riebeek Kasteel in the Malmesbury District.


              A claim by the Oukloof Land Claim Committee was submitted on
              behalf of the former residents of the Oukloof area of Riebeeck
              Kasteel on 21 April 1997, in accordance with sections 11(1)
              and 2(1) of the Restitution of Land Rights Act, Act 22 of
              1994, as amended, and section 25(3) of the Constitution, and
              gazetted on 18 July 1997.


              The Oukloof location was established as a coloured location
              early in the previous century, when a white farmer donated
              land to the Dutch Reformed Church for this purpose. Oukloof is
              two km from Riebeeck Kasteel. The church assumed
              responsibility for administering this settlement, and annually
              nominal sums were paid to it for water. The claimants built
              their own houses but were prohibited by the church from owning
              the land.


              At the time of removal in 1961, the land belonged to the
              Village Management Board, who, in order to make way for
              extension of the white residential area, forcibly removed the
              residents of Oukloof, bulldozed their homes and moved them to
              a newly built township, Esterhof. The removal was done
              according to the Group Areas Act of 1957. The houses at
              Esterhof at the time were worse than the homes the claimants
              had been removed from. The claimants were expected to pay one
              month's rent before moving into the houses and were promised
              by the municipality that after 10 years the houses would be
              theirs. A total of 57 households were removed at the time of
              the dispossession, and 56 households lodged claims. When
              claimants initially lodged their claims, they stated that they
              did not want restoration of the dispossessed property, but
              wanted tenure upgrade and structural upgrading of their
              municipal houses in Esterhof. However, the majority of the
              claimants could not attain full tenure security because their
              payments in respect of rates, housing and services were in
              arrears and the Malmesbury municipality could take possession
              of their properties if they did not honour their debts. It is
              the position of the Commission that compensating claims
              financially, in order to settle arrears with the municipality,
              will allow them to acquire full tenure security. The full
              financial compensation is R980 000, which will be split
              amongst 56 families, so that each family would receive R17
              500.


              Mr Lameyer indicated that claimants were unhappy, as residents
              were the owners of their properties, but did not have proof on
              paper. The Malmesbury municipality informed residents that
              they would not be granted title deeds to their properties
              until all the residents' backdated debts had been settled.
              This meant that those residents who had no debts would also be
              denied receipt of the title deeds to their homes. The question
              that the delegation raised, was whether the land was
              communally owned by all the residents together or privately
              owned.


              Mr Lameyer informed the delegation that the residents opted
              for the R17 500 compensation to be used to pay off their
              outstanding debts, in order to obtain their title deeds. They
              intended to use the rest of the money to develop and upgrade
              their homes.


              Once the moneys have been paid out, the Commission of
              Restitution of Land Rights would follow up to see if the debts
              have been paid off and whether the titles deeds have been
              allocated to the residents.


              The delegation agreed that the Chairperson would approach the
              Select Committee on Public Services to follow up what the
              situation was as regards the issue of the title deeds. In
              addition, the Oukloof Land Claim Committee should approach the
              town clerk of Malmesbury to find out whether Riebeeck Kasteel
              is privately or communally owned.


     C.     Tuesday, 17 October 2000


         1. Slangrivier


              The delegation flew to George and were met by Mr T Mofokeng
              from the Commission of Restitution of Land Rights. The
              delegation undertook a one-and-a-half hour road trip to
              Slangrivier and met with the following members of the
              Slangrivier Land Claims Committee: Mr D Lotz, Mr D Esau and Mr
              C Hoogbaard.


              The delegation heard that the Minister had approved the
              restitution settlement package, which formed part of other
              land reform programmes such as redistribution, since this area
              was an Act 9 area. The Slangrivier Land Claims Committee also
              indicated that the residents have waited seven years for the
              restitution packages to be paid out. The residents not only
              want monetary compensation for the loss of their homes during
              the apartheid era, but also wanted to receive land
              restitution, as they did not feel it was right that they had
              to buy back plots owned by them and which had been forceably
              removed from them. Slangrivier will receive R680 000 as
              compensation.


              The delegation agreed that it would approach the Minister
              about the problems the residents were experiencing and would
              request that Parliament look into the issues of monies that
              have been made available to the community, but that have not
              been used for that purpose.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
     Study Tour to North West, dated 27 February 2001:
     The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
     undertaken a study tour to the North West on 18 and 19 May 2000,
     reports as follows:


     A.     Introduction


         The Committee embarked on a visit to the North West with a view to
         assessing and evaluating progress made on land claims and land
         restitution, as well as problems experienced by the communities.
         During the visit the Committee was able to meet with the MEC for
         Land and Agriculture, members of the standing committee on land
         and agriculture, officials of the department of land and
         agriculture, the legal adviser of the department, members of the
         Land Claims Commission, the Bakolobeng Chief and Bakolobeng
         representatives, the acting Chief of Bakwena ba Mahlako and the
         community, the Barolong ba-ga Barokologadi and the Bakwena tribe.


     B.     Purpose of Report


         The purpose of this Report is to present the findings of the
         Committee on the progress made and problems experienced by
         interested parties.


     C.     Findings


         1. Meeting with MEC and Land Commission


              The MEC for Land and Agriculture gave the general background
              on issues revolving around land claims and land restitution.
              Land is a thorny issue, as experienced in Zimbabwe. The
              situation is causing a panic in South Africa, but it may not
              be repeated here because, by comparison, Zimbabwe made
              promises that were not fulfilled after independence. South
              Africa, in 1994, recognised that the land issue was important,
              and is trying to rectify the legacy of the past. The land
              question is enshrined in the Constitution. These are ways
              which will help to resolve the land issue in a peaceful way.
              Some sectors of the community are dissatisfied that claims
              have to be made since 1913. They want it to go beyond that
              period, but unfortunately there are no records in this
              respect. The 1995 Restitution Act was enacted to quell the
              situation and instill hope in people in South Africa. The
              Security of Tenure Act was aimed at settling and protecting
              people on farms.


              The courts are clinging to sections of repealed Acts, such as
              the Trespassing Act and the Property Rights Act, as well as
              the property clause. This makes the work of the Land
              Commission a bit difficult. There are also some Acts which
              make the work of the Commission difficult because they do not
              give clear guidelines. The government has created institutions
              to give effect to these Acts, which shows its commitment and
              intention to deliver. Issues such as a lack of capacity and
              resources are some of the limitations that are being
              addressed.


              The country is part of the global community, and agreements
              have been entered into. Some of these agreements are
              disadvantageous to us. The agreements are not protecting those
              who are involved in imports and exports, such as farmers and
              traders.


              The process that has taken place, included the handing of land
              to the community in Putfontein, and other small land claims
              have already been processed. The Minister for Agriculture and
              Land Affairs has devolved powers to the MECs relating to the
              collection of rentals on land and other related claims to
              land. The issue of emerging farmers is not progressing well,
              as banks are not willing to grant loans to them. The
              restitution process in the province is taking place at a
              snail's pace and is not satisfying. After the land has been
              distributed, people are left with no infrastructural
              developments, and these communities have no development plans,
              which causes problems.


              The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs has devolved
              powers to the MEC to allocate land and to deal with land
              claims. This will help in speeding up the restitution process
              and stop the loose cannons who want to invade land. There is a
              mushrooming of this tendency in a number of provinces,
              including North West.


              The Chairperson of the Committee indicated that the purpose of
              the visit was to monitor and assess the progress made with the
              implementation of the laws made by Parliament. The study tours
              started in other provinces in 1999, and are still continuing.
              The aim of this study tour was to look at land restitution and
              land claims. The Committee wanted to see if the people did get
              their land, and the progress and problems around land claims.
              There should be integrated efforts between the implementers,
              the department and the legislature to ensure that land is
              restored to the owners.


         2. Land Claims Commission


              The Commission agrees with the MEC that some of the Acts are a
              hindrance to its work. Despite these weaknesses, the
              Commission has been able to settle some claims. The following
              is the breakdown of claims:


              Total number of claims 3 945
              Total number of claims prioritized 87
              Number of claims gazetted 24
              Number of claims in the negotiations phase 9
              Number of claims in court 3
              Number of beneficiaries of recently settled claims 5 100
              Total number of settled beneficiaries 18 800


              (1) Achievements


                  (a)  The finalising of the Putfontein land claim.


                  (b)  Research and negotiations are in progress for the
                       special project in respect of Vogelfontein and Twee
                       Rivier.


                  (c)  Settlement of the remainder of Ratsegae (Portion
                       13).
                  (d)  Transfer of development funds of Ratsegae - on-site
                       development taking place


                  (e)  Business plan for Dithakwanene is completed.


                  (f)  Bakubung claimants completely resettled.


                  (g)  A working relationship with and a commitment from
                       the department on the implementation of court orders
                       and ministerial awards.


                  (h)  A working relationship with district councils as
                       service delivery points.


                  (i)  Willingness by TRAC and ANCRA to assist in the
                       process of effectively settling claims.


                  (j)  Political commitment from the Premier and the
                       political head on land issues.
              (2) Problems


                  There is resistance from land owners for the following
                  reasons:


                  (a)  Refusal to attend meetings.


                  (b)  Disagreement regarding valuation reports.


                  (c)  Questioning the validity of claims without
                       conducting thorough research.


                  (d)  Infighting amongst claimants.


                  (e)  Lack of co-ordination and commitment by other role-
                       players.


                  (f)  The process of acquiring state-owned land is a
                       cumbersome process. An interdepartmental procedural
                       review is, however, in the pipeline.


                  (g)  Ministerial/departmental policy regarding
                       compensation is problematic and remains unresolved.


                  (h)  Claimant verification is problematic.


                  (i)  The cost of establishing historical valuations is
                       exceptionally high.


                  (j)  Lack of capacity - the staff is not in a position to
                       handle the current caseload.


                  (k)  Some people are not sure of their land.


                  (l)  There is a problem of restitution versus
                       development. Private companies acknowledge the claims
                       but want the land for development.


                  (m)  The Communal Property Association (CPA) is a legal
                       entity, but it gives the Commission a lot of problems
                       in settling land claims.
                  (n)  There are claimants who had undivided shares prior
                       to dispossession, and they do not want to have
                       communal land.


                  (o)  The courts want affidavits and birth certificates of
                       claimants, and this delays the process. The fact that
                       every claim should go to court, also frustrates the
                       Commission.


              (3) Some solutions


                  (a)  The Commission should be given some powers to
                       investigate.


                  (b)  What claimants had received in the past should not
                       be considered.


              (4) Progress on advanced land claims


              AREA     STAGE OUTCOME


              Kinde Estate Court Minister's response to compensation
              received is awaited.
              Discussion with landowners with the view to reopen
              negotiations and settle the matter through s42(d) of the Act.
              The matter is set for hearing on 19 June 00.


              Bakolobeng Court The claim is in court and there is no
              agreement on the price.
              Compensation received has to be decided by the Minister.
              Zefanjeskraal Court Matter set for hearing.


              Putfonteins 42(d) Settled. Subdivision of plot for owners.


              Madikwe s42(d) Negotiation. Mandate from Minister received
              with recommendations. Office working on these
              recommendations. There is a Memorandum of Understanding
              between the North West government and the Commission.


              Kafferskraal Negotiations Offer made based on the valuation
              and recommended     market price. Arbitration will be
              considered if the andowners do not respond to the offer made.
              Appropriation to be considered.


              Tigerkloof Negotiations Agreement on price with all but one
              landowner.


              Draft mandate completed.


              Klipgat Negotiations Mandate ready to be submitted


              Uitkyk Court In the process of being finalised. The claim is
              to be referred to court as there is no agreement.


              Holgat Negotiations Submission made to the Minister of Public
              Works on the disposal of this land as it is state-owned.


              Moiland and Zamkomst Negotiations.The claim is being
              negotiated


              Vogelsfontein Negotiations Awaiting the valuation report for
              further and Tweerivier negotiations.Options workshop to be
              conducted for claimants. Site inspection to be done.


              Concordia Negotiations Awaiting valuation report for further
              negotiations. Options meeting to held with claimants.


              Kleincwain Negotiations Offers received from landowners.
              Mandate is being drafted.


              Khaukwe Negotiations Was gazetted; however, to start there is
              a problem tracing current landowners.


              Byl Negotiations Claim gazetted and a stakeholders' meeting
              was scheduled for 27 March 2000.


              Rhenosterdoorn Mediation.


              (5) Way forward


                  (a)  Policy formulation at both provincial and national
                       level should be towards an integrated approach, and
                       it should be aligned with a budget.


                  (b)  Political co-ordination and commitment - there is an
                       increased need for co-ordination by relevant
                       departments to ensure sustainable development.


                  (c)  Fast-tracking by the North West Commissioners would
                       expedite the settlement process.


                  (d)  The decentralisation process - from the national
                       office to the province.
              (6) Observations


                  (a)  It has been realised that the 1978 Traditional
                       Authority Act is a thorn in the flesh and needs to be
                       repealed.


                  (b)  The Commission should be able to have alternatives
                       to some problems and be able to formulate proposals
                       to submit to the Committee.
                  (c)  The councillors are still divided - one group
                       belongs to the democratic dispensation and the others
                       are the old guards of the Bantustans. This division
                       causes conflict, as the old guards distribute State
                       land to their favourites.


                  (d)  To expedite the settlement of the land claims, the
                       need to decentralise commissioners becomes vital.


                  (e)  There should be a co-ordinated link of structures on
                       land issues in order to have an integrated approach.


                  (f)The documentary proofs requested by the court places a
                       burden on the Commission.


         3. Visit to Ganalaagte (Bakolobeng ba-ga-Ramodiyana)


              The Bakolobeng tribe was removed from their original land in
              1976. Their claim covers the area of the Lichtenburg District
              to Ventersdorp. The Ganalaagte area has been developed and
              people have settled on this land. There is a division in the
              community, in that there are those who want to go to
              Ventersdorp and those who want to remain in Ganalaagte. There
              is a strong feeling from the community that they want to get
              their land back. They argue that that land is fertile, is next
              to amenities and has a developed infrastructure.


              People were compensated when removed from their land, but that
              compensation did not equal the hardship these communities
              endured during the removals.


              Bakolobeng have title deeds to their land. Hence the
              department is acknowledging that Bakolobeng have lost their
              land as a result of racially discriminatory laws and
              practices. There are no problems with the claim of the
              Bakolobeng. However, the matter is still being held back by
              negotiations in respect of the offer.


              There is a problem of infighting between chiefs on the claims.
              The Committee requested the chiefs and the community to solve
              that matter. If it is not solved, there will be no winner and
              the land will not be returned to them. The Committee
              recommended that the House of Traditional Leaders be
              approached to assist in this matter.


         4. Visit to Madikwe (Bakwena ba Mahloko)
              The claim was made in 1996. Legal Resources Centre initially
              assisted with the claim. The claim is made on two farms -
              Diamante and Optel; and it is a communal claim. This land was
              held by the Minister of Land Affairs for the community. The
              community do not have title deeds for this land but the
              Minister acknowledges the holding of the land. The Minister
              has requested the community to move to another area so that
              there could be some developments. This was in actual fact an
              exchange agreement.


              The Chief had agreed with the government to exchange the land
              and, despite the objections of the community, the Chief
              proceeded with this agreement. When the land was exchanged,
              there was no tribal resolution to make this exchange legal.
              People who signed for this were less than 20 and were under
              age. The Act by then required that the tribal resolution
              should have been signed by the majority of male residents and
              the administrator should attest to that.


              The community has challenged this in court and the process is
              going to take long to get settled. White farmers are not
              against the claim, however, they have their own demands. These
              farmers have various demands that are causing delays to the
              settlement of this issue. The land needs to be valuated and
              the price determined. The community plans to do commercial
              farming. The community wants to have mineral rights and the
              Legal Resource Centre is researching that possibility. The
              Commission feels that the only obstacle to this claim might be
              the price. The Commission is currently educating the community
              on Communal Property Associations and how to administer land.


         5. Visit to Madikwe (Barolong ba-go-Rekologadi and Bakwena)


              Barolong ba-ga-Rekologadi and the Bakwena tribes have
              representatives from five villages. People had title deeds
              dated 1871, but the community felt that they had resided there
              long before in 1871. The community were forcefully removed
              from Mokumbjane and Phalane, together with their livestock. It
              is not possible for the community to claim back the land, as
              it is a game reserve. Amongst other land being claimed, is
              State land which is on lease. There are farms that are
              adjacent to the land claimed and they are occupied by informal
              settlers. There are white farmers who have reserved the land
              for grazing. Some people have leased the State land and, at
              the end of the lease, the occupants do not want to vacate.


              The land which Barokologadi is claiming, is about 20¬†000
              hectare, whereas the Bakwena are claiming 10¬†000 hectare and
              the Baphalane ba Sesobeng also 10¬†000 hectare.


         6. Obstacles


              Negotiations have not yet started due to the following
              reasons:


              (1) There is a farmer, Mr Jonk, a Zimbabwean by origin, who
                  was given the land by the former Bophuthatswana
                  government. The land allocated to Mr Jonk was about
                  45¬†000 hectare. The intention was to use this land for
                  commercial farming. This land is prime property and can
                  be beneficial to the whole community. In response to this
                  claim, Mr Jonk has decided to take the Department of Land
                  Affairs to court for selling the land to him. This delays
                  the progress of claiming. Mr Jonk's contract ended in
                  1994.


              (2) A certain Mr Dipale had an expectation to buy the farm.
                  The department did not meet this expectation, and he
                  intends to get a court intervention. This issue is also
                  problematic and causes delays.
              (3)      projects developed in the area, and the community
                  will manage and maintain them. The community will
                  participate in eco-tourism in the game reserve.

                           THURSDAY, 14 JUNE 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the Acting President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (i)     Housing Amendment Bill [B 7D - 2001] - Act No 4 of 2001
                  (assented to and signed by Acting President on 13 June
                  2001); and


         (ii)    Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2001] - Act No 5 of
                  2001 (assented to and signed by Acting President on 13
                  June 2001).

     (2)    The following Bills were introduced by the Minister of Trade and
         Industry in the National Assembly on 14 June 2001 and referred to
         the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
         Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Merchandise Marks Amendment Bill [B 33 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              22249 of 24 April 2001.]


         (ii)    Trade Practices Amendment Bill [B 34 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              22249 of 24 April 2001.]


         The Bills have also been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry of the National Assembly.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 14 June 2001: To be
     submitted to President of the Republic for assent:


     (i)    Export Credit and Foreign Investments Re-insurance Amendment
         Bill [B 19B - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75).
     (ii)   Patents Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
         75).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 21 -
     Labour [RP 130-2000].


