---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 May 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-05-17
---

THURSDAY, 17 MAY 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONALY ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms N S MTSWENI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today is World Telecommunications Day;
  (2) further notes that Telkom has performed remarkably and made
       tremendous strides in rolling out services to rural areas, clinics
       and schools;


  (3) believes that the development and enhancement of communications
       technology in South Africa and other developing countries is an
       important precondition for the integration of all countries into the
       new global order; and


  (4) joins in the celebration of World Telecommunications Day.

[Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that -


       (a)  there is no Government policy for the treatment of HIV/Aids on a
           national or provincial basis outside of the Western Cape;


       (b)  at hospitals such as Johannesburg General Hospital, HIV/Aids
           patients are being turned away from the Aids Clinic which faces
           closure due to lack of support from the Gauteng Health
           Department; and


       (c)  that yesterday an Aids candle was lit by the Government in
           Parliament as a symbol of concern for those suffering from
           HIV/Aids;


  (2) regards this act of lighting the candle as one of gross insensitivity
       because it is little more than the triumph of symbol over substance;
       and


  (3) calls upon the Government to -


       (a)  stop playing games with the nation and begin developing a proper
           cohesive and valid policy on HIV/Aids; and


       (b)  show real concern for those who suffer from this dreaded
           disease.

[Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: [Inaudible.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Just a moment, hon member. Your microphone is not
working.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Alexandra township is to be the focus of an upliftment
           programme;


       (b)  R1,3 billion has been committed to this process over seven
           years; and


       (c)  the Alex stakeholders made known at a workshop in April their
           wish for genuine and meaningful consultation in the use of these
           funds;


  (2) calls on the Government to take note of Alexandra residents' views
       with regard to -


       (a)  income-generating projects;


       (b)  a clean environment that includes parks and clean rivers;


       (c)  access to effective health and social services;


       (d)  sustainable housing with secure tenure;


       (e)  conversion and redevelopment of hostels;


       (f)  removal of shacks from the banks of the Jukskei;


       (g)  new taxi ranks, appropriately located, and the upgrading of
           existing ranks;


       (h)  upgrading or relocation of existing informal settlements; and


       (i)  a safe, secure environment with sufficient policing and criminal
           justice; and


  (3) calls on the Government to do all the above to ensure that changes in
       Alexandra are sustainable and are embraced by the grassroots.

Miss O R KASIENYANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the forecasts that South Africa will exceed the 6% inflation
       target for next year;


  (2) believes that the sound management of the economy and the fiscus by
       the Reserve Bank and the Department of Finance have placed this
       country's finances on the soundest footing ever;


  (3) recalls the horrific inflation of over 18% under apartheid; and


  (4) commends the Government on its sound fiscal policy and reminds the
       opposition of the economic mess that was left behind when the
       apartheid government was voted out of power.

[Applause.]

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) die bevoegdheid van die agb Dullah Omar bevraagteken om die
       vervoerportefeulje te behartig omdat hy die beweerde korrupsie,
       omkopery en bedrog binne die rekapitalisasieprogram van R20 miljard
       in die taxibedryf wegpraat;


  (2) die Minister van Handel en Nywerheid ter verantwoording roep omdat hy
       nie die vervaardiger van die pendelkaartstelsel, wat na bewering die
       adviseur van beide die Regering en die taxibedryf met R3 miljoen
       probeer omkoop het, uit die taxi-heropbouprogram skors nie;


  (3) die Minister van Handel en Nywerheid aanraai om onverwyld al die
       feitelike inligting aangaande die beweerde wanbesteding in die
       program van R1,3 miljoen aan belastingbetalersgeld openbaar te maak;
       en


     4) sy misnoeë uitspreek oor die klaarblyklike onbeholpenheid van die
        Minister van Vervoer om beter veiligheid en groter gerief vir Suid-
        Afrika se taxipassassiers te bewerkstellig.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr W A ODENDAAL: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) questions the competence of the hon Dullah Omar in managing the
       transport portfolio in view of the fact that he is explaining away
       the alleged corruption, bribery and fraud within the taxi industry's
       R20 billion recapitalisation programme;


  (2) calls the Minister of Trade and Industry to account for not
       suspending the manufacturer of the commuter ticket system, who
       allegedly tried to bribe the advisor of both the Government and the
       taxi industry with R3 million, from the taxi restructuring programme;


  (3) advises the Minister of Trade and Industry to disclose without delay
       all the factual information regarding the alleged misappropriation in
       the programme of R1,3 million of taxpayers' money; and


  (4) expresses its dissatisfaction at the obvious ineptness of the
       Minister of Transport in achieving better safety and greater comfort
       for South Africa's taxi passengers.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock and dismay the increasing rate of drug abuse amongst
       the youth;


  (2) further notes that 50% of drug users started this habit at the tender
       age of 13 and that more than 31% of those who were treated in Cape
       Town were 15 years of age or younger;


  (3) notes that drugs, such as heroin, are freely available and are used
       by children;


  (4) calls on the Government to conduct an in-depth investigation into the
       exact extent of this problem, the routes used and sources of drug
       providers, and to respond with a comprehensive strategic plan that
       will address the easy accessibility of drugs and stop South Africa
       from being used as an access route and dumping ground for drugs; and


  (5) takes the lead in the battle against the senseless loss of future
       generations to drug abuse.

Ms N L HLANGWANA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the closure of five schools and the killing of nine people in
       Mtubatuba due to faction fighting;


  (2) further notes that these fights have effectively disrupted normal
       teaching and learning at schools;


  (3) believes that the violence denies learners their right to education
       as they prepare for the June examinations and causes anxiety and
       human suffering; and


  (4) calls on the warring factions to stop the violence immediately and
       resolve their differences through peaceful dialogue and coexistence.

[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the SA Law Commission proposes that a scheme be set up to
       compensate victims of violent crime;


  (2) further notes that South Africans are already heavily taxed, and do
       not need another special tax to pay rape victims, families of murder
       victims, and those disabled by crime, when in reality they cannot be
       compensated for their loss by a state hand-out of R2 000 or R5 000;


  (3) acknowledges that the purpose of restitution, as called for over the
       years by the ACDP, is to make the perpetrators take financial
       responsibility for the pain, suffering and financial devastation
       incurred by the victim, and to teach them that crime does not pay;
       and


  (4) calls on the Government to -
       (a)  introduce legislation that will ensure that criminals, and not
           law-abiding citizens, are forced to compensate victims of
           violent crimes; and


       (b)  heed the call of victims who say they want the courts to impose
           sentences that fit the crime and a criminal justice system that
           works, rather than compensation.

[Applause.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the FA:


  That the House -


  (1) discusses the report issued by the London International Institute for
       Strategic Studies, in which it confirms sentiments that President
       Mbeki is incompetent to continue in the footsteps of President
       Mandela, that he is failing to promote democracy in Southern Africa
       because he cannot take a firm stand against the undemocratic actions
       of President Robert Mugabe and that he has already allowed the use of
       the instruments of Government to intimidate the members of his own
       party, who might consider opposing him; and


  (2) rejects the subsequent statements in support of President Mbeki that
       have been made by his Office, and urges his staff to advise the
       President rather to lead South Africa, Southern Africa and Africa as
       a whole out of undemocratic dictatorships.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock the eviction by Swartruggens, of 184 mineworkers and
       their families, who are now living in one community hall without
       basic services in the Borolelo township in the North West province;


  (2) further notes that this community has lived and worked in Mazister
       for more than 50 years;


  (3) believes that this action is inhuman and an infringement of basic
       human rights; and


  (4) calls on the Government and the relevant authorities to intervene to
       ensure that the rights of these people are restored without delay.

[Applause.]

Mrs G M BORMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that despite passing the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act
           in this House last year, which emphasised that the Government
           was committed to ensuring public participation and creating
           conditions for citizens to participate in their municipalities,
           the Department of Provincial and Local Government did not
           consult the National House of Traditional Leaders on the White
           Paper on Traditional Leadership;


       (b)  that the issue of the roles, functions and powers of traditional
           leaders in the new municipalities has not yet been resolved; and


       (c)  that the Public Protector has become involved, because the
           alleged failure of the ANC Government to deal with the issue
           could be construed as a form of maladministration; and


  (2) calls on the Government -


       (a)  to ensure that traditional leaders are consulted in any policy
           relating to traditional leadership; and


       (b)  and traditional leaders to agree on the roles, functions and
           powers that traditional leaders will have in municipalities.
[Interjections.]

Mr F C FANKOMO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the US senate is considering imposing restrictions on the
       import of steel from other countries including South Africa;


  (2) believes that such protectionism is an abuse of the United States'
       position in the world economy, where it is able, by virtue of the
       size of its economy, to penetrate foreign markets; and


  (3) calls on the United States to practise what it preaches and be
       consistent in keeping its markets open to exports from smaller
       economies.

[Applause.]

Dr O BALOYI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with alarm -


       (a)  the staggering figures on abortion procured by persons under 18
           years of age recently published in the media, and that those
           figures are an indirect indication of the extent to which the
           youth of the country are sexually active;


       (b)  that sexually active persons are at high risk of being  infected
           with HIV/Aids, with the resultant consequences thereof; and


       (c)  that the largest number of this population at risk is in high
           schools, technikons and universities;


  (2) challenges all educational structures as well as youth structures to
       urgently address the situation and come up with strategies that will
       ensure that the youth of the country survive in order that they can
       become a replacement human resource of the future; and


  (3) pleads that these strategies should address the physical, emotional,
       spiritual, social and security needs of the youth.

Mr G D MKONO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recently expressed need to the value of R38 billion for
       basic services as a national indicator of the level of poverty in our
       country;


  (2) expresses its concern at the escalating rate of the disparity between
       rich and poor, especially the lack of basic services for the elderly
       with regard to pension, health and food needs;


  (3) further notes that the amount allocated may not be adequate in the
       bigger schemes of society;


  (4) expresses its concern that the Government needs R38 billion but is
       only able to spend R2,6 billion; and


  (5) calls on the Minister for Provincial and Local Government to further
       empower local councillors so that they are equipped to adequately
       reduce debt-collecting periods and improve basic services to all
       South African citizens.

Dr R T RHODA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock that -


       (a)  the gang war raging across the Cape Flats has claimed at least
           103 lives since the beginning of this year; and


       (b)  official figures indicate that more than 100 000 young people
           are members of gangs and this figure is growing every day;


  (2) urges all persons involved in gang activities and those who are on
       the verge of joining gangs to cease their activities and rather
       expend their energies in helping to build up this country;


  (3) calls on education leaders, religious leaders, business leaders,
       sports leaders, celebrities and community leaders in the Western Cape
       to become actively involved in the fight against the increasing
       problem of organised gangsterism; and


  (4) believes that if we do not act now, organised gangsterism will become
       uncontrollable and will lead to the total disintegration of community
       structures.

[Interjections.]

                       DR BEYERS NAUDE'S 85TH BIRTHDAY

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr M T GONIWE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that Dr Beyers Naudé, the great fighter for justice and
       equality, recently turned 85;


  (2) further notes that Dr Naudé has been suffering ill health;


  (3) acknowledges the role played by him in the fight for freedom,
       equality and justice for all South Africans; and


  (4) wishes him a happy birthday and a speedy recovery.

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 9 - Public Service and Administration, Vote No 10 -
Public Service Commission and Vote No 11 - SA Management Development
Institute:
The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Speaker,
members of this House and those who have joined us to discuss this
important Vote, which is one that calls for change for action and action
for change in the Public Service.

I would like to state upfront that some members of the House raised some
concerns when they looked at the time of the Vote, asking me whether I was
going to beat Fidel Castro in terms of speaking time. [Interjections.] I
would like to tell my colleagues that the red colour is not about beating
Fidel Castro, but that I am here today to actually represent the Votes of
the Department of the Public Service and Administration, the Public Service
Commission, the SA Management Development Institute and the State
Information Technology Agency.

This Vote is critical in terms of being the machinery that should ensure
that services are delivered by Government employees, and that these
services, to a large extent, form the last line of defence for the majority
of our people against poverty, hunger, disease and crime, and which, for
many, constitute the only the real opportunity for growth and development.
To that extent, educators or teachers should be an example to our children
by building on each child's strength, helping them to achieve their full
potential and maximising their capacity to meet the demands and challenges
of today's world. Our Police Service should aim at achieving the trust and
respect of the public, so that all our people may turn to them with
confidence for protection when threatened.

The Public Service needs to learn to work in a way that embodies our
democratic ideals. They should see our people, the South African people, as
partners in delivery, not as the enemy, not as competition, and not as
passive recipients. Our whole approach is one of ensuring that we try to
build a national democratic, nonracial and nonsexist state. And to make
this happen, we need to put certain things in place. Without the initiative
of our people on our side, we will not be able to make progress in the
battle against poverty and deprivation, nor will we succeed in changing the
Public Service from a self-serving, self-indulging, unreformed creature to
a powerful machine committed to removing the injustices of our past, in a
manner that befits the kind of society we need to create.

After seven years in Government, we have learned that the Public Service
does not change easily. And this, of course, is a lesson that all countries
actively involved in public service transformation are deeply conscious of.
This is because institutional change requires massive investment in
transforming systems, culture and the operational environment, coupled with
systemic changes in values and behaviour of public servants. The sheer
scale of the Public Service and its traditions embedded over centuries make
the change process more complex and involved.

There is a need for us to look today at what is going to make this change
happen, what the characteristics are that distinguish those who succeed at
change from those who fail. I want to say today that dogged determination
and perseverance are going to be the characteristics that distinguish those
who are determined to succeed from those who fail. It is only those who
stick to the bigger game plan and the agreed strategy, those who take time
to do the necessary preparation in terms of the more mundane, and those who
find ways of working their way through or around obstacles, that will, over
a period of time, reap benefits.

My hon colleagues in this House are part of those who must make sure that
they are willing to persevere and that the mundane happens. Hon members
should ensure that we do not constantly change strategy and keep on
changing direction and, in instances, lose sight of the final outcome,
because that will ensure that we do not reach the final destination
required of the Public Service by our people. We need to keep the
perspective that we will only see the full benefits of what we have been
doing over the past seven years in 10 to 15 years' time.

In the meantime we will have to develop the wisdom to resist the temptation
to resort to short cuts, quick fixes and quick wins in order to have
demonstrable wins immediately, and rather develop the wisdom on what proves
to be unsustainable in the long term. Given the complexities and the long-
term nature of Public Service transformation, we need to ensure that the
change process is responsive to the demands of people-centered development
and that the energy for it is sustained for the long haul. It is imperative
that the change process itself is not restricted to the bureaucrats.

Die proses moet deur ons mense ingelig word. Ons moet toesien dat ons mense
staatsamptenare die energie en aanmoediging gee om seker te maak dat die
amptenary werklik verander. Dit lê in die hande van die mense van ons land.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The process must be informed by our people. We must see to it that our
people give public servants the energy and encouragement to make sure that
the bureaucracy really changes. It is in the hands of the people of our
country.]

It is therefore abundantly clear that as a society we are seeking more and
better services, delivered in a more accountable, transparent and
approachable manner. We can only do this through more innovative means of
service delivery. We can only do this when the inclination of public
servants is to continue to perform in a manner that is appropriate to
building a nonracial, nonsexist and developmental Public Service. That is
why greater societal participation is required.

I said earlier that we have coined a catch phrase based on the President's
state of the nation address, namely ``action for change, change for
action''. Hon members all have a mouse pad that captures what action for
change means, and should mean, to the Public Service and broader society. I
hope, as the Minister of Minerals and Energy said, that this is not about
us wanting to become mice, but about us using information technology to be
on line, more accessible and giving e-governance a real face.

Last year I touched on various priorities facing the Public Service, and I
think today we can take stock. We have identified the period 2000 to 2003
as a period of consolidation, during which departments that are responsible
for policy implementation should ensure that they inculcate this in their
work processes, in order to make this happen in a real sense.

We believe that the bulk of the policy work has put in place the major
transformational changes required in terms of the vision by this Public
Service. That has been done. We now need to ensure that the machinery is so
structured and poised to make things happen. It is about ensuring that we
are operationalising and implementing, that we are working at change, and
that we are always going to endeavour to improve to work better, smarter
and faster in order to achieve results.
During this reporting period, it is necessary to reflect that the team that
is sitting here, ie the DPSA led by Robinson Ramaite; the Office of the
Public Service Commission, led by Mpumi Skosana; Seta, led by the MD,
Collin van Schalkwyk, under the chairpersonship of Sello Rasethaba; and the
Management Development Institute, headed by Prof Job Mokgoro, has, over the
period, grappled and engaged with institutional change and transformation
processes.

They not only have to facilitate the overall transformation of the entire
system, but they themselves have had to lead internal restructuring
processes, focus and look at aims and objectives anew, adjust staffing
according to priority requirements and critically review work processes.
All of these were done with the aim of ensuring that we practise what we
preach and that we become a model organisation capable of leading and
facilitating change.

I am happy to report today that we have moved to a phase where the bulk of
our attention can be applied to issues external to these organisations. We
can, therefore, give more attention to the daunting challenge of
transforming the Public Service. To this extent, we say that we serve the
people who serve the people, hence I would like to reflect now on the
changing profile of the Public Service, which will serve as a vivid
indicator of Public Service transformation. I shall reflect on only a few
aspects of it. I would like to say that certain aspects of our profile
serve as an early warning system by highlighting potential challenges that
will have the impact on motivation, expertise and efficacy of the workforce
and management, which will, eventually, impact on the ability of Government
to deliver against its policy objectives.

So, as of December 2000, the size of the Public Service stood at just
around a million employees - 23 607 less than the previous year. Seventy-
one per cent of public servants are in provinces, compared to 29% in
national Government. Fifty-one per cent are women and 49% are men.
[Applause.] However, the overwhelming majority of women of all race groups
are found in the lower to middle salary band, bands 3 to 8. Women make up
only 20% of all managerial level appointments. Only 0,2% of employees are
people with disabilities, a fraction of the total and far short of the 2%
target that we set ourselves. So, one can see the kind of issues that we
are grappling with, and that Labour leads as one of the core regulatory
departments.
Overall, the profile of the Public Service has not changed much during
2000. The downward change in numbers, personnel numbers, reflects a greater
consciousness amongst managers, however, to match staffing to service
delivery requirements. I do want to say, returning to the gender profile,
that we need to ensure that we take this forward a lot more proactively.
And to that extent, Samdi has identified the need to develop a curriculum
that will specifically aid the fast-tracking of women in management.

A further issue to note is that the management cadre of the SA Public
Service remains very small. A total of 0,4% of the Public Service
constitutes management. If compared to a very broad base of production-
level skilled workers and lower skilled workers, especially in the
infrastructure and economic sectors, one would agree that this figure is
very low.

I would like to say that speaking comparatively, this profile is very
different from that of countries that were regarded, and have more recently
been regarded, as success stories in public management, such as Malaysia,
and probably Singapore if one wants to make that reference. In these
instances professional and senior management cadres are pushing the 60%
mark compared to the production-skilled, the lower-skilled level. So it
constitutes an upside-down pyramid if compared with the South African
Public Service.

To aggravate the managerial situation even further, the distribution of
senior managers is skewed towards national departments. And for provincial
departments, that is at the coalface of service delivery, only 40% of the
0,4% constitutes the managerial component.

I think another point to make this afternoon is the fact that we have
traditionally looked at the Public Service in a very narrow way. We saw it
as consisting of national and provincial departments, an issue that has
concerned a number of us. And I think that as we look at this issue, we
accept that we had excluded from the concept of Public Service the third
tier of Government, that is local government, as well as public entities
such as parastatals.

Increasingly, it is becoming clear that if we want to understand service
delivery, if we want to ensure that it is improved, then we have to look at
the very complex networks of service delivery institutions. And the
complexity in this range of organisations is fed, amongst other things,
through an explosion in the numbers of public entities.

According to the Public Finance Management Act, the public entities listed
total 201. A recent study conducted by us concluded that there are more
than 350 public entities, and this number includes subsidiary institutions
that are under the recognised control of public entities. They employ close
to 290 000 staff members, nearly a quarter of the current Public Service.
The demographic profile of the staffing in these institutions has not been
monitored in any central way. So we actually feel that we need to look at
that.

We think that, increasingly, partnership between the Government and the 100
000-odd Public Service organisations that exist also constitute an
important part of the service delivery web that we excluding in our current
conceptualisation of the profile of the Public Service, and we need to look
at that. Yes, one of our challenges for the next financial year is to
develop a better understanding of these partners in service delivery: What
their capacity is and how to optimise the relationship between the Public
Service and them.

DPSA has identified a project to start mapping out the service delivery
change. The challenge in this regard, particularly when we look at the
harmony of public entities and the Public Service proper, is to manage the
paradox between agency autonomy and the standardisation of better
efficiency and co-ordination.

I note that some of our labour partners are here with us in the Chamber. I
would like to welcome these comrades, who are a major part of the
transformation process. They showed this in January this year when together
we held a successful Jobs Summit. For the first time we publicly stated
that we needed to ensure that the Public Service is restructured to ensure
better and more effective service delivery. Furthermore, we said that we
needed to ensure that basic services reached our people. We again said that
together we should facilitate the social transformation that is required.

We can claim that we have moved beyond a narrow focus on negotiations and
issues around the conditions of service. We have and are discussing issues
related to the restructuring of the Public Service within the broader
economic and social framework. We are looking at specific issues that
organised labour put on the Public Service Co-ordinating Bargaining Council
agenda, which, amongst others, included the issue of HIV/Aids and measures
to efficiently extend service delivery to our people.

The outcome was a remarkable framework agreement. It has set the stage for
further constructive discussions between Government as the employer and the
employee parties on the issues of transformation and restructuring of the
Public Service. So in addition to the need to ensure that personnel
expenditure does not crowd out investment expenditure, we have argued for
the development of a labour relations framework suitable for the Public
Service sector, underpinned by the need to match personnel deployment with
service delivery requirements.

Although retrenchments may in some instances be inevitable in certain
sections, the emphasis now is on the sustainable management of the wage
bill through medium-term human resource and expenditure planning. This is
encouraged by the agreement of the Jobs Summit and a renewed sense of
partnership. We want to move towards a three-year wage agreement that is in
line with the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. We need to see how we
could do this together.

I would like to say that within the Ministry of the Public Service and
Administration, as part of our thrust maintaining that we serve people who
serve people, we are aware and engaged in the depths of the complexity of
poverty in our country and how it impacts on public servants personally and
in terms of services required from them. We see the whole issue of poverty
and HIV as being interconnected. As a result, we will be producing a
comprehensive tool for managing the issue of HIV/Aids. We will look at
developing this tool, to have the knowledge and skill for the effective
management of the impact of the pandemic.

The tool will include a workplace policy and programme framework, together
with minimum standards that will serve as an implementation guideline. The
framework will ensure a measure of consistency in addressing HIV/Aids
within Public Service workplaces and will, at the same time, provide a
guide for the necessary development of sector and situation specific-
programmes. Direct work on the new framework and minimum standards has
commenced this month, and will be taken forward by a special technical task
team that has been set up for this purpose. A draft will be ready for
circulation by the end of 2001, and, currently, the specialised team is in
the PSCBC as well.

Let me go on to our support of departments. I would like to say that
although we are largely responsible for policy-making and monitoring, as
well as evaluating policy implementation, we are also committed to
supporting the development of institutional capacity for service delivery.
Where feasible, the various components - the teams here, and they are solid
teams - co-operate on such ventures, each handling the issue from their
particular mandate.

One such venture was the Tiro project in the Department of Home Affairs, a
project on which we worked with the management of that department to
reposition it to work towards improved services to the public in line with
Batho Pele principles. The joint team was dedicated to ensuring that an
appropriate change-management process was on track. We will continue
supporting that department in that work.

At national level, we also worked with departments such as Public Works,
Justice, Welfare, and Correctional Services. Our work with the Public Works
department is linked to efforts at looking at transforming the current
organisation into a reputable and effective property management agency,
details that were presented by Minister Stella Sigcau when she presented
her Vote to this House last week. National departments are, however, but
one of our focus areas of intervention.

Provinces, and particularly service delivery institutions, have become
increasingly important in our work. The intervention programming in this
regard has been the integrated provincial support programme, which is now
in its second year. The focus has been on a series of provinces. I can say
today with confidence that our greatest success has been in the Northern
Province, focusing particularly on restructuring road construction and
maintenance services of the Department of Public Works in this province.
This showed a way for us to handle practically restructuring exercises in a
creative and responsible manner, and also proved the need for a close
interface with labour in a manner that was and is constructive in this
process. The province is also far advanced with housing, under a single
roof, a range of Government services - the so-called one-stop information
centre idea.

We have also recently seen a citizens' report from the province. This
report says that visible improvements have become noticeable in terms of
the times that service delivery institutions are actually open and
functioning, when staff are on duty, and children are actually more in
classrooms than they used to be, to mention but a few things. I think we
should see these as some of the small achievements that are coming about.

Let me talk about the Public Service Commission. The Public Service
Commission has undertaken evaluations of major Government programmes in
order to contribute towards the improvement of performance and service
delivery. There is still a long road to travel, and we are only the
beginning. Some of these reports are the Home Affairs, Batho Pele and
management audit investigations; secondly, the survey of compliance with
Batho Pele policy; thirdly, a policy guide on annual reporting; and,
finally, an investigation into land administration, geographic information
systems and fleet management in the Eastern Cape.
I would like to request my colleagues to study those documents. When asked
about this, they must draw on resources, on work that has been done. In
terms of this work that has been done, the OPSC is following it up through
an active programme of providing support where negative feedback has been
given. An evaluation programme will be in place next year, which will also
include the housing and land reform programmes. These evaluations are
conducted against set objectives and the extent to which they have been
attained.

Through their work we see a range of issues and what we would want to argue
for is that sustained attention be given to provinces in particular, where
we should look at a focus that will be on those institutions and on those
organisations directly interfacing with the public. We want to look at
combining top-down and bottom-up strategies in service delivery improvement
that, we believe, will best be achieved over the next period.

I want to reflect on management capacity. I want to start by saying -
because maybe some members are falling asleep at this point - that Napoleon
reasoned once that there are no bad regiments, only bad colonels. Someone
else remarked that our experience of bottlenecks is that they are always at
the top. I think this reflects on some of the problems that we may and do
have with management, hence our introduction of the senior management
service.

The machinery of Government depends on the commitment and capacity of
senior managers for its effectiveness. As a result, these managers should
be the embodiment of the spirit of service delivery. They must be above
reproach and they should be absolutely committed to the ideals of a
nonracial, nonsexist, developmental state. As a result, we need to ensure -
and this is a challenge to the executive at all levels - that we are
appointing the right people to the senior management service at the
director-general level and that they, in turn, ensure that the SMS is
appropriately skilled.

This will be backed by proactive interventions that will be done and
assisted by competency tests by us, ensuring that the people we put in
place do not only have the right experience, but that they also, on an
ongoing basis, develop their skills. Hence, Samdi has positioned itself
strongly to facilitate management training of a quality that compares
favourably with the best benchmarks available. We have seen, since 2000,
through a showcase programme called the Strategic Management Leadership
Development Programme, a focus on developing directors-general and senior
managers at a strategic level.

Let me move on to information technology and e-government. This reflects on
the work of Sita, the State Information Technology Agency. Sita has been
confronted with several challenges, which include the integration of its
original three founding departments, the integration of all information
technology in Government and the need to increase the speed at which
information technology is delivered, as well as the maintenance of
Government's IT skills.

Hence, the e-government strategy that has been identified clearly says that
the performance required by Sita is one in which the ``public service
speaks'', one that looks at the interoperatability or, rather, the ability
of Government systems to talk to one another. This is so that when the
Minister of Land Affairs uses a mouse pad and wants to access human
resource information about her staff she can do so, as can any other
Minister, or even MEC, in Government. And, that is possible right now.
We also want to have a situation in which Government departments are able
to share information, so that it becomes possible to register births in
hospitals, or even to detect fraud in welfare, through the sharing of
databases between the SA Police Service and the welfare system. We would
not like to have a situation which many of our people have to stand in
different queues to provide the same information over and over again.

The State Information Technology Agency should ensure that when information
is developed once, it can be used in other instances. They should also
eliminate unnecessary duplication because currently in today's
international telecommunications, we are being reminded that there are 12
different telecommunications infrastructures, which cost us as Government
huge amounts of money to maintain.

We need to ensure that we use economies of scale as leverage. The hon Langa
Zitha always likes to ask: ``What are the trade-offs? How do we use our
resources better? How do we ensure that we make the best use of the
resources that we have? By purchasing IT on behalf of Government as a
whole, Sita will be able to reduce costs and offer quality services by
negotiating from a position of strength.
For all these things to happen, we need a movement for change. The
President stated this, and said earlier this year that we should look at a
situation in which public servants can feel more passionate about the
change required in this Government within this machinery. They must take
pride in what they are doing and feel deeply ashamed if they fail in their
task. If we could achieve a situation in which public servants feel that
they are an appreciated part of that, a body of people that wins the battle
against poverty, crime, disease and illiteracy, we would have gone one step
further on this road.

If we could achieve a situation in which the the community's sense of self
does not allow any service that is second best and can speak out against
bad service, we would have gone one step further on this road. If we could
achieve a situation in which negative feedback is seen as an opportunity to
learn and improve, we would be somewhere on this road.

Therefore let us look at ways in which we can start taking advantage of our
rich combination of skills and understanding by documenting and sharing our
experiences. That is why we are saying that the Public Service must be
transformed into a learning organisation. And hence we will be launching,
in July this year, a centre for Public Service innovation which will offer
a great opportunity for sharing ideas. I encourage all those with good
ideas on Public Service improvement please to watch this space, follow the
press and link up with us on the website, in order to respond for calls of
interest that will be published soon, because Batho Pele remains our single
most important campaign to achieve the necessary transformation of the
Public Service.

From 22 June we will ensure that we have a proactive process in looking at
a closer interface, not only between the executive and the Public Service,
but also generally between, I hope, Parliament and the Public Service. Why
22 June? Because 22 June is Africa Public Service Day, since we are also
saying that we must turn around this important machinery on the African
continent. But what we would like from the Public Service and executive
members is an affirmation of public servants who are doing well. Let us
identify those who deliver a good service and commend them.

Perhaps we should develop the Isithwalandwe award in the Public Service, to
recognise those who are in the front line of public service delivery and to
acknowledge them. However, we must also give a brickbat to those who do not
deliver services. We need to ensure that they are dealt with appropriately.


Therefore capacity-building or ability to perform a job is a central factor
in getting results and achieving job satisfaction. One measure we can use
to understand whether the institution has adequate capacity to execute its
task - and I would like hon members to listen closely - is to determine the
extent to which such an institution is dependent on external consultants to
undertake tasks that are core to its mission.

Models that attempt to establish institutional capacity or the ability of
governments to succeed quite often look at the degree to which consultants
are engaged, either to perform specialist jobs, or, more often than not, to
perform regular jobs of public servants who are just not capable of doing
this themselves. We have just completed a study on this. Through this study
we have confirmed that in a sample drawn from 19 departments over two years
1998-99 and 1999-2000 - there are 952 consultant appointments.

Consultants cost the state about R1,6 billion in the 1999-2000 financial
year. When one looks at that, and not withstanding the fact that
consultants are costing that significant amount and that the supplementing
of Public Service capacity through the appointment of consultants has been
a growing trend, no systematic monitoring has taken place. That
intervention has taken place as per decision of the executive, because we
looked at whether consultants are actually lending and adding original
value.

I must say today that from the report of the study done, we have found that
there was not enough sharing across various units in the Public Service
through knowledge management networks of the consultants' activities. Some
of the work that could easily have been transferred had not been
transferred. Instead, it had been recommissioned.

Very little capacity-building and skills transfer have taken place. To a
large degree, it again points back to the bottleneck - the colonels. That
is why we are saying that something needs to be done, and we have
identified some of the measures. We will be developing operational
guidelines to ensure that there is an improved management of consultants,
and systematic auditing and monitoring of professional service expenditure
of departments.

We will ensure that there is documenting and sharing of knowledge, of where
consultancy studies have been undertaken, and we will ensure that reports
are shared across Government departments. This will include the sharing of
services and products of consultants in the areas of human resource
management, training, education and the development of human resources.

There is a lot more I can say about this, but on this particular point, I
would like to end by saying that the consultancy study and the study that
was conducted on behalf of the DPSA by the HSRC on scarce skills in the
Public Service has confirmed our concern about the shortage of skills in
IT, financial management and project management. Again, a systematic
intervention was undertaken around that.

I have already outlined some of the domestic initiatives of Samdi. But I
think it is necessary to share with this House today that Samdi is
beginning to play a more active role in our region - the Southern African
region and the African region. Only last week Samdi was part of a very
successful pilot initiative in which a newly developed leadership programme
of senior management was piloted by the Commonwealth. Samdi played a key
role in the curriculum development process and will be instrumental in the
facilitation of course content. This programme will be extended to Uganda,
Barbados, Sri Lanka and other developing countries within the Commonwealth
fold.

We have been able to develop something, and we are able to share it. I
think that as I draw to a close, I should talk about the anticorruption
programme and I will come back to it in my closing remarks. What I want to
say is that the anticorruption forum will be launched in June. This forum,
clearly, is a partnership that in outlook should not be limited nationally,
but we are looking at it being extended beyond our borders to include
regional and international co-operation.

Let me raise two further aspects around the anticorruption initiative. I
think that we need to apply our minds on how successful we have been in the
implementation of the various initiatives within Government. We, firstly,
need to ask ourselves whether some of the frameworks that we are expecting
managers to operate in are drawing an adequate distinction between the
various levels of corrupt behaviour and avenues to follow for each
category. If we are to provide more administrative mechanisms to deal with
smaller cases of corruption, will that not allow us to stamp out corrupt
behaviour when it starts and allow that to happen with less of an effort
from the side of a manager than to try and build up a criminal case for
normal intervention.

This is the issue that we are looking at. We are also looking at getting
better systematic evidence and deeper analysis of trends in the area of
Public Service corruption specifically, and societal corruption in general.
The academic community and civil society research organisations have a role
to play in order to shift the debate and understanding around Public
Service corruption beyond the anecdotal level, because we tend to focus on
the anecdotal too much and, of course, the headline level which is supplied
by the popular media. We feel that this will contribute greatly to the
watchdog partnering role that we anticipate and as a successful strategy to
deal with Public Service corruption issues.

I want to conclude by saying that the programme that I have outlined is far-
reaching. I believe that together we can make it happen between the spheres
of political, social, economic and religious life, and society in general.
We have what it takes to realise our societal dreams. We can only do this
if we take action to induce change in the Public Service.

Being a daughter from the African soil, I want to leave an African proverb
with the members as an aspiration and for further thought: one piece of
wood alone does not keep a fire alight. The key question is: Are members
going to contribute to feeding that fire whilst the Minister of Minerals
and Energy replaces that with coal, solar energy and so on? Are members
going to contribute to that? What role are members playing to ensure that
we do change, because it is not spectators that are going to make a
difference but it is active participants. [Applause.]

Mr N P NHLEKO: Madam Speaker, comrades and colleagues, in the last two
weeks Parliament has been treated to an account on service delivery. The
Votes on Agriculture, Water Affairs and Forestry, Land Affairs and other
departments, which were debated in the previous week, have demonstrated how
the ANC Government is realising its objective in accelerating service
delivery to change people's lives.

This service delivery we evaluated here, as Parliament, is carried out and
performed by public servants and, therefore, that bears testimony to the
commitment and loyalty of our public servants. We are transforming our
Public Service in terms of representivity and style of management. This is
an orientation that our Public Service is taking towards accelerating
service delivery.

In 1994 we inherited a fragmented Public Service, and it was not only
fragmented but its orientation was also wrong. In the years between 1994
and 1999, we have managed to make our civil service representative of South
Africa in terms of its make-up and culture. More importantly, we have
managed to refocus it from apartheid to democracy. The year 1999 saw the
ANC Government with a renewed electoral mandate to accelerate service
delivery, which signified a shift from policy development to policy
implementation.

Our Government, through the Public Service, realises that democracy, good
governance and economic development can only be given meaningful expression
through sound Public Service policies. It is for this reason that Batho
Pele became Government policy, meeting service delivery targets. However,
there is an urgent need to sharpen Batho Pele in order for it to become an
instrument of public engagement, in other words, South African citizens
must be able to use Batho Pele as a tool with which they engage their
democratic Government on service delivery and the character which it takes.
The Batho Pele service delivery improvement policy investigates the
restructuring of the Public Service and develops innovative service
delivery techniques. We hope this will assist in developing public
participation in service delivery.

Through the Public Service Co-ordinating Bargaining Council, Government and
labour agreed to Public Service regulations in 1999, the main aim of the
regulations being to ensure that managers and heads of departments in the
Public Service have greater control over their resources and personnel.
Further, this ensures that managers are accountable for their activities.
We are happy to note that labour relations have stabilised in the Public
Service. In fact, labour and Government must be congratulated on having
gone a step further to deal with matters concerning restructuring and
transformation. We saw this effort culminating in the Jobs Summit Framework
Agreement, entered into Pietersburg on 29 to 31, January 2001.

To meet the political objectives of a democratic state, it is necessary
that interventions are made to strengthen our instruments of service
delivery, in this case, our Public Service management. We are happy to note
the amount of progress Samdi is making in training our managers to meet the
new challenge. However, there is an urgent need to develop an activist
orientation among public servants so that their work is seen as nothing but
serving the South African public with dedication, diligence and a sense of
duty. This will help to dispel the notion or perception that being a public
servant is about a personal profession or an individual concern.

The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration has witnessed
training in progress for managers by Samdi, the focus being management and
leadership and this being part of the Presidential Strategic Leadership
Development Programme. We also welcome the establishment of the public-
sector education and training authorities in terms of the Skills
Development Act of 1998. This will make sure that we have skilled public
servants through human resource development programmes.

The information technology in the Public Service is co-ordinated by the
State Information Technology Agency and it is interesting to note that the
transformation of the South African Public Service is actually
multidimensional. Globalisation has forced governments around the world to
investigate new ways of enhancing service delivery and the manner in which
it has to be responsive to the citizenry.

Whilst our Public Service is transforming from the apartheid legacy, it is
also on a par with the rest of the world. In fact, some countries, such as
the United Kingdom, think that South Africa presents itself as the best
model for transformation of the Public Service. We welcome the direction
that the State Information Technology Agency is taking, and that is an
emphasis on strengthening the information technology sector for purposes of
service delivery. Comrade Richard Sikakane will speak in detail on this
particular point.

We are also witnessing an increased level of political consciousness on the
part of public servants and some communities in defending their democratic
Government and state. A few examples come to mind in this regard. In the
Eastern Cape, eNgcobo, the community took action against the misuse of
Government property in one particular hospital, and members of Nehawu in
Kokstad staged a sit-in to protest against alleged corrupt activities by
officials. This also concerned the alleged misuse of Government vehicles.
We should encourage the principle of public and labour participation in the
transformation process, and it must be seen as an essential ingredient in
transforming our Public Service.

The Public Service Commission continues to play a significant role in the
fight against corruption. In fact, the Public Service Commission has really
demonstrated that it is the standard-bearer in the fight against
corruption. The Public Service Commission monitors, investigates, evaluates
and advises on strategic Public Service issues. In the period under review,
the Public Service Commission made critical interventions in fulfilling its
constitutional mandate, and has been engaging continuously with the
portfolio committee and departments on policy issues.

We also want to point out that corruption in some Government structures has
been exposed and investigated by the Public Service Commission, and has not
been stumbled upon by anybody. These investigations - as is the case with
those in the Department of Correctional Services' personnel salary system,
Persal, and other departments - have not been merely about investigations,
but have rather been an institution-building exercise to strengthen our
democracy.

The DPSA budget, which incorporates the State Information Technology
Agency, is expected to increase by an average of 11% between 2003 and 2004.
This increase is informed by ongoing policy reforms; the establishment of
the Public Sector Education Training Authorities, which are expected to
cost between R5 and R6 million by 2003-04; projects to facilitate service
delivery, enabling the DPSA to develop service delivery indicators, and
lastly the question around transfers that amount to R26,6 million to Sita.
These increases should be understood in the context of the DPSA undergoing
transformation, but, more importantly, enabling the DPSA to make strategic
policy interventions. Lastly, these increases in the budget demonstrate the
commitment of our Government to accelerating service delivery.

The Public Service is about people. The duty and obligation we have, as the
ANC Government, is to improve the living conditions of our people.
Therefore, accelerating service delivery is the duty that we have to carry
out. In this approach we must convert our public servants into activists
for the realisation of our goals.

Service delivery must also deal effectively with narrowing the
infrastructure gap between rural and urban areas. In our quest for
accelerated service delivery, we must start investigating ways and means by
which we co-ordinate and integrate local government into the Public
Service. To this end we welcome the establishment of the Government's
governance and administration cluster system, as we hope this will foster
co-ordination in Government.

Lastly, we would like to congratulate the Minister, her department, the
director-general, Samdi, the chairperson and Director-General of the Public
Service Commission, the chairperson of Sita and the Director-General of the
Department of the Public Service and Administration for a job well done.
There are many challenges that lie ahead in the process of transforming our
Public Service and the country. We support this Vote.
Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and members, today I focus, as the
DA does in the Western Cape every day, on cutting the red tape in the
Public Service, which is strangling delivery to all the people of this
country. The red tape I am speaking about is not only confined to
describing a bureaucracy that is bloated, corrupt, obsessed with race,
politicised, lacking a policy direction and tainted by inexcusable
nonaction or noninsistence on delivery by the Cabinet and the ruling party
at large. [Interjections.]

Time and time again Madam Speaker has called on this House to lead by
example. It seems that this plea has fallen on deaf ears when it applies to
the ANC. There can be no clearer call for members of the ruling party,
especially its Cabinet members, to set an example than when it comes to the
Public Service. But what kind of example is the ruling party's Chief Whip
setting? On the Top 10, we understand hon members' current favourite song
is O Lord, won't you buy me a Mercedes Benz. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

I am unable to delve into the many many other examples, save to say we all
remember the driving licence scandal, Sarafina and the peanut butter
sandwiches. This Government will never be able to rid itself of corruption
in the Public Service, while it continues to turn a blind eye to its own
party ranks. Let me remind hon members that on 4 May 1999, on the election
trail, the then Deputy President, Thabo Mbeki, promised that fighting crime
and corruption would be the key focus of his presidency. He said:


  The aims of the Government with regard to social transformation will not
  be jeopardised by those intent on stealing from the public.

Another broken promise, because two years and two anticorruption summits
later, corruption is spreading as fast as HIV/Aids.

Corruption is not merely bad because we in the DA say it is: It is bad
because in reality it equals increasing nondelivery, and nondelivery in my
book means our children living in the streets in the heart of winter,
starving and addicted to dangerous substances.

An HON MEMBER: What do you know?

Mr M WATERS: I know a lot more than you.

Nondelivery means millions of our people living in filth without access to
clean water or electricity. [Interjections.] Nondelivery means that
millions of South Africans with HIV are continuing to suffer and die on a
daily basis. [Interjections.]

The ANC's tolerance of corruption, both inside and outside the party, is
one of the core reasons for nondelivery. [Interjections.] As much as
corruption prevents delivery, the obsession with race makes delivery an
absolute nonstarter to begin with. [Interjections.] My constituents in
Phomolong, in Gauteng, do not give a hoot whether their water and
electricity are delivered by males, females, whites, blacks, coloureds,
Indians, homosexuals or heterosexuals. [Interjections.]

I can tell hon members what they think, because my party, the DA, is
actually in the communities, working on the ground. [Interjections.] We are
not in Cuba, and we are not in Libya, propping up authoritarian regimes.
[Interjections.] This is what they are saying to me: Where is my water?
Where is my electricity? [Interjections.] Where are the houses? Where are
the jobs, jobs, jobs? [Interjections.] Where is President Mbeki?
[Interjections.] Where is the ANC? [Interjections.]

The DA agrees that the Public Service has to represent all South Africans,
which it did not do in the past. [Interjections.] The inequalities must be
addressed, but never to the detriment of delivery. [Interjections.] While
it must be the aim of the Government to serve the residents of Phomolong by
a representative Public Service, let us just start by getting them served
in the first place. [Interjections.]

In using the race card as an excuse for nondelivery, the ANC has got itself
into a complicated administrative mess. The ANC has proved unable to
develop an environment in which jobs are created, so it has taken the
easiest route, namely giving away jobs in the Public Service willy-nilly. I
want to tell the Minister that it will be harder, but far more beneficial,
to take the time and the money to develop training programmes in skills
development for people who had previously been robbed of these
opportunities.

The result of this failure has been that unskilled people have been thrust
into positions for which they are not equipped, through no fault of their
own. This has happened on a large scale, and therefore nondelivery is
happening on a large scale. In fact, the ANC knows very little about real
empowerment, which is not about getting a salary cheque for a job badly
done, but rather in the pride and the self-respect that comes with the
genuine qualification and knowledge gained. [Interjections.] That will
clamp down on the hon the Minister's consultant costs.

It seems that the ANC Government is using the old regime as its benchmark
for running the country. It certainly is, in the case of the continued
politicisation of the Public Service. President Mbeki has appointed or
transferred no fewer than 25 party hacks to various director-general or
equivalent posts, the bulk being in the first six months of his presidency.
[Interjections.]

The centralised appointments to top positions in the Public Service are
causing chaos in certain departments, which is resulting in nondelivery. A
case in point is the Department of Home Affairs where the relationship
between the Minister and his director-general has deteriorated to such an
extent that legislation cannot be processed, such as the immigration Bill.
[Interjections.]

One of the biggest challenges that faces our public servants is the lack of
direction and lack of motivation by the Ministers here. Paying
noncompetitive wages, tolerating ineffectiveness and laziness, formulating
policies which give preference to Cubans instead of South African doctors
and teachers, is not the way to get the Public Service working.
[Interjections.]

However, the biggest betrayal of the public and the Public Service's trust
is the unforgivable nondelivery on the part of the ANC. The current
Minister for the Public Service and Administration is one of the most
shocking examples. In her capacity as the Minister of Welfare she failed to
spend R353 million or 79% of her budget in one year, while South Africans
across the spectrum suffered the consequences. Does the hon Minister
realise what a difference that money can make? I can tell her that she
could have provided 267 424 child grants annually, or she could have built
over 22 000 houses with that money. [Interjections.] In any true democracy
the Minister would have had to resign over that failure. [Interjections.]
Of course the ANC, continuing with its tradition of rewarding incompetence,
promoted the hon the Minister to be the head of the entire Public Service -
the person presently in charge of the overall delivery of this Government.

As everyone knows, the DA is a party which offers practical and workable
solutions. [Interjections.] The DA believes that to unleash the potential
within the Public Service, we need to modernise and free the Public Service
so that it can build on its strengths to innovate and draw on best
practices.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Is that a point of order?

Mr L M KGWELE: Madam Speaker, yes, I want to find out whether the hon
Waters can take a question?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to take a question, hon member?

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, I will take it at the end of my speech, if I
have the time.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: He says he will take it at the end of his speech.
[Interjections.]

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, we need to build on the strengths, innovate and
draw on best practices from throughout the world.

Let me mention a few solutions from the DA's side on modernising the Public
Service. [Interjections.] First and foremost, members of Parliament must be
held accountable in terms of a strong code of ethics enforced by strong
mechanisms which do not adhere to party lines. The DA has proposed the
criminalisation of the misuse of public office to combat corruption in the
public sector. It has proposed that before any legislation or regulations
are introduced a cost analysis must be done. A clear example of Government
not being able to afford its own legislation is the Refugees Act.

The DA also proposes that before any new policy or regulations are
introduced in a department, an assessment of its regulatory impact must be
done to ensure that we are not creating more red tape, and that the new
rules and regulations have the desired effect. We also propose that the
Department of the Public Service and Administration evaluate all current
policies and regulations in every department by the Regulatory Impact
Assessment test in order to identify cumbersome areas of overregulation
which are stifling delivery.

The DA strongly believes in introducing financial rewards for   public
servants who identify savings or service improvements by means of more
efficient practices. We also believe that all Ministers - you lot - should
pledge before new legislation is introduced into their departments that
they have the capacity to drive the new legislation, and to achieve its
goals and deadlines, failing which they should all accept accountability
and responsibility for its failure. [Interjections.] We believe that policy-
making in the public sector should become a more joined-up approach ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I cannot hear you, hon member!

Mr D J SITHOLE: Madam Speaker, I am asking whether it is parliamentary for
a member to say ``you lot'' when referring to other members of the House.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! [Interjections.] Order! Do take your seat
hon member. Well, it is not necessarily unparliamentary to say ``you lot''.
[Interjections.] However, it is conventional to refer to your hon
colleagues in the House as hon members. [Interjections.]

Mr D J SITHOLE: Madam Speaker, I cannot hear you! [Interjections.]

Mr M WATERS: The Public Service must be organised around the users, that is
the voters, instead of around the structure, that is the Ministers. An
example of that would be the allocation of offices and office hours. Many
people are still at work when our offices are actually closing. How many of
the members, when they go to their constituencies, have heard people
complaining about the fact that they have to take a day's leave in order to
apply for an ID book?

I say to the hon the Minister that we promote the expansion of one-stop
shops. We believe that that should be continued and accelerated. We would
like to congratulate the Minister in that regard for that initiative. I am
sure that hon members will agree with me that having separate buildings for
each department is a thing of the past. Expenses aside, why should people
have to travel at huge cost from one building to another for services when
they should be able to conduct all their business with the Government under
one roof?

The DA agrees with the department that an IT strategy for Government must
be developed. This should establish cross-governmental co-ordinating
machinery and frameworks. That will alleviate the tedious filling in of
forms at each department, which require basically the same information from
each individual. The DA realises that that process is not a simple one and
that tough choices have to be made. We strongly believe that the starting
point must be the political will of the national Cabinet to act to get the
Public Service delivering to all the people. Sadly, the ANC Cabinet lacks
that will.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all the hard-working members of the
Public Service who have dedicated their lives to making a difference in
South Africa. The Government owes those people support. The Government owes
the people of South Africa a Public Service which delivers. If the ANC
cannot deliver that, it has no right to be in the Government.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, officials of the
department and hon members, I congratulate the chairperson of the portfolio
committee, the hon Nathi Nhleko, for being a good captain of the portfolio
committee.

The Department for the Public Service and Administration is charged with
the task of leading the modernisation of the Public Service by assisting
Government departments in implementing their own management policies,
systems and structural solutions. The DPSA hopes to achieve its objectives
through the following three programmes which the Minister has highlighted:
administration, functional assistance to the Minister, and auxiliary and
associated services.

The DPSA has developed a number of policies between 1997 and 2001. Those
policies deal with the transformation of the Public Service, affirmative
action, human resources management, training and education in the Public
Service. In the medium term, that is from 2001 to 2002, the DPSA aims to
improve the skills of senior management in the Public Service, improve
service delivery, provide oversight of Sita, develop e-government and
implement related information technology projects, and develop and
implement risk management practices, including an HIV/Aids policy for the
Public Service.

Those priorities are aimed at strengthening Government's capacity to
support integrated programmes such as the Integrated Sustainable Rural
Development Strategy. Those policy developments will be realised through
the DPSA budget which has two main components, namely a core budget
component and transfers to Sita from the auxiliary and associated services
programme.

More than 80% of the core budget is spent on personnel because the DPSA is
labour intensive. Administration, which conducts the overall management and
administration of the DPSA, takes 28,5% of the total budget allocation for
2000-01 and 2002. There is a 0,5% decrease in the budget allocation for
this programme. This is a concern to us.

The functional assistance to the Minister's programme, through its
subprogrammes, endeavours to create a unified Public Service, develop and
partially implement a new policy, ensure more effective development of
resources, and facilitate ongoing institution building. In 2000 the DPSA
identified weak management capacity as a focus area that needs attention.
Consequently, the DPSA has developed a senior management service system.

The programme on auxiliary services aims to deliver auxiliary services and
services related to the department. The Budget allocation on this Programme
has decreased by 14,3% between 2001-02. However, 29,2% of the overall
budget is allocated to this programme for 2002.

In conclusion, the IFP wishes to pose a few questions which are intended to
be food for thought to the Minister and the DPSA. These questions are as
follows. Since Government has raised concerns about the share of personnel
spending in the budget, what has the department done to address the
concerns on personnel spending? Why is there a 14,3% decrease in the
auxiliary and associated services programme? Is the decrease not going to
affect the activities of the programme? Why has the increase in
professional special services not been allocated to capacity-building? What
is the racial and gender composition of the Public Service? How much money
has the DPSA lost because of corruption in the Public Service? To what
extent will e-government improve service delivery in the Public Service? To
what degree has corruption in the Public Service affected service delivery?
And how effective is Batho Pele?

We sincerely hope that the budget we are debating today will enable the hon
the Minister and the department to address these questions and to
accelerate transformation and service delivery. We support the budget.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before I call on the next speaker, I would like
to recognise a delegation of the Botswana caucus for women in politics led
by the minister of local government and housing in Botswana. You are
welcome, honourable members. [Applause.]

Mr M R SIKAKANE: Madam Speaker, I am extremely tempted to go for the last
DP speaker! [Interjections.] I am so disappointed, and I remember the
saying which goes: It is better to trust a stone than to trust a man.
Because the hon member is still young and we are with him on the committee,
I thought he was a promising member. But when he stood up to speak here I
began to think about what one member said in my constituency. He said to
me: ``Comrade Rich, why don't you ask Tony Leon where he was all these
years? When did he learn the word ``democracy?''. [Interjections.] He
continued and said: Did he not know that people needed water, electricity
and equal education?''. [Interjections.]

We have visitors here today, and they expect us to say something that they
can take home and give them hope. However, we have been listening to that
hon member and he is not telling our people anything. He is waiting for
election day so that he can go and deliver parcels to people and so forth.
[Interjections.] I am not going to waste my time with such a member.
[Applause.]

The Minister for the Public Service and Administration said that one can
take a piece of wood, but that it cannot keep the fires burning. I am
saying to hon members today that Sita can keep the fires burning and
rolling in this country, because it can make the undeliverable deliverable.

The quest for change culminated in the introduction of the Sita Act, Act 88
of 1998. This was a legislative expression for change with regards to the
functioning of IT in Government, while the White Paper on Transforming
Public Service Delivery of September 1997 offered the policy framework of
Government to put people first, as initiated by Batho Pele. The State
Information Technology Agency - Sita - was established as an instrument of
the Department of Public Service and Administration to champion change for
and on behalf of Government on the IT front.

As a shareholder on behalf of Government in Sita, the Department of Public
Service and Administration highlighted the key elements to strive for.
These include making use of Government's spending power to reduce costs, to
increase productivity, and to deliver public services on the Internet to
work for the convenience and welfare of citizens.

An additional factor of change was the establishment of the Government
Information Technology Officers Council, Gito, made up of directors of
state organs and charged with the responsibility of ensuring that their
respected departments use IT to the best advantage. This was a wonderful
move in terms of which we are saying that this component of Government,
established by this Parliament, has gone further and called upon all the
directors of departments to form this unit in order to ensure that Sita can
do what it ought to do and make all the deliverables deliverable. That is
why my theme today is about Sita as an agent for change. Hon members must
just keep on listening.

The elements of change involving Government's IT division is to take
strategic decisions that Sita will be expected to implement. Sita is on
track and is not a mistake. Sita, therefore, constitutes a complementary
part of the total set of state institutions that are mandated to act as
instruments of change. However, for this change to come about, all state
institutions must act in concert, with a view to making a joint and co-
ordinated response to Government expectations. Sita's mandate directs it to
provide in IT needs and deliver IT services for the specific ordering of
state organs.

Sita's involvement of innovators from the private sector is to meet IT
needs, to provide IT services and solutions. Results should be in support
of Government business objectives and not the other way round, as an hon
member demonstrated here. Those members always work against Government for
things that will not help the people who sent us to this Parliament. But,
never mind, they have been doing that for the past 100 years, it's their
usual stuff. [Interjections.]

As the dedicated IT arm of Government, Sita's goal is to address the
following: to make IT systems compatible; to eliminate unnecessary
duplication that may exist; to use Government's buying power to leverage
economies of scale; and to ensure that citizens' information, in terms of
the cost to the state, is not compromised through the maintenance of secure
IT involvement. These are tasks that the country would be proud to see
achieved. Of all the sectors that should experience change, the IT sector
has not been left out. It has a dedicated platform to look up to. Sita is
the agent of change on the IT front.

I would like to highlight the fact that the people of Nongoma, Thohoyandou,
Mafikeng and Cofimvaba are watching to see what this country is going to
do. They are sitting there, expecting change to come. It was heartening for
me to learn that Germany, a First-World country, went to India and invited
2 000
IT-literate Indians to settle in Germany, so that they could make things
happen. Then the question was: What do we do in this country?

The chair of the board, who is seated there, Sello Rasethaba, said to me:


  Do you know what Sita is aiming to achieve? We have a mission whereby
  right in Thohoyandou, Nongoma, or Cofimvaba, if there is a post office,
  we are going to go to the post office and say: `Let us plug in a cord
  here which will take electricity to that nearby school where there is no
  electricity. We will fill that school with IT equipment, and our children
  will be able to become computer literate.

That is what we are here for in this country and in this Parliament. That
is what the people sent us here for. Members are not here to demand things
they never did for the past 100 years. They only know those things are
needed today.

Finally, I would like to thank and congratulate Mr Van Schalkwyk, who has
been appointed the CEO of Sita, and the team seated there with the chairman
of the board, Sello Rasethaba, who have given our people hope for the
future, ie that IT is up and running in this country. In a few years' time,
we would not be going to Germany, America or Britain to ask for skilled
people to come to this country, because Sita is designed to do this, and
they have given us hope. I would like to turn to our people in the gallery
and say that there is hope for our children. They will all be computer
literate in the future. [Applause.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Madam Speaker, at a time when the inability of the
ANC to govern the country becomes more and more evident, when the Tshwetes
and the Yengenis of Parliament are an embarrassment to their own people,
when the ANC wilfully fails to draw a distinct line between party and
Government, and where the taxpayer's money is being misspent on bogus
threats against the President, there is, however, a Minister who goes about
her task with vigour and determination. She needs to be commended for her
value and efforts in setting the pace for the transformation of the Public
Service.

Anders as ander Ministers, het sy lank reeds besef dat die effektiewe
transformasie van die Staatsdiens slegs sal slaag indien dit gedryf word
deur 'n ystervrou met 'n ysterwil. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Unlike other
Ministers she realised long ago that the effective transformation of the
Public Service will only be successful if it is driven by an iron woman
with an iron will. [Interjections.]]

The Minister's uncompromising stand against Cosatu and organised labour and
the demanding wage negotiations should serve as a good example to her
colleagues in Cabinet. She does not allow her party affiliation to distract
her in the execution of her task as the head of a Government department
which is accountable to all the people of South Africa, and not only to the
dwindling ANC. She proved to her colleagues that one can achieve one's
goals if one is prepared to stand firm on principles, rather than to
succumb to internal alliance pressures.

The Department of Public Service and Administration is primarily
responsible for creating a culture of good governance. This can only be
achieved by a well-trained staff component, in which the SA Management
Development Institute should play a pivotal role. In this regard, all
departments should be compelled to utilise the training and development
programmes that are provided by Samdi.
The Department of Public Service and Administration has come a long way
since the publication of the Presidential Review Commission's Report on
Transformation of the Public Service in February 1998. However, the
Government has still not succeeded in addressing poor productivity, poor
work ethics, proper performance monitoring and the low level of service
delivery, to name but a few.

If we say that good governance and administration is the major catalyst
needed to ensure the overall success by the Government to achieve its goal
of liberating and empowering the South African people, to eradicate poverty
and to launch the South African economy on the road to steady growth, the
Government must take the following aspects into consideration.

Existing plans must be consolidated and all efforts should concentrate on
these plans rather than to create more and more new untested frameworks.
This will enable the Government to proceed with the full implementation of
these plans in order to enable the departments to determine the successes
and failures of programmes so that the necessary adjustments could be made.

The Government must address the lack of interdepartmental relations that is
still responsible for poor co-ordination within and between different
departments and spheres of Government. This makes it difficult to implement
national programmes and consequently leads to failure to deliver basic
services.

There is a need for stronger and more accountable political oversight in
order to manage the progress and performance of Ministers and departments.
It is important to realise that the total transformation of the Public
Service is not the task of only one Minister and one department, the
Department of Public Service and Administration. It must be a collective
effort by all Ministers and Government departments.

Frameworks and strategies are not developed simply to give Ministers and
director-generals more work. No, they are developed in order to provide
departments with the necessary tools for service delivery and productivity.
Therefore, Ministers in particular should commit themselves to bringing to
their offices and to this Parliament an awareness of the responsibility to
the people, as provided for by the democratic process.
Skilled, honest political leadership is needed to determine policies that
will address the needs of the total South African society, and the ultimate
responsibility is to account to Parliament and to the public at large, with
integrity, for that which has been and that which has not been done by the
Government. I believe that it is imperative to take these issues into
account if we want to succeed in accelerating the transformation of the
Public Service in order to serve all the people of South Africa.

In the final analysis, I want to thank the Minister for this mouse pad with
a clock on it, which is an indication that time is running out for the
delivery of service.

Mr D J SITHOLE: Madam Speaker, it is always nice to have a salesman who
sells goods. But once one has a salesman who is unable to sell anything,
such as Mr Van Jaarsveld, then one has a problem. No wonder he left selling
houses and came to Parliament in the hope that he would make a career. It
is still not working out.

It is true that seven years ago this department was nothing else but a tool
to enforce apartheid. The ANC Government was faced with the challenge of
transforming the apartheid machinery that knew nothing about public service
management to an organisation that can meet the challenge of a new
political order - I direct this to Mr Waters.

Driving transformation in the Public Service requires the organisational
capacity to respond to political concerns whilst co-ordinating management
changes. To sustain change and maintain a newly-created standard of service
delivery in the public service requires a strong DPSA. It is, therefore,
important for Samdi to intensify training on policy so as to ensure that
the culture of caring, as espoused by Batho Pele, takes root.

The DPSA must provide professional support to line departments. It must
recruit professionals who are community cadres and understand the
constituency the line department serves. The challenge to the Public
Service is to recruit and retain qualified staff.

The growing complexity of needs means that the DPSA has to recruit
specialists and assist in providing analysis and good policy development.
Public service, by its very nature, is the yardstick of the relationship
between Government and the public. Therefore the Department of Public
Service and Administration should and must be an agent for change.

The aim of the Department of the Public Service and Administration is to
lead modernisation of the Public Service by assisting Government
departments in implementing their own management policies, systems and
structural solutions within a framework of generally applicable norms and
standards in order to improve service delivery. The task of the department
is to champion change, merit, integrity and excellence in the Public
Service. The department should be a site of learning and innovation. The
department has to contend with a Public Service that has complex
responsibilities, as opposed to the old public service that performed
repetitive work.

The new society requires a public service that will adapt to the new
challenges of technology and globalisation. This complexity, brought about
by changes in society, has placed a strain on management structures of the
Public Service. The growing sophistication and interdependence of the
nations' economies require that the Government departments keep up with
constant changes, both in policy development and implementation.
Flexibility and responsiveness of Government is a permanent challenge. Our
people expect an improved performance from the Public Service. They expect
improved service delivery. They expect to be treated equally. They expect
service delivery to be cost-effective and transparent. Equality is not what
was implied by the hon Waters. When he speaks on behalf of our people, he
claims that he knows what they want. He further claims that the DA is able
to deliver, when in fact the DA and his upbringing have taught him that he
is superior to blacks. [Interjections.]

He comes here and makes a noise about the race card, whilst in fact he is
unable to speak in the committee. I first heard the hon member saying
something for the first time in the committee. I hope that whoever prepared
his speech will do it again and assist him in the committee.
[Interjections.]

President Mbeki visited the Northern Province to speak to ordinary people.
Only the ANC can do this, because it is the only political movement that is
grounded within the masses. This example must be emulated by Parliament, to
ensure that it engages with citizens so as to evaluate the impact of the
laws it passes. This will ensure that public representatives are able to
engage with the public on its needs and what can be done to improve the
Public Service, not to do the moaning that is being done by the opposition.
[Interjections.]

We declared the 21st century an African century. The ANC, in its 8 January
statement, raised the issue of developing a cadre of the 21st century. The
development of such a cadre will ensure that the gains made by the mass
democratic movement are not reversed. Public Service managers must be
responsive and accept that change is inevitable. It is the work of this
Government which has created the platform to change values and attitudes of
the Public Service, not the DP or its surrogate child, the New NP.

Accountability is enshrined in the Batho Pele policy. This policy places
people first and says that public servants must serve diligently. It is
also true that not all public servants are performing as expected. There
are still old people out there who are not happy with what they have
experienced in our departments. But we are committed to changing for the
better.

We need a public service that will be guided by the needs of the people. We
need a public service that will provide career pathing and growth for
individuals, and organisations that will provide incentives for good
performance and reward those who perform exceptionally well.

One critical issue is the issue of representativeness in the Public Service
as reflected by the report of the Public Service Commission. It is critical
that the noncompliance by departments - and for that matter, provinces -
with national policy be dealt with firmly. The department has a
responsibility to ensure that all departments, irrespective of their
location, meet the policy objectives.

This adherence to national policy is quite an interesting phenomenon when
it comes to local government, particularly in the Western Cape. It is my
submission that all spheres of government should be governed by one
Government policy and therefore the legal regime of local government must
be reviewed. Since the department was established, it has played a critical
role in formulating policies that are a reflection of a new order. The
expenditure of the department will show that the organisation is becoming a
professional body, run and managed by cadres who understand the role and
centrality of our people in changing their conditions.

We are led to believe that Government is inherently incompetent. Of course
there are still problems, but to say Government is inherently incompetent
is wrong, because it is not true. The work that is done by those men and
women in the Public Service goes beyond the call of duty.

I went to visit the Booysens police station in my constituency. The amount
of effort put in by the personnel at the station is unbelievable. Despite
the fact that resources are limited, the commitment to do the work with
those limited resources is encouraging. Improving service delivery does not
mean more money in all instances, but rather doing the right thing the
first time, and having the right attitude towards work.

We commend the leadership role played by Cosatu to ensure that the outcome
of wage negotiations set good precedences for the future. The success of
the Public Service jobs summit held in the Northern Province is a
reflection of maturity between Government and the public-sector unions. We
also need to urge the department to expedite the development of the exit
management policy. This policy will help to ensure a smooth and organised
exit for those who want to move out of the Public Service. It is time that
the Public Service employs managers who must perform their management
responsibilities, and release those who are trained as doctors or policemen
to do the work they were trained do.

The Department of Public Service and Administration, together with other
line-function departments, should review the policy of promotion. We must
place people where they should be. Doctors must be doctors, nurses must be
nurses, policemen must be policemen, and managers must be managers, and not
the other way round.

Government is not a safe haven for nonperformers. Those who have no will to
perform must go. Those who still want to protect the old order must go.
That includes the DA in the Western Cape. We cannot afford to have people
who are outright fascists in our country.

In the Minister's budget speech, the department made commitments and said
that there were key outputs and key indicators that they had set
themselves. It is our view, as the portfolio committee, that the department
will always be evaluated in line with the objectives they set themselves in
the Budget Estimates, and will not have mercy in dealing with deviations in
making sure that our people get delivery, not the noise that we get from
the other side. [Applause.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Chairperson, I must agree with hon member Sithole that the
Public Service in any country must constantly change in a changing world to
ensure efficient service delivery. I also salute the top brass, who are
sitting in the cross-benches. I am glad that they can be here.

On Tuesday this week, in closing the budget debate on Water Affairs and
Forestry, Minister Kasrils did something commendable that seems to have
become an outmoded practice in this Parliament. He delivered what can be
accepted as a ministerial reply to a debate. He had the courtesy to thank
all the participants in the debate and he commented on the inputs of
members, including those who were critical of his department.

It is hoped that the Ministers, or the Minister of Public Service and
Administration and all other Ministers for that matter, will follow this
good example. Courteous conduct is the hallmark of good upbringing and
reflects respect for humankind, especially when extended to those who hold
different views from oneself.

Moreover, if one expects others themselves, particularly those who look to
one for leadership, to extend courtesy, one must be prepared at all times
to set the example. I think my comment affects the Leader of the Opposition
as well.

Ensuring courtesy is a fundamental proposal made in the White Paper on
Transforming Public Service Delivery and the principle of Batho Pele, which
really should be most easily achieved. Batho Pele places the people first.
This simply means that Public Service staff must be ever cognisant of the
need for customer care, which begins with courteous behaviour in their
interaction with the public. Not only does a nurse ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order, hon member. [Interjections.]
Mr N J GOGOTYA: Chairperson, would the speaker kindly stick to the issue
that is being debated today. [Interjections.] He has read five paragraphs,
but has not said a thing about the debate today.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That is not a point of order, Mr Gogotya.
Continue, Mr Abrahams.

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Not only does a nurse who is frequently absent from a clinic
reflect a lack of care for patients, but such discourteous conduct puts
unnecessary pressure on colleagues on duty as well. By the same token,
senior management that fails to act for months on a report from a school
principal that a teacher has absconded is not promoting customer care.
These are things that must be eliminated.

A reading of the report on a survey of compliance with the Batho Pele
policy confirms that, inter alia, the policy has not yet changed the daily
tasks of frontline personnel. It is a very practical policy and must not be
seen as an add-on to the main business of departments. It is the main
business of departments. I quote this very well-worded statement because it
is precise.
In terms of the mouse pad that the hon the Minister gave us, which refers
to honesty and honour and of our having to be above reproach, it is
unforgivable that public servants must be obliged to work under a deputy
director-general who is publicly labelled by a magistrate as ``a pathetic
liar who attempted to obstruct justice''. It is amazing how the system can
tolerate such a character on the payroll for such a long time, a time in
which he committed deeds, or is alleged to have committed deeds, concerning
covering up for a lot of personnel who did corrupt things.

These are the things that the system must be shaped into expelling from the
Public Service if we are to succeed in this direction. My time has run out
and I will not touch on the next item that I wanted to refer to.

Mr R J B MOHLALA: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, the leadership
of the Department of Public Service and Administration has as it aim the
modernisation of the Public Service, moving away from the old ways in which
the apartheid machinery operated. To illustrate this I would say in my
language: ``Botate bajele matata, meno gwa sia a bana.'' [The children are
suffering the consequences of the evil deeds committed by the apartheid
regime.]
This leadership is aimed at being realised by the assistance that the
department gives to other departments, to see how best they implement their
management policies, systems and structural solutions. The implementation
is envisaged within applicable frameworks of set norms and standards. These
norms and standards are not designed and applicable by, or at national
level, to the exclusion of provinces or any province for that matter, as
others would like us to believe. That is why, therefore, the norms and
standards have to be measurable.

They can be measured, firstly, by the state of managerial representivity.
The provinces need to apply the same norms and standards as national
departments. This issue of management policies cuts across all spheres of
government. Although the situation nationally is not something to write
home about, it has improved tremendously. The provinces, with the exception
of two of them, are making a good attempt at improving the situation. The
two provinces that are lagging behind are the Free State and the Western
Cape. However, there is a difference between the two provinces. The
situation in the Free State is of a managerial nature.

In the Western Cape, the situation is politically sanctioned. Here we have
a DA-controlled government that has its own norms and standards, separate
from those applicable nationally. [Interjections.] We have a government
that is clinging to old apartheid norms and standards, a government in
which 72% of its managers are still lily-white, male, probably middle-aged
and Afrikaans-speaking. [Interjections.]

In actual numbers, there are only six Africans, 12 Indians, 52 coloureds
and, voilà, 176 whites in each managerial echelon since 1994.
[Interjections.] Males comprise 88% compared to a mere 12% of female
managers. [Interjections.] This is a reversal, to say the least, and it
undermines the gains that we have made as South Africans.

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for the
hon member to mislead the House as far as figures and the racial
demographics of the Western Cape are concerned?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Well, I cannot determine right now
whether those figures are misleading the House or not.
Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, I know that the member is misleading the House,
because I have the figures right here. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Take a seat, Mr Waters. That is not a
point of order. I cannot determine right now whether, based on the figures,
the hon member is misleading the House or not. Continue, hon member.

Mr R J B MOHLALA: Thank you, Chairperson. The hon member is at a
disadvantage because he just joined the portfolio committee quite recently.
That is why he is shooting from the hip. [Laughter.]

They managed to achieve this with flying colours, despite a dramatic
increase from 121 managers in 1999, to 246 this year. The South African
Constitution demands that all provinces adhere to Public Service
regulations on transformation in order to reflect the country's
demographics and political dispensation. We need to understand the history
from which we come. The ANC Government has a mandate to transform not only
the state machinery, but also society. We therefore do not need the antics
of the DA.
Mathaithai ao a dirwago ke makgotlana a mantlwane bjalo ka DA, ga re a
nyake. ANC, e lego ya makhuduthamaga, e rile ge e tšea mmuso ya bea
lenanego-kgoparara la go fetola maphelo a batho ba Afrika Borwa. Makgotlana
a bjalo ka DA ona a lebeletše bomenemene le bolotsana bja gore mmuso wa ANC
o se ke wa atlega. [Legofsi.] Lefapha la Tona, e lego mmago rena,
mohlomphegi Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, le ikemiseditse go tlisetsa batho ba
rena seo re ba tshephisitsego, e lego tlhahlelelo e mpsa yeo e ikemego ka
tlhahlelelo bathong ba gabo rena.

Ga bjalo, seo se ra gore tlhahlelelo yeo re bolelago ka yona e swanetse
gore e kwiwe ke batho bao ba e emetsego metseng ya gabo rena, e ka ba
Mapulaneng, Phalaborwa, Polokwane, Sekgosese, Tshwane, Gauteng, le yona
Kapa, moo ba dirago meleko ye. [Lesego.]

Seo re ka se botsago DA ke gore, di tla bonyane ke di tla boima. Le gona
Mopresitente wa rena o itse ge a fetola mathomong a ngwaga a ba lemosa gore
seo se sa felego se a hlola. Meswinini ke batho, mehlolo ke dinoga
matsatsing a lehono. [Legofsi.] Tsela yeo DA e itshwerego ka yona e lemosa
ge e le gore ba swerwe ke letswa la tatamoloko ka ge botate ba lle matata
meno go sia a bana.
Fela rena go ANC re tseba gore le ge ke se modumedi, ke rata go tsopola
Beibele. ``Tate o tla nkabela dijo manaba a ka a ntebeletse, a ntlotsa
hlogo makhura, senwelo saka sa tletse wa go falala, tse botse fela le
kgaugelo di tlo ntatela mehla yohle ke sa phela.'' (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Monkey tricks, as are usually performed by small parties such as the DA,
are not wanted. When the ruling ANC came into power, it established various
infrastructures aimed at changing the lives of South Africans. Small
parties like the DA are only involved in misinformation campaigns that are
meant to discredit the ANC-Government. [Applause.] The Department of Public
Service and Administration of the hon Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, is
prepared to bring to the people what was promised before, that is self-
empowering.

Therefore this empowerment can only be achieved by representatives from our
villages, be it Mapulaneng, Phalaborwa, Polokwane, Sekgosese, Tshwane,
Gauteng, as well as Cape Town, where all these efforts are being made.
[Laughter.]

What we can say to the DA is ``for better or for worse.'' What our
President reported in his speech at the beginning of the year made them
aware that everything has a beginning and an end. Snakes are nowadays seen
as people, while people are seen as serpents. [Applause.] The DA's way of
living still leaves much to be desired.

Even if I am not a Christian, I would like to quote from the Bible. ``My
God prepares a banquet for me, where all my enemies can see me, He welcomes
me as an honoured guest, and fills my cup to the brim, I know that God's
goodness and love will be with me all the days of my life.'']

Our quest for transformation and realisation of a better life for all is
unstoppable. The DPSA, through the PSC, has enough data to be in a position
to formulate a clear strategic response to the shortcomings that still
exist in service delivery. There are clear strategic interventions that
shall be employed. Today we as the ANC Government are at a stage where we
know where the bottlenecks and blockages are. As the department embarks on
the improvement of service delivery, our people, who are the recipients of
this service delivery, shall pass judgment on whether the Government
performs or not. [Interjections.]
So far, there has not been any indication on the Government's part that
there is a collapse in service delivery. Instead, the feedback is that the
Government is doing just fine. [Interjections.] But - a big but - we still
have areas of service delivery that need further improvement. There is a
need to revamp the way public servants carry themselves in servicing the
people out there. That is our mandate.

Modulasetulo, ntumelele ke re ge ke tlo fetša, ke lemoše Ntlo ye gore go
nanya go phala go kitima. Mengwaga e šupago yeo e fetilego, re be re loga
maano, bjalo matengwa a beilwe, maumo a tla tšwelela. Lenanego la Kgoro la
Batho Pele le na le dikokwane tšeo di tiilego.

Ba bangwe bao ba tšamogo gore ke bona bo tsebanyane, go swana le bo
mohlomphegi Waters. Ge e ele Tony Abrahams o mmakaditše ka gore ke thoma go
mmona le go mo kwa a bolela ka taba tše, ka gore ga nke re mmona. Bjale re
ipotšiša gore naa tsebo yeo ba nago le yona ba e tšea kae, e bile ba bala
dipuku dife tšeo rena re sa di balego? Fela seo se lego gona ke gore re
swanetše gore re kwišiše gore la fata ga le boe feela.

Ge ke lebeletše, go na le mokgalabje o mongwe o tlo tla mo, Mohlomphegi
Bell. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Chairperson, please allow me to finish my speech, steady but slow. For
the past seven years, we have been devising various ways and means and now
the foundation has been laid and the fruit shall be reaped. The
department's concept of Batho Pele has well-established foundations.

There are some, like the hon Waters, who claim to be knowledgeable. As for
Mr Tony Abrahams, I am surprised to hear him saying these things, let alone
actually seeing him, because

I hardly see him most of the time. So, we ask ourselves, where did they get
this information, and which books do they read that we do not? What we need
to understand is that one gets the rewards for one's labour.

I realise that the next speaker will be the hon Bell.]

I have never seen such an old man from whom I cannot learn anything. In my
culture one learns from old people. That old man is not going to fail me.
He is still going to come. There is nothing that hon members can learn from
him. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

In conclusion, I want to indicate that it does not help members of the DA
to come here and play cheap politics. We know them and we meet them at
portfolio committee meetings. They are as dead as I do not know what. They
do not contribute a bit, but somehow they have the wisdom to tell us how
wrong we are and so forth, just to waste our time. Unfortunately they can
howl as much as they like, but there is something they do not know about
me. I am deaf in my left ear. If one howls, one is wasting one's time.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Before I sit down, I would like to say:

Maropeng ra re re tloga ra lema dithaka, ra re re boa ra ja maraka.
[Legofsi.] [If one leaves the place of one's birth and goes to a new place,
when times are hard then one will gain comfort at the ruins of the place of
one's birth. [Applause.]]

Adv Z L MADASA: Chairperson, hon members will excuse my voice. I am not
feeling well.

Public Service and Administration is responsible ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, hon Nhleko and the whole
group there, please could we control ourselves so that we can move on with
the business of the day?

Adv Z L MADASA: Public Service and Administration is responsible for policy
development. It is not directly involved in service delivery. The statement
is not entirely true. It is the duty and responsibility of policy
formulators to establish what impact such policies have on the intended
recipients. Are they having the desired effect?

The Public Service Commission was instituted to take charge of monitoring
and evaluation. Samdi was instituted to develop managers by training them
in appropriate skills, so that service delivery could be improved. Sita was
to supply the state with IT.

It is common cause that, despite these measures, there is still poor
service delivery because the machinery is still struggling to work
efficiently, to deliver the intended services. In other words, the
restructuring that has been done that is good in the Public Service, has
not yet yielded the required results.

The usual complaint from the department is that the resources are not
enough. I put it to the Government today that we cannot say the money is
not enough, unless it can be proved convincingly that the money available
is unable to cover, not the work done, but the work which should have been
done. They should show us by means of figures and the amount of work done
that the money was short. One official has admitted before the committee
that the budget process employed at this stage is not yet scientific and
does not conform to the required formulas.

What is done about this to ensure that budgeting is improved? Money will
never be enough. What is important is whether we are doing good work with
what we have. The Government has instituted a cluster approach to service
delivery. This is a good system, because if properly used it will help the
Government to use the available money efficiently. But the snare is that
the departments still plan separately and work separately.

I was encouraged by the developing co-operation between Public Works and
Agriculture, but more is needed. Before any project is undertaken in any
department, the question should be asked: Which other departments will be
affected by this decision and in what way? How can other departments be of
help, so that this project is sustained?

For example, the ex-President, Mr Mandela, goes about building schools and
equipping them, but is there any collaboration between these projects with
the department? Does the Departments of Safety and Security, Education or
Public Works have a plan to ensure the safety of those schools, and that
the equipment is not stolen?

The clusters must not be rigid. There must be flexibility in departments to
work with any other department if a need arises. Samdi must ensure that the
managers are multi-skilled and able to work for the public in any
department at any time. The issue is not whether a department is efficient,
but whether the entire Government is working well.
People may get service from one department, but if they are experiencing
crime, for example, then they would blame the entire Government. To the
Minister of Public Service, what plans are there to create flexible
clusters which can tackle projects with ease? What plans are there for the
amalgamation of budgets to deliver particular projects, and what plans
there are for more centralised planning and budgeting?

With the scarcity of resources the Government cannot afford a disintegrated
departmental approach to service delivery. The question is no longer
whether a department is run properly, but whether the entire Government is
run properly?

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, comrades, 25 years ago, after having been
forcefully removed from their birthplace in Distict Six, Constantia and
other places, people from Bonteheuwel, Heideveld and other areas were
promised better lives, rather than gangsterism, in the sand dunes and
bushes of Mitchells Plain. Not only were they confused to see so much white
sand and bushes, thinking that at least they were in a holiday resort, but
soon the reality also dawned upon them that there was a problem when the
houses started to crack and their means of public transport was to travel
via Manenberg to get to Mitchells Plain. This is unlike the stories we have
heard about how things have changed here in the Western Cape.

Very soon people in Mitchells Plain demanded health facilities in the form
of a general hospital. Unfortunately and very disgustingly the DA's
response was to give them a hospital called Lentegeur. This mental hospital
is still there today.

I wish to tell Comrade Minister that the stories are similar in many of our
black areas. The housing office responded to the needs of the community on
the basis of officials being bribed and gangsters, who have now mushroomed
like anything, being paid protection money. Therefore, service delivered in
places like Tafelsig by the police today to stop gangsterism does not
address the historical problems in those areas.

Public servants were taught that they could accumulate leave, and that they
could work overtime, not to address service delivery, but because this is
the culture they all have to follow that. It was unheard of for a woman to
become a manager in any department. We were told earlier on that in the
Western Cape, red tape is being removed to speed up change, but what are
the facts?

In 1995 the ANC Government passed a law to change land use planning at the
national level in the country. We should ask the hon Waters to ask his DA
provincial government why they are refusing, if he claims they are changing
things, to implement the law on land use planning and, therefore, why our
football players cannot play at Newlands, as has been demonstrated.
[Interjections.]

Why are they not changing, at the provincial government, a law from 1995,
and trying to say that the ANC has not done so at the level of local
government. [Interjections.] At the provincial government they are refusing
to change the law, like so many other laws they have refused to change,
which my comrades have referred to here already. [Interjections.]

The fact is that blacks and women are not employed in the Western Cape
public service, and not that the ramblings that hon members have heard here
today. [Interjections.] [Applause.] The fact is that our people were told
that the buzzwords should rather be: ``Do not tell anyone that we are doing
these things, because it is better to keep things like that.''

Because we come from that background and because we have seen what has been
done, particularly by the machinery of the state, to keep apartheid intact,
we have made sure that in terms of section 196 of the Constitution we have
a body to investigate independently, to do monitoring, to do research and
to make sure that we have good governance and service delivery in the form
of the Public Service Commission. [Interjections.] My left ear is closed
too, so the hon member can howl. [Laughter.]

The Public Service Commission has a mandate to promote effective and
efficient departments. [Interjections.] It was necessary for us to do that.
It was necessary to give them a mandate to promote affirmative action,
because in the Western Cape we will continue to have public servants being
white, male and 60 years old. [Interjections.] We have given them the
mandate to make sure that our people will be served in the form of Batho
Pele. We have also made sure that we give the mandate to the Public Service
Commission to implement Government policies. [Interjections.]

Two weeks ago we heard, yet again, that in all the provinces Government
policies were being introduced. Who was not? Who else but the ``volkstaat''
Western Cape was refusing to implement these Government policies.
[Interjections.] The mandate is to deepen democracy and to empower our
people so that they can effect democracy. Reports have already been
received about whether we are moving in this direction, including, and very
importantly, in terms of budget allocations made to effect these
programmes.

At last our people are now being offered an opportunity to take Batho Pele
to its next phase by making sure that they can participate in making
service delivery more people-friendly. We have examples of that in the
Northern Cape in the form of one-stop centres. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member! Order! Hon Waters and the
gentleman behind you, you are interrupting the discussion of this House.
[Interjections.] Heckling is allowed in the House, but you are overdoing it
now. Could you please give the member a chance to be heard? Continue, hon
member.

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Thank you, Chair, for saving me from the creche.
[Laughter.] Our public sector cannot be called transformed without the
inclusion of our disabled people. We think that more efforts should be made
to get disabled people into the Public Service. An important initiative is
in the pipeline by the Public Service Commission and, of course, the
portfolio committee - which the hon Waters supported by the way - is taking
the improvement of service delivery to the people.

The primary function of this body is to exercise the methods and solutions
to ensure delivery, and not merely to complain as one part of the
opposition normally does, because the New NP did not support them today.
So, too, in the area of anticorruption, there is an ongoing investigation
into procurements, tendering and maladministration. It is not as if we are
going to have the tendering office in Long Street in the Western Cape, with
our people in Mitchells Plain never being able to access the office - again
a decision taken by the Western Cape. [Interjections.]
The many recommendations by the Public Service Commission must find a way
to implementation or else we will be undermining the constitutional
importance of the Public Service Commission. Adherence to these
recommendations will alleviate the plight of the people in Eastridge and
Tafelsig who have to take two taxis when applying for a grant or pension
because it has been decided to house the maintenance department in the
Lentegeur Hospital instead of grouping them together as one service.

And then, of course, the people have been asking the MEC for Safety and
Security for a sub-police station in the heartland of the gang warfare
area. To date this has not been given to the people to bring some relief
with regard to gang warfare. What we heard, instead, is that the ``Bobby on
the beat'' will be on the parade rather than in Mitchells Plain.
[Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson and hon members, the Public Service is the
front office of any government and should serve the public relations
exercise of the Government of the day. A dedicated, friendly, people-
centred and loyal public service is a blessing to any government.

Some departments continue not to inform even shortlisted applicants about
the outcome of their interviews. We maintain that, whether successful or
otherwise, people who are interviewed should know the outcome of their
interviews.

It is becoming common to learn of highly placed Government officials, in
some cases managers, who have misrepresented their qualifications.
Departments, selectors and panels of interviewers have to be strict, and if
an applicant, regardless of who it is or whose daughter or son it is, does
not include the required documentation, such an applicant should not be
considered, as promises to submit documentation, later are never fulfilled.

We appreciate, however, the managerialist approach of the Public Service,
in which clear performance measures are established and managers are
contractually tied to the achievement of their tasks. This type of
management system enables the authorities to know who has not performed
accordingly, and remedial action is taken swiftly. The system in place
leaves ample space for creativity, innovation and flexibility, yet it is
explicit about the eventual outcomes and results.
How one wishes that some of the clots in the system who forge
qualifications, take bribes and revel in indolence could be rooted out so
that our Public Service can be faster, more efficient and more people-
friendly in delivering services. Our people should not have reason to
shrivel their heads in their armpits when they visit Public Service offices
for attention.

The Public Service Commission is doing splendid work and has to be
commended for the oversight they provide and the monitoring work they do to
see to it that the Public Service is people oriented. [Time expired.]

Mr B MTHEMBU: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I stand and
speak in support of Vote 11, the SA Management Development Institute.

One of the key challenges that is central to the successful transformation
of the Public Service is the development of a management and leadership
that is capable of implementing the policies of the national democratic and
developmental state. There is no doubt that our Government has formulated
appropriate policies and progressive legislation towards the realisation of
a developmental and service-orientated public service. However, the good
intentions reflected in these policies will remain an empty dream unless
they are matched with public managers who are capable of translating them
into the desired outcomes.

The key question that needs to be answered is how best to promote capacity-
building and management development in the context where the Public Service
is faced with the problem of simultaneously transforming itself, while also
transforming the management and delivery of service to the public, and in
particular extending basic services to the previously disadvantaged sectors
of society.

This is a complex question, and the Government is highly commendable for
not falling into the trap of a simplistic approach, reducing a complex
problem to an either/or approach. They use both approaches - that is, they
continue delivering services to the diverse sectors of our society, whilst
simultaneously changing the way these services are delivered. They are
surprised by our openness here, because they are still steeped in the old
paradigm ...

An HON MEMBER: What is that? The 4x4? Is that the old paradigm?
Mr B MTHEMBU: ... of a linear situation. [Interjections.] A genuine
consensus is emerging that successful management involves the ability to
manage complexity and diversity in the context of a dynamic policy
environment. After all, managers are needed precisely because there are
complex questions that need creative and innovative answers.
[Interjections.]

Clearly, therefore, the realisation of transformation that is professional,
effective, equitable, accountable, transparent, service orientated and
representative, calls for a new management paradigm. A series of
legislation enacted from 1994 up to, and including, 1999, has effectively
deconstructed the old, outdated and highly centralised public
administration model, with its dishonest assumptions of neutrality.

The shift from public administration to management is highly commendable
for numerous reasons. Key among them are the following: South Africa, like
all other countries of this global village, is not immune to the negative
impact of globalisation on the Public Service. The public management model
appears to be an emergent global strategy to meet the challenges of
globalisation.
Some of the key components of a new paradigm are consistent with our
transformation agenda of the Public Service. The paradigm emphasises the
role of public managers in providing high-quality service that the citizens
value, advocates increasing managerial autonomy, demands measures and
awards organisational and individual performance. This model will thus
promote the realisation of a transformed Public Service that is
professional, accountable, transparent and service oriented.

We commend the department for having contextualised the emergent global
paradigm to fit our political, social and economic situation. This global
management paradigm, like any paradigm, is not monolithic, but incorporates
various strands. The local implementation of the new paradigm, as reflected
in the Public Service Laws Second Amendment Act of 1997, and the Public
Finance Management Act of 1999, strengthens the developmental role of the
state and provides clear accountability lines.

The elected representatives of the people - that is, the Cabinet Ministers
and MECs - are accountable for setting out policy outcomes, while managers
are made accountable for clear policy outputs. I think this is an important
shift in the sense that it strengthens democracy, unlike the neoliberal
notion of the so- called neutral bureaucracy. We expect politicians who are
the true elected representatives of the people to devise strategic policies
and we expect managers to manage. In a sense we are bringing about a
balance to ensure that there is proper, what I may call, ``centralisation
in decentralisation''.

The transformation and reform White Paper has assigned the central role of
achieving the Government's goals in relation to Public Service training and
management development to the SA Management Development Institute as the
single most important statutory body. We welcome the descheduled Samdi and
its absorption as an integral part of the Department for Public Service and
Administration. The notion of an independent or neutral institution is
inconsistent with the notion of a developmental state. This development
will ensure effective alignment between Government policy and training
programmes.

Samdi's new focus on policy analysis and strategic management, change
management, human resource development and management, labour relations and
financial management constitutes a relevant curriculum which is congruent
with the public management model. We commend Samdi for the efforts it is
exerting to manage a complex and daunting task while simultaneously
transforming itself and managing the EU-funded projects, that is, the
Public Management Development Programme. We are also very happy that there
is a clear indication that Samdi will be able to meet its target of the
financial agreement with the EU.

We also note with satisfaction the launch of the Presidential Strategic
Leadership Development Programme in June 2000. The launch brought many
serious managers together. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before I call the next speaker, I am
informed that we have learners and educators from Qingqa Mntwana School in
Crossroads with us. I wish to take this opportunity to acknowledge them.
They are seated somewhere on the gallery. [Applause.]

Mr B G BELL: Chairperson, fellow MPs, it is my privilege to speak on behalf
of the DA in this Budget debate. [Interjections.] But before I start my
speech, that I have taken a lot of trouble to write - and I am probably
going to run out of time now, because of certain things that have happened
- I would like to make a statement to the hon member Mr R J B Mohlala. I
certainly hope he is alive when he reaches my age, so that maybe a
youngster will try to insult him the way he tried to insult me.
[Interjections.] I am afraid I take it whence it comes. [Interjections.]

Secondly, I would like to correct some figures regarding the current
situation in the Western Cape. At the moment, as of yesterday, there are 60
coloured managers in management, 60 Asians, 10 blacks and 117 whites, which
is very different to the numbers that we have been given. [Interjections.]
I can go into more detail on that if necessary.

Thirdly, I would like to ask the hon Connie September to please check her
facts. She must ask the ANC branch of Claremont as to why soccer has not
been played at Newlands. [Interjections.] Perhaps she would get the story
right there.

I will speak mainly on Samdi and make brief comments on the Public Service
Commission and the Department for Public Service and Administration. The
aims of Samdi are to provide practical and customer-driven training that
can lead to improved performance and service delivery in the public sector.
These aims are very commendable and should be encouraged by us all. Since
1999, Samdi has become a schedule 1 department with its own director-
general. It is now geared to generate its own funds by charging realistic
fees for the training given. In time, Samdi will be able to fund itself.

It is encouraging that Samdi claims to be fully booked until November 2001.
Does that mean that no further training courses can be undertaken or is
there some place in the plan for new initiatives? Perhaps, to give some
advice from my own experience - and perhaps the hon member will listen - I
would like to say that in this type of training, unless there is total
commitment from senior management, nothing will come of it. Therefore, it
is essential that senior management has a major say in course content and
supports the newly trained public servants to implement what they have been
taught. The general atmosphere and results achieved indicate that training
is sorely needed in the Public Service at present.

It was reported that R37 million of donor funds were available to augment
their own budgeted amount of R19,4 million. Those donor funds must be
reported on and strictly controlled. Also, the funds that Samdi generate
from the fees charged must be monitored and ploughed back into training.
When one analyses the reported expenditure for the 2000-01 fiscal year, one
finds that no money was spent on financial management training. That is
amazing. Unless Samdi abdicated their responsibility to others, it means
that no financial managers received any assistance in implementing the
Public Finance Management Act, which is probably the most far-reaching
project that we have ever undertaken.

Samdi is a national initiative and should be supported by all provinces.
But that does not mean that they do not have a responsibility to train
their own public servants. The Western Cape legislature has established a
training facility called Cape Administrative Academy. At this academy,
employees are trained throughout the year in all spheres of management.
From those courses employees are put onto career paths to set their
futures. One of their initiatives is called the Provincial Executive
Programme. That programme runs for 12 weeks and consists of groups of 13
candidates. It is very seldom that there is more than one candidate from
the non-designated group. Through that training programme, our future
senior Public Service servants will be drawn.

I trust that there are similar initiatives in the other provinces. For that
reason, the money spent by Samdi is only a portion of the total training
budget. As an example, the Western Cape reported that their expenditure is
to the tune of R10 million.

To the Minister, I say that we are shocked at the possibility that managers
in the public sector may soon be receiving intensive training in China.
What is that all about? China's philosophy is totally different to ours.
Unless this ANC-led Government intends changing direction, our managers can
learn nothing from them. Samdi can be a management tool to be used by all
of us to improve the efficiency of the Public Service and, as a result,
improve on the delivery to all our people.

In commenting on our Public Service Commission, I would like to say that it
is disturbing that we still talk of African ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs L MALONEY: Chairperson, Minister for the Public Service and
Administration, today we are debating the budget framework of the Public
Service and Administration. It is through this budget framework that the
public will be able to monitor and evaluate whether the department is
keeping to its mandate and target. My speech will focus on Vote No 11 of
the department which is the SA Management Development Institute, or Samdi
for short.

The aim of the SA Management Development Institute is to provide a
practical and customer-driven organisation and to develop intervention that
lead to improved performance and service delivery in the public sector.
Development and training of senior management is not a stand-alone
programme. It is an integrated programme of the Government. Samdi has been
given the responsibility to drive this programme, with Director-General Job
Mokgoro as the engine of this vehicle.

Developing and training senior managers is a challenge and a future
investment for the country as a whole. People must bear in mind that this
process cannot be a once-off event. Customer care training is also given by
Samdi to senior managers in the Public Service in order to promote the
Batho Pele policy in all Government departments. This Batho Pele policy
should also be extended to the private sector so that it can understand
that caring for people is not the responsibility of the government alone.

The budget of Samdi has been increased by 1% in 2000-2001. We welcome this
increase as this shows that the ANC-led Government is committed to making
sure that there is professionalism and efficiency in the Public Service.

Like other departments, Samdi had to undergo a transformation process in
order to accelerate service delivery. Furthermore, Samdi is required to be
self-financing. Therefore, a turnaround strategy was necessary to put Samdi
on the right footing. It is this turnaround strategy that assisted Samdi to
be more focused and have a clear understanding of the vision and strategies
that departments are struggling to develop.

We also welcome the fact that Samdi managed to get an outside donor for
certain projects. But, we should guard against ending up in the back seat,
allowing donors to dictate terms for us, otherwise we will end up at the
wrong destination.
I will touch on one of these projects that Samdi has embarked on. In 2000-
01 Samdi developed strategy-development programmes for director-generals
and programmes for training and development of ministerial staff. I will
focus on a few of these programmes. There is the excellent customer care
service for frontline staff. This is an area where the government could be
able to measure the Batho Pele policy as the frontline staff are in daily
contact with the public. If people do not get the service they want because
of the attitude and the bad service of the frontline staff, people assume
that the Government is not delivering. I think that special attention
should be given to this area. Another important project is the labour
relations team being trained to deal with sexual harassment. To me training
alone is not enough, without staff support structures in place.

For instance, if one compares one's training programme on attitude and
cultural value, which has only 20 participants, with one's training
programme on human resource management, which has 200 participants, one's
marketing skills should be sharpened in order to attract more people to
take up the cause of cultural values. This is a very serious issue and
should be compulsory, as we know the kind of public service that we
inherited from the apartheid regime. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the following member, Mr
Sibiya, will be delivering his maiden speech. [Applause.]

Mr M S M SIBIYA: Hon Chairperson, the Public Service Commission bears a
tremendous responsibility. The IFP therefore supports the budget which
would enable the Public Service Commission to achieve its objectives.

The aim of the PSC is to promote the constitutional values and principles
of public service and administration in the public sector. The commission
was established in terms section 196 of the Constitution of 1996. This
section makes provision for the commission to exercise its powers in order
to maintain an effective and efficient public administration, with a high
standard of professional ethics. The commission has appointed 14
commissioners, five based in Pretoria and one resident commissioner per
province.

Budgetary allocations to the commission have been increased from R44,607
million in the 2000-01 adjustments estimate to R53,013 million in the 2001-
02 budget. The budget will also increase from R55,371 million to R57,955
million over the medium term.

The effectiveness of the commission is determined by the degree to which it
communicates with the stakeholders. The core business of the Public Service
Commission is to monitor, investigate, evaluate and advise on strategic
Public Service issues. It needs research, and analytical and policy skills
to perform these functions. While it has made progress in procuring the
appropriate skills, the commission still needs to build capacity in these
areas.

The commission aims to ensure that coherent and effective research tools
and instruments are available. The programme provides for policy
formulation by the Minister, the Public Service Commission, the directors-
general, corporate services and management. This subprogramme aims to
establish a culture of professional and ethical behaviour. An analysis of
the financial disclosures by Public Service managers reveals that conflicts
of interest will be the focal area of the commission's work through both
monitoring and raising awareness.

Regarding special investigations, this is a newly established subprogramme
that manages the execution of special investigations. With regard to the
limitations of the programme, in future the tracking capacity will be built
in as part of monitoring and evaluating the impact and activities of the
commission, in addition to processing employee grievances. The Commission
will monitor trends and analyse strategic labour relations issues in the
Public Service.

In conclusion, women and the disabled are poorly represented at senior
levels of management. Statistics show that only 8,3% of the senior and
middle-management levels comprise women, with 0,1% comprising people with
disabilities.

The IFP supports the budget. [Applause.]

Mr M R BALOYI: Chairperson, our Public Service is a microcosm of the South
African society as a whole - a society with a painful past, complex current
challenges and a desired culture of responsibility, responsiveness,
accountability and service-delivery orientation.

As the South African society is gradually moving away from its painful past
under apartheid rule, so is our Public Service moving closer to the
attainment of its ultimate goal. In the past, the Public Service was an
instrument of oppression. It was the delivery arm of apartheid policies. It
operated in a fragmented manner, was highly secretive and lacked public
management programmes.

I am saying some of these things for the benefit of novices like the hon
Waters in this House. The Public Service that the ANC-led Government has
built has a culture of service, founded on the spirit and letter of the
White Paper on service delivery, ie Batho Pele, People First, Vanhu ku
sungula.

Hi vula tano hi ri eka pfhumba ro tirhela vanhu leri nga ni xikongomelo xo
antswisa vutomi bya vona, mintirho yoleyo yi fanele yi endliwa hi ku
tirhisana na vanhu va kona. Leswi hi nga swi fikelela loko tindzawulo ta
Mfumo ti tirha hi ku ya hi Tsalwa ra Vanhu ku sungula, People first, Batho
Pele, leri vulaka leswaku vaaki va ni mfanelo yo kuma migingiriko leyi va
enetaka, hi ndlela yo olova, etindhawini leti va tshamaka kona, va nga,
hlwerisiwi hi swilo leswi nga ri ki na xikongomelo xo va pfuna. Va nga
heleriwi timbilu loko va vutisisa. Va nga khahliwi  ni ku tseketseriwa. Va
va ni mfanelo yo kaneta loko va nga enerisiwi hi matirhelo ya vatirhela-
mfumo.

Naswona va pfumeleriwa ku koxa ku vonana na murhangeri wa hofisi yihi kumbe
yihi loko va lava ku nghenisa mavonele ya vona eka vukorhokeri lebyinene.
Hi gimeta mhaka leyi hi ku vula leswaku n'wina vanhu hi n'wina mi nga ta hi
pfuna ku xopaxopa matirhelo ya tindzawulo, leswaku xivono xa Mfumo wa ANC
xi fikeleriwa, ku nga ku antswisa vutomi ni ku lwisa vusiwana.

Tirhisanani na vahubyankulu lava va nga na tihofisi emigangeni ya n'wina,
xikan'we na tikhanselara ta muganga, leswaku va mi pfuna ku twisisa timhaka
ta vanhu ku sungula. (Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[That is what we say to the Public Service responsible for the programme of
providing services to the people with the aim of improving the lives of
their people. Such services should be delivered in collaboration with those
people. What we have achieved at the time when Government departments
started working and in accordance to the document called People First,
which stated that citizens have a right to benefit from the activities in a
satisfactory manner, in any easy way, in their respective residential
areas. They should not be delayed by things that have no objectives in so
far as assistance is concerned. People should not lose patience whenever
questions are posed. They should not be talked down to or insulted, nor
treated violently. They have the right to object when they are not
satisfied with the service rendered by Government officers.

They should be allowed to contact any chief officer of any department
whenever they need to make any input of their views on the good delivery of
service. We conclude this matter by saying that you, the public, are the
ones who are going to assist us in scrutinising the way our departments are
performing in order to enable the Government to achieve its objective, to
improve quality of life and to fight against poverty.

Work hand in hand with the MPs in your local offices, together with
councillors in your communities so that they may assist to understand what
``People First'' is all about.]

Managing Public Service transformation is a process faced with challenges.
The Minister of Public Service and Administration alluded to this on 12
February recently, when she said that many of the difficulties that society
as a whole is experiencing with aspects of transformation, are also
hampering the Public Service in making rapid progress in pursuit of the
transformation agenda.

The ANC said in its 1999 election manifesto that there were huge
difficulties that we must address, and that it was only the ANC that had
the vision and determination to attack the root causes of such
difficulties. I hope hon Bell is listening. We want to reiterate this
statement today, and to call on all parties and individuals that are not
yet there to join us to accelerate service delivery.

Hi ri eka un'wana ni un'wana, i ndlopfu ya hina. Ndzi ke ndzi nga
tsundzuxana na vaaki va muganga wa Phalaborwa, xikanwe na vatirhi va hofisi
ya majistarata wa Giyani, leswaku va hoxa xandla eka ku antswisa xiyimo xa
matshamelo ya vona. Hikuva loko va nga endli tano, va ta sala va komba hi
rintiho swilo swi va hundzile. (Translation of Tsonga paragraph follows.)

[We say it is the problem of all of us, everybody's. I once reminded people
of Phalaborwa communities, together with officers of the Giyani magisterial
area, to assist with the improvement of their conditions, because if that
is not done, they are going to regret it and then it would be too late.]

It is against this background that reference is also made to what the
parties to the Public Service Jobs Summit Framework Agreement observed in
Pietersburg earlier this year, namely that the challenges of managing a
transformation process in the Public Service were upon each one of them. I
wish we can all join them in that understanding and venture. Whereas some
of the difficulties are generic realities characteristic of changing
societies and particularly expected to exist in the South African context,
some of them, such as resistance to change, are remnants of apartheid
legacies.

Of course, I know that we are living in two worlds, one of optimism,
acceptance and hope, and another of pessimism, denial and despair. I think
if one were to ask hon Waters and hon Brian Bell the question in which
world exactly they find themselves, they would agree with me that they are
pessimists. I know that such a division compels some of the parties on my
left to be sensitive about our transformation programme, particularly
because it destroys their historic comfort zones.

They always try very hard to convince the public out there that our
policies are not taking this country anywhere. When they hear of service
delivery success stories, such as the establishment of multipurpose
community centres in most of our provinces where service delivery is made
conveniently accessible, they always bring arguments foreign to service
delivery initiatives, simply because they want to divert the attention of
the public away from such developments. [Interjections.]

What is more serious about these pessimists - I am becoming convinced - is
that they have planted their agents in the Public Service with a view to
fail the transformation process. [Interjections.] More often than not, one
hears of such officials who neglect their duties and later turn around as
so-called whistleblowers. They point at the very same duties they neglected
and suggest that there is no effective service delivery in the Public
Service. They feed their big-mouthed, restless political masters who have
no conviction to serve the cause of transformation.

Some of these officials are so negative that they rebuff people who need
their service and tell them to blame Batho Pele for whatever they have as
an excuse for not assisting them, or they even tell them to blame the
Government. What is frustrating is to note that some of these officials
pessimistic that have a negative attitude, are at management level. These
officials are sometimes assigned responsibilities for change. When they do
so, they make it a point that those who are affected are exposed to the
extreme harshness of the process, even if there are viable alternatives.
Theirs is to prove the Government wrong.

I thank the Minister for the envisaged customer satisfaction surveys and
public participation forums in the public service. These, we believe, will
give an opportunity for people out there to speak for themselves. The
citizens' report the hon the Minister referred to in her speech is a
positive development.

I am calling on these pessimists - and I hope Waters and Bell are listening
- to join us. By doing so they will have found themselves again, as South
Africans. Of course, optimists such as me need not be too complacent, as if
policies alone will deliver public services. We must vigilantly support
processes that are put in place and ensure that they are implemented, as
the main focus of the ANC is now more on policy implementation than
formulation.

In conclusion, I want to call on the hon the Minister to facilitate a
process that will expedite the implementation of an integrated service
delivery strategy that takes on board the local government sphere. As we
support the Vote, we want to remind those pessimists I referred to earlier,
such as hon Bell, that it was not enough for him just to say that the hon
Connie September need to check the facts. He actually did not move far
enough and this is not because he does not want to, but simply because he
knows that his provincial government in the Western Cape has failed
dismally by taking a decision not to implement the Land Use Planning
Ordinance Amendment Act (Cape). [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I want
to start off by first saying various thank-yous, because there is a whole
range of issues to raise and to which to respond.

I would like to start off by thanking the chairperson, Comrade Nathi
Nhleko, for the leadership that he has given the portfolio committee. I
would like to thank him because we have seen a debate today, from certain
members, that has clearly reflected an intention to study and understand
the implications of the transformation of the Public Service, understanding
that action for change and change for action is about the long haul.

I would also like to thank Prof Stan Sangweni, the chairperson of the
Public Service Commission, the deputy chairperson Mr Johnny Ernstzen and
other members of the Commission for the roles that they are playing as part
of an independent body to ensure that there is monitoring and oversight.
This team is clearly not going to be intimidated and will look more closely
at the complexities around representivity, the nature of service delivery,
the Batho Pele project and where it is at.

After all, Public Service and Administration and the transformation of the
state is about ensuring that there are better services for everyone. It is
about ensuring that we reach unserved and underserved areas. It is about
ensuring that we redress a past that we have fought against and about
providing a better life. In doing this, we need to ensure that we not only
commend those who are really working towards this change, but that we also
deal with those who are not contributing to change. I would like to
acknowledge the Cosatu delegation, led by Thulas Nxesi today, and other
union delegations. I am not quite sure who is leading them, but
nevertheless, I would like to thank them for being present in the gallery.

I raise this because we have had various irresponsible and unparliamentary
comments here today. We have heard comments from, amongst others, the hon
Mike Waters, who has made statements here that clearly reflect that he has
no intention of moving beyond anecdote or even demonstrating a semblance of
responsibility in how he addresses issues. [Interjections.] He, amongst
other things - and hon members heard him - said that corruption was
spreading like HIV/Aids. What kind of parliamentarian or politician would
say this? Mike Waters is clearly very young. Twenty-one years ago I formed
part of the active contingent of the ANC. Where was Mike Waters then? He
was probably a little blighter.

He has no understanding of the kind of change this country needs. He also
has no understanding of where we come from and he has very little
understanding of where we should be going. [Applause.] I raise this here
today, because we should understand that as we talk about change, and as we
put vision on the table, this vision needs to be followed up and taken
forward through implementation. It requires a particular machine. Some of
his hon colleagues are probably part of that machine and yet responsible
for spiking certain changes. [Applause.]

He had the audacity and the temerity to call senior managers party hacks.
What did they do with senior managers in the provincial metropole?
[Interjections.] They got rid of efficient people and placed others there.
They probably claim that some of those are efficient and effective, and we
hope so, because our people need to ensure that they have people who are
prepared for the long haul, people who are to effect action for change and
also willing to ensure that we do not root out members because they do not
carry a DA card, but that we look at what is required at this point for the
Public Service.

I would like to encourage hon members to go and look at the senior
management service. They should also look at what we are putting on the
table and issues of competency profiling. In the gallery today we have
members of the Public Service. These members are part of a contingent who
are trying to do their best. There is somebody called Mandy Smith who is up
there in the public gallery, who works quite hard. Yet she hears scurrilous
statements from individuals who do not care about the implications of
anecdote and generalisations. They use anecdote and make it a reality.

Let us get the hon Waters to put on the table the data that says corruption
is spreading like HIV/Aids. Let us see it. Let us not just hear it, because
I said earlier today that what we have is a disjuncture between perception
and reality. That is precisely why we are involved in the UN's programme to
actually reflect, in a real sense, on the extent of corruption within the
Public Service, against an awareness that it is a global problem. We are
not dealing with it to respond and feed personal needs. We are not here to
do feel-good things and hence, if members recall, I talked about two
issues. [Interjections.]

There are some members on my left-hand side, who, if they could listen
more, if they could listen to hear, would understand. But they actually
just do not care and I hope that the South African people will be able to
appreciate that change will never come from that quarter. [Applause.]
However, let me say to hon members that it is not about coming here and
defending a percentage point difference on representivity. If we are not
representative, let us say so - which is what we did today. Let us say we
need to work towards that change; let us reflect on what the complexities
are with service delivery; and let us state what the system's processes are
that we need to put in place to turn around the Public Service.

Let us not come here and attempt to sound witty and talk about ``that crowd
over there.'' It is exactly of what the hon Bell objected to when he said
he hoped other members would remember when they are his age. So, hon Bell
should start with the youth on his side. When the youth talk about the
types on this side, what does it reflect? Does it reflect a sense of a lack
of understanding? Does it still reflect the attitude of ``swart gevaar''
toward those of us who are in the executive? Does it reflect the fact that
he was never a democrat? He does not understand it. He does not know what
it means to be part of the force of progress. He merely sees our people as
cannon fodder; we are not cannon fodder. The South African people are not
cannon fodder and the South African people need to ensure that
transformation does and will take place and that they form part of this
process.

Let me go further. The hon Bell got a bit nervous. I was worried that we
would have a serious case of angina, but there are doctors in the House.
[Interjections.] He was reflecting:


  Minister, we hear that you are going to train public servants in the
  People's Republic of China. There is nothing to learn.

Good grief! Mr Bell should just open his mind and read. He does not need to
go to the People's Republic of China, he must read. And he must read about
the fact that the People's Republic of China has engaged in a massive
process of transformation. They are transforming the economy, and currently
they are in the process of building a socialist market economy and they are
currently in the fourth part of a 20-year period comprising of four five-
year plans. It was a process where they very clearly engaged in much
discussion to look at how they could transform that economy in order to
generate job creation. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, would you please give
the Minister a chance to reply.

The MINISTER: We need to look at how we can learn from other societies that
are involved in real transformation. In this instance, the slumbering
giants that actually matter in the global economy and global change are
saying: What lessons can we learn? We need to look at the lessons around
local government transformation in the People's Republic of China. We need
to look at how they got involved in enormous capacity-building programmes
to skill and re-skill public servants.

We say that because I raised it in my input. If they bothered to listen, if
they were not whinging and howling on my left-hand side, and if they were
not pre-occupied with themselves and their images - they should bring
mirrors to Parliament, to keep themselves occupied and silent - they would
have heard me when I said that we have identified areas where there are
strategic skills shortages and there is a need for intervention.

If there is one thing this Government is bold about, it is the vision that
is on the table. It is also bold about the interventions required to take
it forward and about acknowledging the difficulties of ensuring that this
machine is skilled to deal with the resourcing and provision of services
for the South African people, people who were underserved in the past.

There is no public servant who before 1994 knew how to service all South
Africans who could access public services, because nobody was focused on
servicing the whole. It was always fragmented and targeted in a stratified
manner. We said that this would change, and we are bold enough to make the
difference. We do not squeak, we do not crow, we do not sit here and cross
our hands. I would like to make reference to a Spanish proverb that goes:
It is not the same to talk about bulls than to be in the bull ring.

This crowd has been talking about bulls all the time. [Interjections.] I
want to go further and make another reference. There is a Chinese proverb,
even though it is uncomfortable for many. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER: They say: If you want to plan for a day, then plant rice. If
you want to plan for ten years, plant trees. If you want to plan for a life-
time, build men - in the nonsexist sense. I think this is what we are
about. We are not just about planting rice.

Now I will conclude with a Pedi quote. It is a little bit difficult, but I
will try: Ditau tsa hloka seboka di sitwa ke nare e hlotsa [If a pride of
lions is not united they will never catch the prey.] It says that a group
of lions without proper consensus will fail to catch even a limping
buffalo, and this is what we are about. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

I would like to invite all the people on the gallery to join us in the Old
Assembly afterwards for a meal and some music, and that also goes for
members of the House who will not have heartburn. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:23.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced by the Minister of Trade and
         Industry in the National Assembly on 17 May 2001 and referred to
         the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
         Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Patents Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2001] (National Assembly -
              sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 22249 of 24
              April 2001.]


         The Bill has also been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry of the National Assembly.

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 17 May 2001 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)     Road Accident Fund Amendment Bill [B 21 - 2001] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75).


         (ii)    Financial Institutions (Protection of Funds) Bill [B 23 -
                  2001] (National Assembly - sec 75).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:
1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology on the Cultural Laws Amendment Bill [B 45 - 2000] (National
     Assembly - sec 75), dated 15 May 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology,
         having considered the subject of the Cultural Laws Amendment Bill
         [B 45 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 45A - 2000].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology on the Cultural Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 46 - 2000]
     (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 11 May 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology,
         having considered the subject of the Cultural Laws Second
         Amendment Bill [B 46 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76),
         referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
         section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 46A - 2000].


         The Committee recommends that the House request the Department of
         Arts, Culture, Science and Technology to investigate whether or
         not legislation is necessary -


         (a)     on essential national standards in respect of the national
              estate;


         (b)     to prevent the permanent removal of objects or collections
              of artistic, historical and scientific value from the
              Republic;


         (c)     to facilitate the recovery of objects and collections
              contemplated in (b) which were removed from the Republic; and


         (d)     to empower Parliament to oversee (b) and (c).


         The Committee further recommends that the Department be requested
         to report on the above within 14 days of the adoption of this
         Report by the House.


     Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the Export
     Credit and Foreign Investments Re-insurance Amendment Bill [B 19 -
     2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 16 May 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the subject of the Export Credit and Foreign Investments Re-
         insurance Amendment Bill [B 19 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
         75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 19A -
         2001].

