---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 March 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-03-08
---

THURSDAY, 8 MARCH 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms N E HANGANA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the court challenge to our Medicines and Related Substances
           Control Amendment Act of 1997 and the public debate surrounding
           it have drawn a flurry of statements by pharmaceutical companies
           about the prices of antiretroviral drugs used for the management
           of HIV/Aids; and


       (b)  the recent media statement by United States multinational Merck
           that it is prepared to sell two of its antiretroviral drugs to
           South Africa at a fraction of its US price has not been
           communicated to a relevant government office;


  (2) calls on Merck and other drug companies to make any offer on the
       prices of drugs directly to the Ministry of Health as the relevant
       government office, and not seek to negotiate through the media and on
       the basis of press releases;


  (3) expresses the need for the country to have effective legislation to
       ensure sustainable access to affordable medicines, and not rely on
       aid programmes and charitable gestures by drug companies; and


  (4) supports our Government and the Minister of Health in an effort to
       fulfil our constitutional obligations ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  recent media releases quoting the director of SA National Parks
           as saying that the Kruger National Park is R36 million in the
           red;


       (b)  the threat posed by this situation to the future status and
           existence of all our country's national parks; and


       (c)  the warnings issued by the DP as far back as October 1999 that
           unless the situation was addressed as a matter of urgency, the
           long-term survival of the entire organisation would be at stake;
           and


  (2) calls upon the responsible Minister to deal with this matter with the
       urgency it rightly deserves.

Mr G B BHENGU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  there is imminent land invasion in Mpumalanga, as threatened by
           farm tenants of Wakkerstroom, Ermelo, Piet Retief and Volksrust,
           resulting from the perceived protection of white farmers over
           tenants; and


       (b)  countrywide, there are cases of severe abuse of farm tenants by
           farmers who hide behind the Government's rural protection plan;
           and
  (2) calls upon the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs to secure
       alternative arrangements to protect farm tenants from such abuse.

Mr S T BELOT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that an explosion occurred at one of Denel's divisions, located
       in Philippi, resulting in the death of one person and six employees
       sustaining injury;


  (2) expresses its condolences and deepest sympathy to the family of the
       deceased, Regina Robinson;


  (3) wishes the injured a speedy recovery; and


  (4) welcomes Minister J T Radebe's statement that the incident will be
       investigated.

[Applause.]
Dr S J GOUS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Minister of Health has given written notice that the
       South African Medicines and Medical Devices Regulatory Authority Act,
       Act 132 of 1998, which was supposed to replace Act 90 of 1997, the so-
       called cheap medicines Act, will be repealed this year;


  (2) welcomes this move, as the New NP already predicted in 1998 that this
       was bad legislation and bad governance, and was, at the time, called
       ``a dog's breakfast";


  (3) congratulates the Minister of Health on her eventual insight into the
       glaring problems of this legislation, and notes that I find it
       difficult not to say: ``I told you so'';


  (4) further notes that this is an example of the former Minister of
       Health's bulldozed legislation that even led to the disgrace of
       Government having to take itself to court; and


  (5) expresses concern that this kind of legislation reflects badly on
       Parliament and is a waste of taxpayers' money, and would also be seen
       as an invitation to be challenged in court.

[Applause.]

Prof L M MBADI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the HIV/Aids policy launched by Wits University yesterday,
       and applauds the university for recognising the immensity of this
       challenge that all of South Africa must face;


  (2) acknowledges that it is especially appropriate for a university to
       take such a step since the youth are the primary infection group, and
       HIV/Aids education and awareness at this level can still make a
       difference and prevent the death of thousands of young people; and


  (3) urges all other education institutions, at tertiary and school level,
       to follow the excellent example set by Wits, and to make HIV/Aids
       education and awareness one of the central themes of their
       programmes.

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  today marks International Women's Day; and


       (b)  International Women's Day is the story of ordinary women who
           have played an extraordinary role in the struggle for equality,
           justice, peace and development;


  (2) believes that International Women's Day is a time to reflect on the
       progress made by the national Government, and the people of the world
       in general, in promoting women's rights and improving the quality of
       life and status of women;


  (3) commends the South African democratic Government for the progress it
       has made in improving the quality and status of women; and


  (4) urges the Government, in partnership with the people, to work towards
       overcoming the obstacles which hinder the complete social and
       economic emancipation of women.

[Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the judgment given recently in The Hague by the United Nations
       International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, in which
       three Bosnian Serbs were sentenced to between 12 and 28 years in
       prison for using rape and sexual slavery as a weapon of war against
       predominantly Muslim women during the 1992-1995 conflict in the
       former Yugoslavia; and


  (2) on this International Women's Day, particularly welcomes the judgment
       in that, for the first time in legal history, mass rape has been
       judged to be a war crime and a crime against humanity by the
       International Criminal Tribunal.

[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die AEB sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) sy misnoeë uitspreek oor die uitlating van die Minister van Onderwys
       dat hy self teen die einde van die jaar sal besluit hoe die land se
       tersiêre landskap sal lyk, aangesien raadplegingsprosesse te lank
       sloer;


  (2) erken dat hierdie uitspraak van die Minister strydig is met die
       beginsel van raadpleging en deelnemende bestuur, waarop dikwels so
       hoog geroem word;


  (3) erken dat hierdie uitspraak 'n weerspieëling is van die
       sentralistiese en totalitaristiese aard van die ANC, en 'n totale
       miskenning van die soewereiniteit in eie kring van
       gemeenskapsinstellings en instrumente van die burgerlike samelewing;


  (4) meen die Minister se dreigement van raskwotas vir tersiêre inrigtings
       ten opsigte van studente, maar veral personeel, daartoe kan lei dat
       ons tersiêre inrigtings net so verlam kan word as wat die staatsdiens
       verlam is deur ondeurdagte regstellende aksie;


  (5) meen die Minister se uitspraak dat instellings nie verteenwoordig sal
       word in taakspanne wat die tersiêre landskap in elke provinsie sal
       ondersoek nie en ook nie ten sy besluite kan appelleer nie, trotse
       tersiêre inrigtings tot die status van kindergartens degradeer; en


  (6) die Minister versoek om eerder te konsentreer op sy primêre taak,
       naamlik om die skoolstelsel sodanig te verbeter dat 'n groter getal
       studente van gehalte by universiteite en technikons kan inskryf.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the AEB:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its displeasure at the remark by the Minister of Education
       that he himself will decide by the end of the year what the country's
       tertiary landscape is going to look like, because consultation
       processes have been dragging on for too long;


  (2) concedes that this remark by the Minister is at variance with the
       principles of consultation and participatory management, which are
       often lauded so highly;
  (3) concedes that this remark is a reflection of the centralist and
       totalitarian nature of the ANC, and a total denial of the sovereignty
       within their own circles of public institutions and instruments of
       civil society;


  (4) is of the opinion that the Minister's threat as regards racial quotas
       in respect of students, but in particular of staff, at tertiary
       institutions could lead to our tertiary institutions becoming just as
       paralysed as the public service as a result of affirmative action;


  (5) is of the opinion that the Minister's statement that institutions
       will not be represented in task teams that are going to investigate
       the tertiary landscape of each province, and that they will not be
       able to appeal against his decisions either, degrades proud tertiary
       institutions to the status of kindergartens; and


  (6) requests the Minister rather to concentrate on his primary task,
       namely that of improving the school system in such a way that a
       larger number of students of quality can enrol at universities and
       technikons.]

Ms B O DLAMINI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  following the decision taken in Beijing in September 1995, South
           Africa is hosting a World Court of Women against War for Peace
           in Cape Town;


       (b)  the court provides a suitable platform for women to express and
           share their experiences in respect of wars of this past century
           and their effect on women and children; and


       (c)  the court is international in character and is distinctively
           African with the theme ``Unsung Heroines of Apartheid"; and
  (2) congratulates the women's movement on its efforts to raise the social
       consciousness about the plight of women the world over.

[Applause.]

Mnr T D LEE: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) gelukwensinge oordra aan Ian Syster, 'n onbekende atleet, en sy
       afrigter, George Benjamin, wat verlede Sondag die nasionale marathon
       kampioenskappe gewen het;


  (2) bewondering uitspreek vir Ian Syster se deursettingsvermoë om, ten
       spyte van die feit dat hy werkloos is, 21 uur per bus te reis en
       sonder enige finansiële bystand die kampioenskappe te wen; en


  (3) 'n beroep doen op Atletiek SA om Ian Syster en andere soos hy te help
       om hulle volle potensiaal te ontwikkel wat nie net tot voordeel van
       atletiek sal wees nie maar ook tot voordeel van Suid-Afrika in die
       algemeen.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates Ian Syster, an unknown runner, and his trainer, George
       Benjamin, who won the national marathon championship last Sunday;


  (2) expresses its admiration for Ian Syster's perseverance, despite the
       fact that he is unemployed, to travel for 21 hours by bus and win the
       championship without any financial assistance; and


  (3) calls on Athletics SA to help Ian Syster and others like him to
       develop their full potential, which would not only be to the benefit
       of athletics, but also to the benefit of South Africa as a whole.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the moral decay that is affecting our society in general and
       our youth in particular;


  (2) acknowledges the role which is being played by the Deputy President
       in his crusade for moral regeneration, the President of the IFP in
       his crusade for the revolution of goodwill and the Minister of
       Education in his efforts to introduce the teaching of values in
       schools;


  (3) is accordingly dismayed at the indiscriminate and brazen use of foul
       and vulgar language in the Yizo Yizo programme on TV, which goes
       against traditional and cultural sensitivities, delicacies and norms;
       and


  (4) appeals to the Minister of Education to have the programme either
       shifted to a time slot where the youth are not exposed to the
       vulgarities streaming from Yizo Yizo or to have the programme removed
       altogether.

Ms N D NGCENGWANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  women are the most adversely affected by the scourge of
           HIV/Aids;


       (b)  sexual abuse of women increases the risk factor for women by
           exposing them to unprotected sex; and


       (c)  unequal power relations between men and women limit the ability
           of women to insist on safe sex; and


  (2) calls upon all men and women to adhere to safe sex and get actively
       involved in the campaign against HIV/Aids.

[Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the statistics of the Salt River and Tygerberg morgues have
           revealed that murder has increased rapidly in 1999, compared to
           the previous 5 years;


       (b)  this is proof of the fact that violent crimes are increasing and
           not declining, as President Mbeki wants us to believe;


       (c)  this confirms that the ANC Government and Minister Steve Tshwete
           are losing control of their efforts to curb crime; and


       (d)  this indicates that the Government can no longer hide behind the
           moratorium on crime statistics to prevent the public from
           knowing that they have failed in their duty to protect South
           Africa's citizens; and


  (2) calls on -


       (a)  the Government not only to lift the moratorium, but to start
           protecting its citizens; and


       (b)  Minister Steve Tshwete to be less involved in diplomatic faux
           pas and to direct his attention to this core business.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with dismay the comments made by Minister Essop Pahad in the
           NCOP, to the effect that opposition parties and certain members
           of the media are exploiting the negative and ignoring the
           positive, to the detriment of the country; and


       (b)  previous occasions on which Minister Pahad accused the media of
           undermining the country, such as his recent comments at an
           Independent Group function;


  (2) acknowledges the wisdom of former President Mandela who has recently
       said that he accepts the patriotic commitment of opposition parties,
       and furthermore, referred to the ANC's current response to criticism,
       stating:


         We (the ANC) must welcome differences of opinion. One of the most
         effective weapons in dealing with different opinions is tolerance
         even if a prominent individual is specifically identified and
         becomes a target for criticism ...


  (3) urges Minister Pahad to realise that his continued attacks on the
       media and opposition parties demonstrate a serious lack of tolerance,
       ignore all the positive feedback from these sectors, and create
       exactly the type of negative media publicity that he accuses others
       of.

[Applause.]

                        CONGRATULATIONS TO TIM MODISE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M F CASSIM: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) learns with gratification that radio presenter Tim Modise has been
       named as the first-ever recipient of the annual Justice and
       Reconciliation Award;


  (2) notes that this unique journalist has played a major role in allowing
       South Africans to explore life at the coalface of the new democratic
       society, in particular since he has allowed diverse and conflicting
       views to be interrogated freely and openly on his programme, the Tim
       Modise Show on SAfm;


  (3) acknowledges that his endeavours and achievements provide South
       Africans with inspiration to continue, within our diversity, to
       search for a gathering and growing goodwill, reconciliation and
       unity; and


  (4) acclaims Tim Modise's nomination and expresses the hope that other
       South Africans will feel inspired through this recognition to
       contribute to a climate in which we easily find one another and,
       therefore, have a greater understanding of one another.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I cannot believe that the Deputy
Chairperson of Committees does not know the Rules or conventions. There is
an arrangement that these notices are circulated to all the parties by
10:00 and that generally they are moved by the Chief Whips or on behalf of
the Chief Whips. I am surprised that Mr Cassim does not know that. But, of
course, he appears very often on that radio programme, so he is very
grateful. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Mr Gibson, let us have the motion first and then I
will recognise your point.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, we really do not object to the motion, but
we do object to the procedure. Could it, therefore, be treated as a notice
of motion?

The SPEAKER: We will discuss the procedure, because I did not know that we
were not entertaining motions by members of the House. Certainly, if there
is some practice or private arrangement, we would have to discuss it.

Agreed to.

                          INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that -


       (a)  today is International Women's Day; and


       (b)  women form the foundation on which our society is built; and


  (2) therefore -


       (a)  congratulates all women in South Africa on this day;


       (b)  assures them of its regard and respect; and


       (c)  expresses its continued commitment to making real progress in
           achieving equality between women and men.

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, the ANC supports the motion to celebrate 8
March 2001 as International Women's Day.

Agreed to.

                 WORLD COURT OF WOMEN AGAINST WAR FOR PEACE
                             (Draft Resolution)

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the women of the South African Parliament welcome the
       World Court of Women Against War for Peace to Cape Town and
       congratulate its representatives;


  (2) notes that women representatives from various countries around the
       world are in South Africa for presentations and contributions on the
       status of women in their countries;


  (3) further notes that the women of the South African Parliament welcome
       their stay and express the hope that their mission will be
       successful, through working together, in bringing about the
       recognition of women in all sectors of society; and


  (4) wishes them bon voyage until they meet again.

Agreed to.

                PARLIAMENTARY FOLLOW-UP TO BEIJING PLUS FIVE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The SPEAKER: Order! Before calling on the first speaker, I would like to
indicate that this is a day on which the focus should be on the conditions
and status of women and for all of us to consider how we address them.

It would be regrettable if the significant minority of our population who
are men decided to sit back today and let the women be the only ones who
speak. [Interjections.] I know they will take the opportunity to articulate
their concerns and involvement in the national issues.

Ms P GOVENDER: Madam Speaker, friends and comrades, today's debate on the
Parliamentary Follow-Up to Beijing Plus Five takes place on International
Women's Day. This debate is a tribute to the courage, love and power of
women of the global South from over 60 countries who are today testifying
in Khayelitsha in the World Court of Women against War for Peace.
For the last two days and this morning we have listened to the stories
about the wars, militarisation, armed conflict, genocide, trafficking in
women and children, the wars of globalisation and poverty, nation states
and nationalism, refugees, racism and exclusion; the war against indigenous
people and their knowledge, and the patriarchy that establishes hierarchies
and then defines and excludes others, male and female. Women have talked
about how to end all these wars of poverty and violence, hatred and fear,
how to build new notions of power based on love, and how to reshape our
economies and our budgets so that they reflect our values and our
priorities, as well as how to build justice and peace, and how to heal all
the people of our planet.

The message of the women of the world court and the message of the
countless women who put their voices into the Beijing Platform of Action
and the Beijing Plus Five, is clear: Our planet and all its people will not
survive unless we fundamentally transform our world so that we, firstly,
share, respect and equitably redistribute the resources of our planet to
end the growing and horrific levels of poverty caused by political,
economic and social policies propagated by multinational corporations, the
WTO, the World Bank and the IMF, all of which put profit before people,
greed before love and which justify privilege on the basis of race, class,
caste, gender etc.

Secondly, build peace through demilitarising our countries, our societies
and our communities in the context where the self-perpetuating arms
industry which defies logic continues to grow at a frightening pace.
Thirdly, begin to revalue and respect ourselves and each other, so that we
use our collective power to end the violence of battery, filicide, rape,
incest, witch burning and more, to act against any form of injustice
anywhere. The poverty, the wars, the violence against women and the
violence against children and the poor are all interlinked. They stem from
a world view based on hatred, on power and on fear. We have to question:
Whose world view underpins our decisions and our actions and in whose
interest?

I would like to quote from the Beijing Plus Five document itself in
relation to what is happening globally. The globalisation process, and I
quote:


  ... has led to more open trade and financial flows, privatisation of
  state-owned enterprises and, in many cases, lower public spending,
  particularly on social services. These changes have also adversely
  impacted on the lives of women and have increased inequality. They have
  led to wider economic disparities, the feminisation of poverty, increased
  gender inequality and, too often, including deteriorating working
  conditions in an unsafe working environment, especially in the informal
  economy and rural areas.


  The application of certain economic policies have had a negative impact
  such that increases in women's employment have often not been matched by
  improvement in wages, promotions and working conditions.

The dominant world view interprets women's biology in ways which ensure
that our worst experiences are often common across all the divides of race,
class, caste, culture, religion, urban, rural, location, etc. For example,
in the United States, the richest country in the world, one in five
children live in poverty, and four women die every day as a result of
domestic violence.

In 1996 - ie post-Beijing - our Government made inspired and critical
commitments in our country of which it can be proud. It established one of
the best constitutional and legislative frameworks in the world for gender
equality, which this year will address legislation pertaining to sexual
offences and inheritance under customary law as part of that framework. The
challenge to ensure that these are not reduced to paper rights is an
ongoing one and involves all sectors of our society - judges, magistrates,
police, teachers, priests, traditional leaders, etc.

I am sure my colleagues will elaborate on these laws during this debate.
Our Cabinet, in its commitments to the Beijing Platform of Action in 1996,
committed itself to ``reallocating military expenditure to support women's
empowerment''.

In the budget commitment in 1996 which was a response to the Beijing
Platform for Action, Government committed itself to, and I quote:


  ... provide information on the impact of expenditures disaggregated by
  gender; the implementation of targets and indicators of gender equality
  and equity in spending and the development of a performance review
  mechanism to evaluate progress and report to Parliament; and conduct a
  study to contribute to developing a method to include women's unpaid
  labour within the GDP.

In the 1998-99 Budget Review, the national expenditure survey, South Africa
began an exercise for which it has become internationally renowned, and
that is engendering the budget. This exercise reflected significant changes
in the Budget Review of 1999. The Government committed itself to
entrenching this analysis in the years to come. This week we received the
National Gender Policy from the Office on the Status of Women, on which we
will be holding hearings as the Committee on the Quality of Life and Status
of Women getting feedback.

At the end of and in the course of this debate today, and on the basis of
what Madam Speaker has already said in terms of International Women's Day
and what the speakers who have spoken on the motions without notice have
said, we will be guided by what it is that we need to do to improve the
quality of life and status of the poorest women in our country and to
ensure that we break the cycle of poverty and violence, and end the
increase of HIV/Aids among women.

I want to end by paying a very brief tribute to the women of our country
and the women of the world on International Women's Day. Before I do that,
I would like to say that the 12 suggestions that are included in the
parliamentary follow-up to Beijing Plus Five will be elaborated on in the
course of the debate today by all the different members that will be
speaking on the debate.

In honour of all the women that are meeting today in Khayelitsha, I want to
say: The colonisers sailing around the world to Africa, Asia, America,
Australia found people who honoured, in worship, the earth and all its
creatures - the sky, the stars, the moon, each other. The knowledge that
women and other colonised people of the world have had of the earth, of
dance, of song, of creativity, of healing and of nurturing wildness has
been spat upon and burnt at the stake.

A woman's ability to create has become a power to be feared and so is used
to control her. Women have been bought and beaten, and taught to obey the
father, the priest, the slave owner, the employer, the husband, the doctor.
Women themselves have learnt to uphold the patriarchy, to build the walls
and imprison their sisters and their daughters, to teach them their
limitations, to clip their wings and their clitorises.

The time has come to light up the parts of ourselves we have kept hidden in
fear, and shame and ambiguity, to begin to realise the knowledge, beyond a
hundred thousand colonisations, to see the fear that drove religious wars,
witchhunts, genocide, slavery, Nazism, apartheid. We look to Minister
Geraldine Frazer-Moleketi to speak with the courage that has won her the
respect of the women of our country when she responds today to how
Government is going to effect the commitments it has made in the years to
come. [Applause]

Mrs B N SONO: Madam Speaker, as we honour and pay tribute to the women of
the world, we in Africa, usually when we celebrate, break into song and we
say: Igama lamakhosikazi malibongwe! [Praise the name of women!]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mrs B N SONO: South Africa has witnessed dramatic changes in the past seven
years through the adoption of one of the most progressive constitutions in
the world, the enactment of various pieces of legislation aimed at
entrenching women's rights, the pressures of globalisation, and the
pressure to transform, not only the economy, but also attitudes and
perceptions about each other.

South Africa is a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination Against Women. This convention was intended as a
weapon for women to fight discrimination, sexual harassment and gender
violence. The convention demands of signatory states that they take
appropriate measures to ensure women's civil, political, economic and
cultural rights. It also demands that they take action to eliminate
discrimination in the fields of education, employment, health and other
areas of economic and social life. When the convention was adopted in 1979,
it was described as the most comprehensive, legally binding treaty on
women's human rights in existence. But bold aims are easy enough, getting
things done is the hard bit.

In reality ordinary women here still face the same discrimination as their
sisters in Africa. They often lack the knowledge about their rights or how
to access them. In South Africa women's rights are probably comparable to
any First World country. The irony is how one makes paper rights equal
rights. Little has changed for women in South Africa because budgetary
realities have not matched the declarations of the convention. Allocations
to sectors which might make a real difference to the lives of South African
women have been poor, and the attention of Parliament has been on issues
which have made little difference to women.

One of the conclusions drawn in the intense global debate around whether
the new millennium belongs to Africa is that this continent can only claim
its rightful place in the global economy when women have taken their
rightful place in the African economy. Giving women higher status in our
society requires genuine commitment and money, even if this means siphoning
off funds from potential Defence Force procurements. For example, the
Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs has promised that men and women
will have equal access to all the benefits under its integrated programme
of land distribution and agricultural development, and that women will be
actively encouraged to apply.

The Government's land reform programme has failed to improve the status of
rural women. Launched in 1994, its aims are to bring equal rights to women
in rural communities, but the recent study of the Government-sponsored
share equity schemes between white commercial farmers and state subsidised
black farmworkers indicates that there remains a wide gap between the aims
of the new laws and the application on the ground, a failure at policy
implementation level.

Regarding violence against women, we have enacted the Domestic Violence
Act, but criminal charges of assault with intent to do grievous bodily
harm, sexual assault, rape and marital rape are all available to the abused
individual. The problem, however, is the strict onus of proof which must be
met in order to secure a successful conviction, which is problematic in
most domestic violence cases. Thus, a comprehensive review of the criminal
law in relation to sexual violence is required.

Regarding women's shelters, current legislation offers no provision for
victim support. Thus, the few women's shelters that do exist are not state
funded. They are an essential provision for women and children escaping
from abuse and violence. This brings us to the Lotto, which is a year-old
and has millions of rands to assist poor citizens, both male and female
and, yet, no distribution has taken place. Could it be that the charities
that qualify for help are not transformed or engendered enough?

Cedaw provides that the state must make sure that there is economic
equality between women and men. South Africa also forms part of a
Commonwealth pilot project to engender macroeconomic policies within member
countries. The areas focused on to date are the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework and the Budget Review. The Department of Finance has committed
itself to the development of methods of including women's unpaid labour in
the GDP but, to date, there is inertia on that front.

Experience has also shown that trade and investment have been effective
means of bringing about economic progress worldwide. The USA is determined
that women should fully benefit from its new African Growth and Opportunity
Act, Agoa. What programmes are in place from our Government to ensure that
women as employees, managers or owners of export businesses, or suppliers
to export companies, are aware of Agoa and are poised to take advantage of
its benefits?

Agoa should help the many women employed in industries that have
traditionally relied on female labour, such as the textile industry. But
does this industry have access, both technical and financial, to assistance
from Government so that it can rise to the occasion? [Applause.]

Nkk L R MBUYAZI: Somlomo neNdlu ehloniphekile, ngifisa ukubonga ukuthi
Somlomo ulethe lolu daba olunjengalolu namhlanje lapha sikhuluma khona
ngezindaba ezithinta abesifazane, ezazidingidwa le komkhulu eBeijing.
Ngifisa ukuqala ngokukubonga wena Somlomo njengomuntu wesifazane, ngibonge
nesekela lakho. Ngalawo mazwi ngithi ukuba ngiyakwazi ukuzenzela, ngabe
ngithi asibashayele ihlombe laba besifazane abasiphathele leNdlu.
[Ihlombe.] Ngizothi mina: kuth'angigiye bese nina nithi: Giya.
[Ubuwelewele.] Kuth'angigiye!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILE: Giya! [Ubuwelewele.] [Ihlombe.]

Nkk L R MBUYAZI: Namhlanjena-ke wusuku olukhulu. Sithi: Happy Women's Day!
Sithi halala komama bonke emakhaya. Siyahalalisa lapho kuzo zonke izigodi.
Ezifundazweni zonke sithi: Halala! [Ubuwelewele.] Nakuyo yonke i-Afrika
siyahalalisa, ngoba nakhona kudingidwa zona lezi zindaba. Sihalalisa kwi-
Afrika nasezweni lonke. [Ubuwelewele.]

Izinjongo-ke ze-Beijing zinhle kakhulu ngakho siyazeseka. Kodwa-ke
kuneminye imibuzo edinga ukuphenduleka. Uma ngikhumbula kahle, ngenkathi
kuzoyiwa e-Beijing, sabuza kuyona le Ndlu ukuthi konje ngabe zithathisiwe
yini izinqumo kubantu. Phela umbiko okwakuyiwa ngawo eBeijing sasiwufuna
ukuthi udlule kule Ndlu ukuze sizwe nathi, sithake sifake izinongo, sibone
ukuthi kukhona okuqhamuka ngasezindaweni lapho sisuka khona. Ngakho-ke
umbuzo lowo usalokhu ufuna ukuphenduleka, ngoba ngithi kwaze kwahanjwa
singazange sawubona umbiko. Uma ngingaphosisi, ngithi komunye umhlangano
esasithunywe kuwo nelungu elihloniphekile, uNqodi, kwi-Commission for
Sustainable Development, safike sahlangana nokuthi umbiko waseNingizimu
Afrika wawungakafiki ekubeni isikhathi sasivele sesihambile kwangaleso
sikhathi.

Sisho ukuthi-ke noma kukuhle kangaka, zizinhle kangaka nezincomo, siyadinga
ukuthi sibone ukuthi kusukwa kanjani laphaya phansi kuya kohulumeni
bezindawo, kwabezifundazwe nakokazwelonke kuze kuyodlulela ezingeni lamazwe
aseduze kwethu; kuhambe kanjalo ngezigaba zonke. Ngisho ngoba abantu phansi
bayabuza ukuthi eBeijing laphayana kukhulunywa ndaba zini. Basuke bengazi
phela ukuthi okunye sisuke sesikunqume amakhanda khona lapha, mhlawumbe
kuze kube khona nemiThetho eshaywayo.

Ngifisa ukubonga-ke uHulumeni kokuthile asekwenzile. Kukhona imiThetho
emihle kakhulu enqunyiweyo esiphumelelisiwe yileli Phalamende ephathelene
nazo izindaba zase-Beijing. Mhlawumbe kokunye umuntu angathintathinta nje
laphaya imiThetho emihle eqhamuka emNyangweni wezemiSebenzi ethinta abantu
besifazane ekusebenzeni kwabo. Leyo miThetho ngifisa ukuyibala yize
ngingeke ngikwazi ukuyibala yonke. Umnyango engingawubalanga ngicela ukuthi
ungasho ukuthi ngiwushiye ngoba unjani kodwa ngibala leyo efike emqondweni
wami njengamanje. Yingakho nje ngiqala ngomNyango wezemiSebenzi ngoba
kukhona imiThetho abayishayile esiza abantu besifazane, enconywayo ukuthi
sekunezinto ezinhle ezenzekayo ngenxa yayo. Leyo yimiThetho efana ne-
Employment Equity Act, iBasic Conditions of Employment Act kanye ne-Labour
Relations Act.

Ngiyafisa futhi ukuncoma laphaya kwi-Customary Marriages Act ephethwe
ngumNyango wezaseKhaya. Abantu bakithi kade benezinkinga ngalolu hlobo
lomshado. Namanje kusafuneka ukuthi kulungiswe. Ziningi izinto okufuneka
zilungiswe. Kufanele kuyolungiswa phansi ukuthi bazi ukuthi lomThetho
uzosebenza kanjani, ngoba abakazi ngempela ukuthi uzosebenza kanjani.
Ngakho-ke i-Customary Marriages Act kuyadingeka ukuthi thina sonke
abesifazane siyazi ukuze sichazele esibamele ePhalamende ukuthi uzosebenza
kanjani lomThetho. Baningi abantu abahlukumezekile ngezomshado kanti futhi
laphaya emNyangweni wezobuLungiswa kukhon izindaba eziphathelene ne-
Maintenance Act okudinga ukuthi abantu baziqonde kahle.

Udadewethu uzothinta ngezinto eziningi zase-Beijing, mina bengifuna
ukuqondisa izinto ezithize nje kulolo daba. Ngithi-ke kuhle lezi zinto
eziqhamuka e-Beijing zinikezwe isabelo semali ngoba oNgqongqoshe bethu
bayathanda ukuthi zisetshenzwe laphaya phansi; kodwa izimali ziyadingeka-ke
ukuze lezi zinto zixhaseke. Okunye esifisa ukuthi kwenzeke ngukuthi
njengoba bese ngishilo, ngukuthi kuthathiswe phansi kubantu yonke into
ezokwenzeka. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Madam Speaker and honourable House, I would like to thank
Madam speaker for bringing the discussion on women's issues before the
House. Issues regarding women were discussed in Beijing. Firstly, I would
to thank you, Madam Speaker, as a woman, and your Deputy. If I had power I
would have said let us applaud these women who chair debates in this House.
[Applause.] I am going to say: ``I feel like I want to perform a war
song''. You will respond by saying: ``Perform!'' [Interjections.] I feel
like I want to perform!

HON MEMBERS: Perform! [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Today is a big day. We say happy Women's Day! We say
congratulations to all women at home. We congratulate women in all places.
In all our provinces we say: Congratulations! [Interjections.] We
congratulate the whole of Africa because women's issues are discussed even
on this continent. We congratulate Africa and the rest of the world.
[Interjections.]

The aims of the Beijing conference were very good and I support them.
However, there are questions that still need to be answered. Before people
from this Parliament went to Beijing, we asked this House if decisions were
taken from the public. We wanted the message that would be taken to Beijing
to be discussed by this House first so that we would hear it and then
improve on it. We wanted to ensure that it included things that are
happening in the places where we come from. Therefore, that question still
needs to be answered, because people went with a message we did not know.
If I am not mistaken, in one of the meetings of the Commission for
Sustainable Development which the hon Nqodi and I attended, we found that
the South African message had still not been delivered, yet it was already
late at the time.

What we are saying is that although the message was so good, as were the
recommendations, in future we will need to see how it starts at grass-roots
level to municipal, provincial and national levels. And also how it
continues from there to our neighbouring countries at all stages. I am
saying this because people ask what sorts of issues were discussed in
Beijing. They do not know that some of the things are first discussed here,
and sometimes legislation is drafted as a result of those discussions.

I would like to thank the Government for some of the things that it has
done so far. There are Acts that have been passed by this Parliament
concerning the issues that were discussed in Beijing. I would like to quote
the Act that comes from the Department of Labour and that affects women in
the workplace. I would like to mention some of those Acts because I will
not be able to mention all of them. If there is any department that I do
not mention, it should not ask why I did not mention it. I will mention
only those that are in my memory right now. That is why I will start with
the Department of Labour. It is because this department has passed some
acts that are now helping women. These Acts are appreciated for the good
things they are doing. I am talking about Acts like the Employment Equity
Act, the Basic Conditions of Employment Act and the Labour Relations Act.

I also want to express my appreciation of the Customary Marriages Act that
is administered by the Department of Home Affairs. Our people have had
problems with this type of marriage. Today it still needs to be rectified.
There are many things in it that need to be rectified. Firstly, the
rectification should be done at grass-roots level. People should be told
how this Act will work. Therefore, we women in Parliament have a task to
inform our constituencies how this Act will work. Many people are
victimised by their types of marriage. In the Department of Justice, there
are issues concerning the Maintenance Act of which people should have a
clear understanding.

My sister will touch on many things that relate to the Beijing conference.
I was just correcting a few things surrounding this issue. I would like to
say that a budget should be allocated so as to implement these things that
were raised in Beijing. Our Ministers would like to see them being
implemented. Money is needed to sponsor these things. Another thing, I
would like to see Parliament consulting with the public first before we
make whatever endeavour.]

A way forward is to strengthen women's economic capacities and commercial
networks, and to adopt policies that support business organisations and co-
operatives in order to provide service to women entrepreneurs in rural and
urban areas. We should also have support programmes that enhance the self-
reliance of special groups of women such as young women, women with
disabilities, elderly women and women belonging to racial and ethnic
minorities. We should support the economic activities for indigenous women,
taking into account their traditional knowledge so as to improve their
situation and development. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, you will be relieved to hear that I am not
going to join in the singing and dancing, because I am not talented enough.
[Interjections.] But I do want to say that it is a great pleasure to be
part of such a joyous debate on this International Women's Day. I think it
is appropriate that we focus on South Africa's international obligations as
far as the promotion of the status, interests and benefits for women are
concerned.

As a country we have subscribed to all the international instruments which
directly relate to women. One of these instruments is, for the current
decade, a living instrument which is intended to become part of women's
lives all over the world and which is intended to place obligations on
governments internationally ...

The SPEAKER: Order! Mr Manie, are you rising on a point of order?

Mr M S MANIE: Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether the hon member is
prepared to take a question? Please say yes.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I have very little time - maybe if I get to
the end of my speech.

It is intended to place obligations on governments internationally to
improve women's lives, and the United Nations is empowered and able to
monitor this improvement, if any. The instrument that I am talking about is
the Beijing Platform of Action which was adopted by South Africa, along
with the international community, at the fourth UN Conference on Women in
Beijing in September 1995, of which I was honoured to be a part.

We are now just over halfway into the decade. South Africa has delivered
its first progress report, prepared early in the year 2000, at the Beijing
Plus Five meeting in New York, last June. It is encouraging that the United
Nations is keeping such a close eye on what is going on in relation to the
platform of action in all the subscribing countries. Arising from the June
meeting were 12 suggestions for parliamentary follow-up, which Madam
Speaker has kindly circulated and asked us to address in this debate.

In last June's progress report we gave ourselves a fairly glowing review,
some of which is completely justified, and some less so. This report, it is
true, was, as usual, hastily put together, because Government preparations
for it started late, rather characteristically. It was, sadly, too late to
be integrated into the central United Nations document. It was finalised
only a week before the departure of our delegation and was certainly not
presented by the executive to Parliament before it was submitted to the
United Nations. The report also contains the following comment:


  Parliament needs to be more proactive and alert and play a role in
  ensuring that the country's processes are on time and thorough.

Amen to that! The executive had the job of compiling the report, and I
suppose it will be up to the opposition members here to continue to try and
prod the Government out of its inertia. If we could re-examine the first
progress report a year on, I will tell hon members there are some glaring
lacunae which we in the DA, as the official opposition, should point out in
order to fulfil our parliamentary role of holding the Government to
account.

Perhaps the most serious lacuna in the progress report relates to HIV/Aids.
There must be a radical reassessment of South Africa's plan of action on
this score. United Nations officials are on record that this is South
Africa's most pressing gender issue, but the report deals with HIV/Aids in
only a couple of lines. It claims to document programmes illustrating the
Government's commitment to addressing HIV/Aids, but it mentions only one: a
school help programme. Parliament has concerned itself with a plan of
action, though not specifically and extensively, and yes, we have set up a
lot of the legislative framework and national machinery needed.

There is another noteworthy exception here, and that is the long missing
national gender policy framework or Green Paper, which the Office on the
Status of Women in the President's Office has spent four years giving birth
to. The project started in 1997. The first draft was unofficially presented
to the Parliamentary Women's Committee in December 1998, when we were able
to give inputs. It remained invisible during the whole of 1999. In May
2000, in response to a question about its completion that I put in
Parliament, the Minister in the Presidency claimed there had been no delay,
and that the document had been submitted to Cabinet for approval.
Thereafter it took Cabinet seven months to approve it last December.

The Green Paper is at last ready to be distributed to members of our
committee and I managed to get a copy yesterday. It is marked ``the
unedited version''. This is just as well, as on the first reading it
contains a number of errors and gaps, for instance, remarkably, there is no
mention of the Promotion of Equality Act, passed over a year ago, which
singles out women as a category for special attention in the section in it
about the legal framework for gender policy.

Hopefully, on closer reading the document will prove to be worth waiting
for. It must be one of the slowest and most expensive births of a Green
Paper in this Government's history. In the meantime, judging from the
progress report, Government departments have had to gallop ahead without
it. The process in connection with the Green Paper surely puts a question
mark over the justification for the continued existence of this office in
the President's Office.

Where we fall down badly is in the area of budgetary resources to implement
administrative and legislative initiatives aimed at achieving gender
equality. Every departmental gender desk complains that they do not have
funds to do more than draw up plans and programmes; there is no money to
implement. The same often applies to legislation. One of the most glaring
examples is the Maintenance Act, referred to by the previous speaker. This
was passed with much fanfare in 1998. The Justice Minister at the time said
the lynchpin of its success would be the extensive appointment of
maintenance investigators to track down the errant fathers.

Maintenance problems are experienced by millions of ordinary women in our
country. The current Justice Minister has admitted that the maintenance
courts do not operate well, in spite of the new Act. The employment of
maintenance investigators would make an enormous difference to ordinary
women's lives. Three years down the line the provisions of the Act allowing
for maintenance investigators to be appointed, have not yet come into
operation and no date has been set for them to come into operation.

A policy regarding their appointment has not yet been determined. No funds
are available for their appointment. The women of South Africa will be
excused for regarding this as a huge con by a cynical Government, and the
DA calls on the Minister of Justice to come clean and tell us if and when
there will be funds for this, or to stop holding out the prospect that this
legislation will one day deliver something worthwhile.

A similar situation has risen in relation to the Domestic Violence Act and
the obligations it imposes on the SAPS to respond to complaints and to
assist victims. This Act was passed in 1998. In 1999 the SAPS drew up a 20-
page national instruction for its members. A year later, the new national
Commissioner of Police stated that the SAPS has neither the manpower nor
the resources nor the vehicles to do what they are supposed to do in terms
of the instruction under the Act, and since then nothing has really
happened. A cloud of inertia has settled over the issue and the DA seeks
clarification. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M B NTULI: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers and colleagues, I
feel proud to represent the minority group, in this case the males.
International Women's Day is an important day to all of us and I am indeed
honoured to participate in this debate today.

One of the major challenges that we are tasked with in this country is to
look after the people who elected us to power. Yes, we need to be proud of
our children and women, and therefore to protect them from any foul play.

I want to start off by making reference to the case that is being heard in
this country since Monday. The DA has been very vocal, saying that the
Government is not prepared to do anything when South Africans are dying.
However, today they are quiet instead of standing behind the Government and
defending the Government against the pharmaceutical industries.

Efforts to develop national policies regarding HIV/Aids began with the ANC
while it was still banned in this country. At a conference in Mozambique,
in early 1990, the ANC drafted the Maputo Statement on HIV/Aids which
acknowledged the urgent need to make HIV prevention a priority. The ANC
decided to work with the previous government, through the Ministry of
Health, before the 1994 elections. The 8 January statement of the President
of the country, President Thabo Mbeki said, and I quote:


  Millions of our people are still condemned to live miserable lives, to
  suffer physical and mental ailments and to die young because of
  preventable diseases.

One of those diseases which he cited was Aids. This not only shows
commitment by the President and the Ministry of Health, but it also shows
commitment by both the ANC and the Government. Where is the DA now and why
are they so quiet? [Interjections.] It is very obvious that they have been
saying things just to score political points. I would like to challenge the
DA to tell the world and their bosom friends that the ANC wants to get the
cheapest medication for our people and not be ripped off by pharmaceutical
companies. Why does the DA not tell them that this is what they have been
calling for and march with the ANC?

On World Aids Day, December 2000 - as we are reminded by the Treatment
Action Campaign in their 12 February issue - the Minister of Health, Manto
Tshabalala-Msimang, outlined the Government's policy on the treatment of
people who are infected with HIV/Aids. The TAC goes on to say that the
decision not to implement a large-scale antiretroviral programme in the
public health sector is not an ideological stance, but is based on the fact
that these drugs, at current prices, still remain unaffordable. I am
convinced that the South African Government remains committed to its
people's health and the Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment
Act, Act 90 of 1997, is proof of that.

Ngakho-ke asikwazi ukulalela amahunge o-DA bezihhumela nje. Isikhathi sabo
saphela ngo-1994. [Therefore we cannot listen to the detractors of the DA.
Their time expired in 1994.]

I want to address myself to rape and abuse of children and women. It starts
with a man who has power over a child or a woman. When he realises that he
is infected and has tested positive, he then decides to spread the disease
so that he will die with many people. This is a fundamental challenge we
are faced with as legislatures. We need to deal with it on a daily basis.
It is a common trend in this country and it has raised an outcry in all
provinces.

Regarding the issue of women and health, the quality of women's health care
is poor. They are treated with little respect and privacy, and get little
information on health choices. Women's mental and physical health suffers
because of violence and negative feelings towards them, and lack of control
over sexual and reproductive matters and other aspects of their lives.
There is little counselling and reproductive health information for young
girls and women. This increases unwanted pregnancies, unsafe abortions,
Aids and sexually transmitted diseases as the increase in Aids infection is
mainly among young women.

To show the commitment of the Government, the Health department is
currently spending an amount which equals 10% of its 2002-03 fiscal year
budget to treat Aids-related illnesses, a figure that is expected to rise.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Miss O N MNDENDE: Madam Speaker, I think that the time has come for us, as
sisters, to be practical and realistic. I am so disappointed, because last
year when I questioned Minister Pahad about his gender sensitivity, he
promised that this year he would show us that he is gender sensitive. Most
unfortunately, he is not on the programme and not even in the House. I am
very disappointed about that because he is the Minister who is responsible
for the status of women in the Office of the President. [Applause.]

Secondly, when we are in our portfolio committee on the status of women, we
always say that we can differ according to our political parties but gender
issues affect all women, irrespective of their political parties, which is
true. We must be practical, especially as we are now discussing Beijing,
which affects all of us irrespective of our political parties. But there is
a party that has 70 minutes and others have seven minutes, three minutes
and so on. Is there any equality there? [Interjections.] We cannot
participate fully in that situation, and that is true.

Thirdly, talking about women and gender issues, when one looks at the
national committees ... [Interjections.] That member can howl, but I know
that! When one looks at the gender commission, and the national coalition,
one finds that only the women of one political party are in leadership
positions. Does that mean that women in other political parties are less
intelligent? [Applause.] Women are all intelligent!

So as women, we must begin to be practical and practise equality and no
discrimination of any kind. We must not have women who are others' big
sisters. That is a reality! [Interjections.] It is therefore with great
expectation that the UDM makes these suggestions for parliamentary follow-
up on the crucial decisions taken in Beijing.

I would go as far as saying that gender issues like poverty, should be a
standing item on the parliamentary agenda ...

Ndiyaniva apho, Nomatyala. Ningamachule kwelo cala. Ningamachule apha
ekubhombolozeni. [I can hear you there, Nomatyala. You are experts on that
side. You are expert howlers.]

Gender issues should inform every decision that we take in this Chamber,
and not just debates on days commemorating women's rights. There is an
overwhelming need for us as the representatives of the South African people
to recognise that inequality arising from gender is an unacceptable fact of
our current society. The House has recognised that poverty leads to
inequality, but we seem to be less vigorous in our recognition that it is
women who bear the brunt of this inequality.

I fully support the concept of a gender sensitive budget. We need active
budgetary measures to address gender inequality, which is manifested by
poverty. We need to go one step further and insist on measurement tools
within the budgetary process, to ensure that progress can be monitored and
where necessary corrective action taken. The need for measuring successes
or failures is emphasised every single time that we hear of budgets that
are either unspent or misspent. It is not acceptable that we accept a
budget and call it gender sensitive, when women on the ground do not see
any improvement in their lives.

When the Minister of Finance announces the next national Budget, it must be
possible for the women of South Africa to observe a genuine improvement in
their standard of living, disposable income and employment opportunities.
Redressing the gender discrimination in legislation must remain a priority.
We can only achieve that goal when women are adequately represented.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Is that a point of order, hon member? What are
you rising on?

Mr M T GONIWE: Madam Speaker, this is a question. I just want to know ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hold on, hon member. Let us ask the hon member
whether she would like to take a question. Would you like to take a
question, hon member?

Miss O N MNDENDE: After finishing my speech, I will be willing to take a
question.

Mr M T GONIWE: It is a point of order!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon member, you said you wanted to ask a question.
Please take your seat! Proceed, hon member!

Miss O N MNDENDE: We must be wary of a tendency to think that a special
committee on women removes the responsibility of all parliamentary
committees to take gender issues into account. In this regard, the notable
successes achieved in certain parliamentary committees deserve mention,
such as the Employment Equity Act and the Domestic Violence Act. Efforts
have also been made to ensure that ... [Interjections.]

Ms N G W BOTHA: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for
the hon member at the podium to refer to another hon member as Nomatyala?
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Well, hon member, it is normal practice for us
to refer to one another as hon members. So, it would be good if the hon
member ...

Miss O N MNDENDE: Hon member Nomatyala! [Laughter.]

Efforts have also been made to ensure that people guilty of offences under
the Domestic Violence Act cannot acquire firearm licences. I refer to this
in the context of yesterday's unfortunate shooting of a Cape Town teenager
by her father. The abuse of women in domestic situations, and the incidence
of family murders is an evil that we must totally obliterate from our
society. Until that glorious day arrives, this Parliament must remain
vigilante and proactive.

No attempt at describing the various challenges facing South African women
would be complete if it did not address the issue of rape. The incidence of
rape, if the latest available statistics are compared with previous years,
is on the increase. There are those who would have us believe that the
problem is under control, or even that there is no problem. How can one say
that rape is under control? Even one rape is a lot. One has to note that
there are men - regrettably, two such men - who believe that the rape
figure is just an over-inflated statistic generated to discredit them. They
are hon Ministers Tshwete and Maduna.

Wathi: Hayi kudala ndilapha akukadlwengulwa mfazi. [He said: I have been
here for a long time and no woman has ever been reportedly raped.]

I urge them to acknowledge that rape is an unspeakable crime, that there is
no such thing as acceptable or controllable levels of rape, that even one
rape in a year is one rape too many. I would also like to urge both these
Ministers to do everything in their power to ensure that the criminal
justice system is accessible to the survivors of rape, and that the
perpetrators are removed from society.
International efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination against
women illustrate a growing awareness of gender equality in the world. I
would argue that South Africa is morally obliged not only to support these
efforts, but also to be in the forefront of these efforts. South Africa
achieved a political miracle in the past decade. We must prove that the
miracle is real and alive. We must take the lessons we have learned in our
struggle to attain liberty and democracy, and apply them to end all forms
of oppression wherever we encounter it.

As South Africa develops its role on the international stage ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Miss O N MNDENDE: Abafazi mabalingane, singacalucalulani. [Women must be
equal, we should not discriminate against one another.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, between 1994 and our last election South
Africa enjoyed centre stage on the world arena. Many of our leaders at the
time were babes in the woods, willing to learn from powerful foreign
experts who eloquently expressed that South Africa must align itself with
their cause.

Many of these experts managed to set up shop in South Africa. Yet, after so
many years of being able to prove their worth this country is not the
solution for the ills of the world as we were led to believe. Due to some
of our policies - and shaped in many respects by these well-meaning experts
- South Africa cannot seem to get to first base on issues such as a crime-
free and investor-friendly society.

We seem to have learnt from the past, and it looks as if we are creating
our own recipes to solve our own problems. We can learn and get assistance
from the world, but we should do so from a position of moral strength, and
not from a position of economic weakness, as they dictate the terms.
Unfortunately, we will be doing so at the expense of the lives of many
unborn children, and of the many who are suffering and dying of Aids due to
the wrong messages we are sending out.

Let me give this House an idea of what resembles a wrong message. In South
Africa we teach people that in order to have safe sex one must use a
condom. This is a wrong message that subliminally encourages domination and
displaces human relationships with cruel sexploitation.

The Cape Argus of Tuesday 6/3/2001 carries a story about a billboard in
Malawi educating people on the same issue with the following message, and I
quote:


  Aids is killing Africa. Malawians, change your behaviour now! Let us save
  our country.

This is a correct message emphasising nationwide responsibility. The
Beijing Plus Five Platform of Action is a process aimed at addressing the
issues that mainly affect women. Yet the irony is that the importance of
women and womanhood do not seem to feature.

The wrong message that the Beijing Platform of Action is promoting is that
of convoluting the issues of women with the general description of gender.
This is simply neither truthful nor respectful of women. I know that the
implied idea behind the gender agenda is to promote equality between men
and women. What is not so clear is whether we are succeeding in addressing
the issues that affect women.

The South African message to women in our society is simply not getting
through effectively enough. How do we fail our women in this country? We do
so by tackling issues of women from the position as defined by gender. Let
me quote the definition stated in the Beijing report. It says:


  ... social relations and processes embodied in the variety of
  institutions which underpin day-to-day life.

What is the consequence of this definition? The consequence is that the
laws that are supposed to promote the issues of women are based upon such
trite and useless definitions. I do not want to sound disrespectful because
we do know that the Domestic Violence Act, the Maintenance Act, the
Employment Equity Act, etc, are good laws that promote the rightful place
of women in society. [Time expired.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Speaker, it is interesting to note that the final
report of South Africa's progress in fulfilling its commitments to the
Beijing Platform of Action, which was presented in New York last year, does
not include women and the environment.

It is common knowledge that the report was only considered by the Cabinet
once the delegates were on their way. Women parliamentarians had no chance
to view or comment on the report before it was submitted by the delegation,
and one wonders whether anyone other than Essop Pahad, the Minister in the
Presidency, who is not here, or the elusive Office on the Status of Women,
had seen the report beforehand. So much for transparency and consultation!

There is a lot of talk about being gender sensitive ... [Interjections.]
Could someone please remind Minister Steve Tshwete, who is also not here,
to be gender sensitive. There is a lot of talk about being gender sensitive
and women's decision-making abilities, but that is clearly not being put
into practice.

Chapter 4 of the report, ie item programmes, policies and best practices,
provides an overview of South Africa's performance under the twelve
critical areas of the Beijing Platform of Action. It aims to highlight
policies adapted, legislation passed and evolving best practices. Women and
the environment is one of the twelve critical areas, and yet it was omitted
from the South African report. Is this because the environment is regarded
as totally irrelevant? Did South Africa have nothing to report on this
issue, or was it simply that the report was put together in such a hurry?

The UN Conference on the Environment and Development, and the follow-up
international conferences, acknowledged the significant role that women can
play in the development of sustainable and ecologically sound consumption
and production patterns and in approaches to natural resource management.
However, women remain largely absent at all levels of policy formulation
and decision-making in natural resource and environmental management,
conservation, protection and rehabilitation, though they would productively
contribute their skills and experience in natural resource management.

Women experience the impact of environmental degradation when, with
increased workloads and without choice, they exploit natural resources in
order to survive. Even with clear knowledge of the need for environmental
protection and sustainability, they grow and process agricultural products,
and sometimes in order to provide shelter, mainly in distinctly poverty-
linked mismanagement of natural resources and subsequent environmental
degradation.

Women are affected by environmental degradation through wars, floods,
drought and bush fires. Who can forget the birth of baby Rosita in a tree
last year? Broadly, a country should aim, firstly, to strengthen or
establish mechanisms to assess the impact of development and environmental
policies on women; secondly, to integrate concerns and perspectives in
policies and programmes for sustainable development; and, thirdly, to
involve women actively in environmental decision-making at all levels and
in the implementation of national plans-in-action.

Many examples are given as to how other African countries plan to implement
and achieve these objectives. What a pity there is no mention of what South
Africa is doing. Perhaps we did not submit a report on women and the
environment at that conference either. Overall, I think it is common
knowledge that the most disadvantaged group in South Africa is women living
in rural former homeland areas.

In the country's gender profile South Africa 1998 prepared for Sida - the
Swedish International Development Co-operation Agency - it is pointed out
that many women and young children spend time each day collecting water and
firewood. Poor women often work, unpaid, longer and harder than others on
household tasks because of a lack of facilities. Collecting water and fuel
takes time, especially when one has to walk miles to fetch them. This also
affects the health of those who fetch and carry, as well as that of those
who use unclean water and dangerous fuels. The present cholera epidemic
immediately springs to mind. Yes, since 1994 a large number of households
have been provided with water and electricity for the first time, but there
are still thousands of women - poor rural women - who do not have access to
these facilities.

Minister Valli Moosa, in discussing South Africa's agenda for the World
Summit on Sustainable Development to be held in South Africa next year,
recently mentioned the emancipation of women, in particular their need for
renewable energy resources. This is a challenge for us all to meet, and it
cuts across every Ministry and every department. This is not just a women's
issue, it is something that affects all South Africans. We all have
mothers, sisters or wives. Let us show them we care and, in doing so, care
for the environment that we live in, too.

Let us also broadcast our achievements to the world by ensuring that women
and the environment, a critical area of the Beijing Platform of Action, are
not left out in the next South African report-back and that this report is
circulated for comment before it is published. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, we in the FF have decided to adhere to the
request by Madam Speaker earlier this afternoon that men should also
participate in this debate, and we will not be using any women in our
caucus today.


  ``Everything women do, they must do twice as good as men to be thought
  only half as good - luckily this is not difficult.''

This was said by Charlotte Whitton, the mayor of Ottawa, Canada, way back
in 1976. The question is: Is this general statement still true in the year
2001, or have things changed to such an extent that women are now in a
position to compete on an equal footing with men and that they are judged
as such?
Ons debatteer vandag die kwessie van die parlementêre opvolging van Beijing
plus vyf. Gedurende September 1995 het 'n Suid-Afrikaanse afvaardiging
deelgeneem aan die vierde van die VN se reeks wêreldkonferensies oor vroue
wat in Beijing, China, gehou is.

Uit dié konferensie het 'n plan van aksie gespruit waartoe die Suid-
Afrikaanse Regering hom verbind het. Ingevolge dié plan van aksie is Suid-
Afrika verplig om oor sy eie vordering verslag te doen met betrekking tot
12 belangrike terreine.

Vandag, 8 Maart 2001, wat ook Internasionale Vrouedag is, bied 'n baie
goeie geleentheid om hierdie onderwerp te bespreek. Die status en
bemagtiging van vroue kan as 'n baie sensitiewe saak beskou word en dit kán
ook 'n baie sensitiewe saak wees. Die vraag is waarom?

Nie waarom enigiemand daarteen gekant kan wees nie, maar juis omdat die
risiko bestaan dat ons totaal by mekaar verby kan praat. Suid-Afrika is en
bly 'n baie plurale en diverse gemeenskap. Wat een groep vroue ervaar en
aan onderworpe is, is nie noodwendig dieselfde as wat ander vroue ervaar
nie.
In die Afrikanergemeenskap waaruit ek kom, word ons vroue met respek,
waardigheid en eer gehanteer. Natuurlik is daar uitsonderings, en kan 'n
mens nie veralgemeen nie, maar dit is die reël. In ander gemeenskappe mag
dit weer anders wees, soos wat ek al in die verlede uit besprekings in dié
Raad verneem het. Daar is verskeie ... [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die agb lid sal nie weet nie, hoe sal hy weet? [Tussenwerpsels.] Laat die
Afrikaner namens homself praat, die agb lid sal regtig nie weet nie, maar
ons hanteer ons vroue met eer en waardigheid. Ek sê daar mag ook
uitsonderings wees. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die feit van die saak is, al die maatreëls wat die Regering getref het, wil
'n mens graag onderskryf. Die agb lid mev Camerer het reeds daarna verwys,
en ek wil spesifiek na twee aspekte verwys, naamlik die Wet op Onderhoud en
die Wet op Gesinsgeweld. Albei hierdie wette handel in beginsel oor
besonder belangrike sake ter bemagtiging van vroue, wat ons steun. Mev
Camerer het korrek uitgewys dat daar in die praktyk sekere probleme met die
implementering van hierdie wette is, maar die bestaan van hierdie wette is
belangrik.

Op hierdie spesifieke dag wil ons graag hulde bring aan ons vroue, hulle
eer en vir hulle baie dankie sê vir wat hulle vir ons doen. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Today we are debating the issue of the parliamentary follow-up to Beijing
plus five. During September 1995 a South African delegation participated in
the fourth of the UN's series of world conferences on women, which was held
in Beijing, China.

A plan of action arose from this conference, to which the South African
Government committed itself. In terms of this plan of action, South Africa
is obliged to report on its own progress with regard to 12 important areas.

Today, 8 March 2001, which is also International Women's Day, presents a
good opportunity to discuss this topic. The status and empowerment of women
can be viewed as a very sensitive issues and it can also be a very
sensitive issue. The question is why?

Not why anyone could be opposed to it, but precisely because the risk
exists that we could talk at cross-purposes. South Africa is and remains a
very plural and diverse society. What one group of women experience and are
subjected to, is not necessarily the same as what other women experience.

In the Afrikaner community from which I come, our women are treated with
respect, dignity and honour. There are of course exceptions, and one cannot
generalise, but that is the norm. It may be different in other communities,
as I have learnt in the past from discussions in this House. There are
various ... [Interjections.]

The hon member would not know, how would he know? [Interjections.] Let the
Afrikaners speak for themselves; the hon member really would not know, but
we treat our women with honour and dignity. I am saying there may also be
exceptions. [Interjections.]

The fact of the matter is that one would gladly endorse all the measures
taken by the Government. The hon member Mrs Camerer has already referred to
this, and I want to refer specifically to two aspects, namely the
Maintenance Act and the Domestic Violence Act. Both these Acts deal in
principle with particularly important matters for the empowerment of women,
which we support. Mrs Camerer correctly pointed out that in practice there
are certain problems with the implementation of these Acts, but the
existence of these Acts is important.

On this specific day we would like to pay tribute to our women, honour them
and thank them for what they do for us.]

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to advise the hon Mndende,
because she is new in this field. She should not come here and say that
nothing has been done for women. It is said that new brooms sweep clean. I
advise her first to sweep in her own party before she comes here and says
that nothing has been done. [Applause.]

The Beijing Conference identified the persistent and increasing burden of
poverty on women as one of the twelve critical areas of concern requiring
special attention. One of these areas is the feminisation of poverty.

Ngitawutsandza kuchaza leligama lebuphuya ngesiSwati. Nasikhuluma
ngebuphuya kubomake basemakhaya sisuke sikhuluma ngekweswela kudla, indzawo
yekufihla inhloko, emanti lahlobile, timphahla tekwembatsa, tindlu
tangasense, imali yekuyisa bantfwana esikolweni, kubate gezi etindlini
lesihlala kuto, sikhanyise ngemakhandlela - solo ngichaza buphuya kutsi
yini - kanye nekupheka ngaphalafini.

Laba labake bahlala kuletindzawo letisemaphandleni nasemahlatsini, njengale
lapho ngibuya khona mine, bayangivisisa kutsi ngitsini. Angati kutsi
bayangiva yini ngakuloluhlangotsi lolungale ngesheya. [Kuhlaba lulwimi.]

Ngitawutsatsa lelitfuba kubonga kuHulumende we-ANC losikhiphile emahlatsini
nasemadvwaleni lapho sasifakwe khona ngulaba bekunene. Njengaloku ngime
lapha nje, ngiphuma emahlatsini nasemadvwaleni lapho bengifihlwe khona.
Ngime lapha nje ngitewukhulumela bomake, ngivakalise livi labomake
labaphuma emahlatsini, emakhaya nasemadvwaleni lapho umuntfu ehluleka khona
kugubha ngisho emamitha lasihlanu nje kuze akwati kufaka liphayiphi
lemanti.

Mhla ka 9 Febhuwari wakhuluma Mengameli kutsi Hulumende usemkhankhasweni
wekulwa nebuphuya. Ngicela-ke kutsi tsine sonkhe lesilapha kuleNdlu
sibambisane silwe nalobuphuya, njengaloku sengike ngabuchaza nje. Ngicela
kuhanjwe-ke kubuyelwe emuva, ngobe labanye betfu abakabetayeli futsi
ababati nekutsi buyini kwabona lobuphuya. Asisukume sonkhe selekelelane
naHulumende ekulweni nalobuphuya lobukhona, kuze singafiki lapha simemete
ngebuphuya lesingabati nekutsi busho kutsini. (Translation of SiSwati
paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to describe the concept ``poverty'' in siSwati. When one
talks about poverty as experienced by rural women one means having no food,
no roof over one's head, no clean water, no clothing, no toilets, no money
to educate one's children, no electricity in one's house and having to use
candles - I am still describing what poverty is - and having to use
paraffin to cook.

Those who have lived in the rural areas and in the bush, such as where I
come from, will understand what I am talking about. I do not know whether
the members on the other side of the House know anything about what I am
talking about. [Interjections.]

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the ANC-led Government which
has taken us out of the bush and rocky areas where we have been hidden by
our oppressors. As I stand before this House, I come from the bush and a
rocky area where I have been hidden, and I stand here to speak on behalf of
women and to raise the voices of the women who live in the bush and rocky
areas where the ground is so hard it would be impossible to dig a 5 km
stretch in order to install a water pipe.

On 9 February the President said that the Government had embarked on a
campaign to eradicate poverty. I appeal to everyone in this House to work
together in eradicating poverty as I have described it. Let us go back to
the beginning, because some of us are not familiar with and do not know
what poverty is. Let us all stand up and assist the Government in fighting
against the prevailing poverty. Perhaps then we will not come here and
pontificate about something we know nothing about.]

Let me say something about our achievements. Since 1994 our Government has
provided more than 9 million people with basic water supplies and many
people have access to clean running water for the first time in their
lives. Electricity and telephone connections have been provided to people
in previously underresourced parts of this country. Reports from our
branches in impoverished areas attest to the impact that the provision of
such basic infrastructure and services have had on the lives of the poor.
Women no longer have to spend four hours a day collecting firewood and
water. The very poor women in our country feel less poor now.

Regarding the challenges we have faced, the Government has yet to refine
and mature its management of public-private partnerships and
nongovernmental organisations in relation to the alleviation of poverty.
With regard to service delivery, the women fully support the Government's
initiative to improve service delivery in the public sectors, despite the
persistent shortcomings of legislative and institutional transformation in
the Public Service, especially in relation to the poor, the majority of
whom are women. Additional training will go a long way in improving service
delivery and integrating lessons from our successes and failures as the ANC
on an ongoing basis.

Poverty suffered by women in South Africa is considered the most common and
serious violation of their human rights. Poor women understand implicitly
and without knowledge of sophisticated statistics that poverty is closely
linked to high levels of unemployment, hunger and malnutrition, lack of
basic services, inability to pay for health care and the disintegration of
families.

In 1993 - during the NP era - 3 million households consisting of over 13
million people lived in poverty in this country. This means that 35 out of
every 100 South African households were poor. Overall, over 2 million rural
households are poor. Rural areas have the highest incidents of poverty.
[Interjections.] Could those hon members lend me their ears, please? See me
about this sometime! [Interjections.] In a village of 1 000 households, at
least 530 do not have enough money to buy the minimum amount of food,
clothing and fuel necessary to sustain them, because their income is below
the household subsistence level.

Let me now talk about the challenges that are facing us. The reason for
greater poverty in the rural areas, including the absence of basic
infrastructure, roads, water and electricity supply ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, it is some five years since women of the
world converged on Beijing, where far-reaching resolutions were taken. The
resolutions were meant to empower women and help put across the message
that women have dignity, are worthy of respect and, to put it bluntly, not
made of the crumbs that fell from the Master's table as he was creating
men.

The time has come for us to take stock regarding the progress made on those
resolutions or otherwise. While we in the UCDP do not wish to be understood
as saying that women should, by right, be appointed to senior positions, we
maintain that they deserve such placements on the basis of ability.

We are surprised that parties which hold the reins in the provinces are
hard put to elect or appoint women to positions of premiers. The Free State
is the only province that has gone that far. Premier Winkie Direko
succeeded Minister Matsepe-Casaburri. Could this be the reason why in
certain circles it is called the ``vouestaat'' [state of women]?

The Beijing mandate was not confined to the political arena only. The
position of women has to be considered in all spheres of life. A look at
some religious bodies calls for real scrutiny. Some of these bodies are too
patriarchal in their affairs, and some cannot countenance the ordination of
women. We commend those religious institutions that accept that all people
are equal in the eyes of the Lord.

This brings to mind the African Methodist Episcopal Church that has long
recognised the role of women in the church. In this denomination Charlotte
Manye Maxeke is the leading figure on the mother continent in so far as
women are concerned. Such recognition of women and acceptance of their
ability was demonstrated in Cincinnati, Ohio, last year at the 46th general
conference by the election of the first woman bishop in the person of
Vashti Murphy Mckenzie, currently prelate of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland
and Mozambique. She achieved this feat by obtaining the second highest
number of votes from a class of 32 candidates for the office.

The Beijing conference decreed that gender-sensitive legislation should be
introduced. In the wake of that, this House passed the now famous Local
Government: Municipal Structures Act, Act 117 of 1998, which was used to
run the last local government elections. Section 5(3) in Schedule 2 of the
Act states, and I quote:


  Every party must seek to ensure that fifty per cent of the candidates on
  the party list are women and that women and men candidates are evenly
  distributed through the list.

Regrettably, out of the 13 parties in this House, none, whatsoever, met the
requirement, despite the fact that this is a law passed by this House. We
note, however, that the ANC, the UCDP and the ACDP made efforts to meet the
requirement by having over 40% of their candidates comprise women.
Implementing effective resolutions and Acts passed by Parliament are a form
of delivery and accountability.

Let us be committed to the issues we agree to. We should not leave them for
the record of Hansard only. [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, on International Women's Day it is evident
that women in our country face the free-market paradigm, which is anything
but free.

Stateless corporations have given rise to corporate states. Faced with a
decimated industrial base and grossly inflated incomes, women are facing
deepening poverty, long-term unemployment, homelessness, a rise in
bankruptcies, repossessions, crime, family breakdowns, HIV/Aids, and
increasing maternal and infant mortality. Present economic policies leave
the women weaker, insecure and inevitable victims of economic exploitation
and social degradation.

The PAC of Azania is challenging the assumption that markets do not have a
gender dimension. Research is accumulating evidence which proves that
markets operate on the free, exploited, unaccounted labour of women.
Globalisation has become a huge bonus for transnational corporations. The
export-led economies hire women in the export processing zones, while
children work in sweatshops and hidden basements, usually described as the
informal sector.

This has not improved the labour standards of women. Global capital and
global markets thrive on unemployment and on the shrinking wages of
economically active males, transferring the burden of long hours of work
onto women inside and outside the households. The UN Development
Programme's human development report states that women contribute US$11
trillion in unpaid household work to the global economy. How else can cost
reductions in the public sector, for instance in health care, hospitals and
schools, be undertaken if women do not subsidise them with labour.

Globalisation, as manifested in privatisation and liberalisation, is
shifting 70% to 90% of women in Africa into the informal sector. Women
absorb the shock of Gear's structural adjustment programme. Women are
deprived of the basic worker benefits and health care. Women are central to
the search for cheap labour, a situation that comes about because of the
sexist division of labour and the racist division of both labour and
resources.

The PAC believes that in order for women in our country to experience the
implementation of the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, the Beijing Declaration and other human
rights instruments, the national Budget must invest liberally in the
advancement of women. Without this budget allocation, the PAC believes that
there will be no progress in the lives of women no matter how many
conventions we sign and ratify.

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President and the women of our
country, a working woman is confronted with very tough choices on a daily
basis. She faces choices on a daily basis, having to ask herself: ``Will it
be macaroni and cheese, or will it be peanut butter and jam; will it be a
new muffler or will it be an electric bill; will it be a sick child or a
demanding boss; will it be a parent-teacher conference or a pink slip?''
These choices reflect the labour market we inherited, one characterised by
a grossly unequal distribution of economic resources, distorted industrial
development, and in which women were kept out of the economy.

By 1991 women represented 36,3% of the formal labour force. That is about 8
million in formal employment. This means that about 2,9 million had formal-
sector jobs. Indeed, they found themselves in the service sector as
domestic workers and, of course, in the informal sector. Added to this is
the atypical labour, which is casual, temporary, part-time and
subcontractual. By 1999, if one takes the categories of employers,
employees and those that are self-employed, women represented about 42% or
4,4 million of the formal labour force. By 1999 women represented about 37%
or 2,8 million of the labour force in the informal sector. However, there
has been a tremendous drop in the formal sector.

By 1999, the majority of women were still in the service sector, the
domestic sector, and of course, the elementary sector and clerks. Even
worse, by 1996 about 50% of the women found in the elementary sector, such
as cleaning jobs, collecting garbage and so on, were African women. At the
same time, 75% of these African women were in the informal sector, with 82%
of them in the elementary area.

Our challenge remains the redressing of the characteristic of the sexual
division of labour, as demonstrated by the statistics I have just given hon
members - a challenge to overcome the legacy of poverty, apartheid and job
reservation. For us the major economic instrument that the ANC-led
Government inherited in 1994 is, of course, the state and state-owned
enterprises, and the Public Service, which is our engine in the
redistribution of wealth and income and meeting the needs of our people.

Although women are still thinly represented in social life, women's rights
now enjoy constitutional and legislative protection. These rights and
obligations empower Government to fulfil the promise that if we are to
improve the quality and equity of service delivery, we must draw on the
skills of all the talents that we have in South Africa, which will
hopefully lead to the opening of the economy for women in an equitable way.

The ANC led by introducing affirmative action targets in Government
departments and provinces by requiring that 50% black people, 30% women and
2% disabled people should be targeted for management positions. Let us look
at these figures and what has been achieved to date. At national level, our
achievements have been 58% blacks at managerial level in the Public Service
compared to 42% whites, and 21,53% females - a bit short - compared to
78,4% males.

I decided to take one of the regions in which we had to implement
affirmative action as an example. I took the Western Cape region, and this
is what the figures looked like. In 1997 they had no African males or
females; coloured males were 23,4% and coloured females were 2,1%; Indian
males were 85%, but they had no females; white males were 57% and white
females were 8,5%. There were therefore 34% blacks, 65% whites, 89,4% males
and 10% females.

We are called upon to introduce what I will term economic democracy, which
will deal with the figures that we need to sort out and show us how to
analyse women. We must create and continue to modify programmes that
strengthen the vital role that women play in food security, especially in
food production, farming and so on. We must encourage community economic
development through strategies that build on partnerships with Government
and we must provide outreach programmes to assist low-income and poor
women, particularly in rural and remote areas. Last but not least, we must
recognise and encourage the contribution of research by women scientists
and technologists. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, hon members, may I first take this
opportunity to extend a warm welcome to all the delegates to the World
Court of Women Against War for Peace. I hope that their deliberations these
past few days have been fruitful and have energised them in their efforts
to continue working in the field of human rights expression and education.
I also want to welcome the delegates from Khayelitsha who are in the
gallery. Their support is appreciated. [Applause.]

While many men may jest about the need to celebrate Women's Day, it is this
very essential focus that forces a society to acknowledge the vital role
that women play in society and to evaluate whether due worth is accorded to
that role. The Beijing Plus Five document implores us to evaluate what has
been achieved and whether South Africa is moving forward in respect of the
specific agendas tabled.

Our Parliament has in place a committee which monitors the status of women,
and we have a good representation of women parliamentarians. But the sad
reality is that the mechanisms in place at national level are not filtering
down to all at grass-roots level. It would appear that the lot of women at
this level is not a happy one.

One specific area in which the Government has failed South African women is
in respect of sexual violence. South Africa has earned itself the title of
the rape capital of the world, with one rape being committed approximately
every 83 seconds. The percentage of successful prosecutions is as low as
16%. The establishment of the One-Stop Rape Crisis Centres, to which the
hon the President alluded in his 2000 state of the nation address, has
still to come to fruition. As if that is not enough, women who are raped
are double damned if they are infected with HIV, because the Government
will not provide AZT free of charge to rape survivors. Further, the law as
it presently stands, places the burden on the survivor to get a court order
to test the HIV status of the perpetrator.

While the South African Constitution enshrines reproductive rights and has
one of the most progressive pieces of legislation in respect of termination
of pregnancy and sterilisation, the reality is that gender inequality
greatly affects the ability of women to participate equally in sexual
relations, to have an equal say on the use or non-use of contraception.
There is still inadequate pre- and postcounselling services for termination
of pregnancy and many of the top sites are not fully functional and are,
therefore, driving women to backstreet abortions. There is an urgent need
to address the behaviour of health personnel and enforce the patients'
charter, to redress this situation.

HIV is on the increase, yet the Government is defensive on the HIV/Aids
issue and has thus far shown a nebulous response to a growing pandemic.
While there have been recent moves by the Department of Health to provide
Nevirapine to reduce mother-to-child transmission, it is limited to a very
few sites. Only the Democratic Alliance in the Western Cape does not
discriminate in providing anti-retroviral medication.

Research has shown that investment in educating girls and women will
benefit the economy. Two thirds of the world's 875 million illiterates are
women. The Platform of Action has eradication of illiteracy amongst women
as one of its main objectives. Any school drop-out by girls has until
recently been mainly as a result of pregnancy, because traditional
attitudes still persist about excluding pregnant girls from school. Good
support structures such as childcare facilities, programmes to help her
cope with her new role of motherhood and acceptance of her by her peers as
a learner will all help the girl child achieve literacy.

The Department of Education's Nine Point Plan is gender blind. Now while
this is a good thing if the playing fields are level, many South African
educators are not yet transformed in relation to gender sensitivity. There
is a need to integrate sex and gender-based harassment and violence against
girls and women into the school programme.

Another reason for the high drop-out rate of girls from schools in recent
months has been attributed to the fact that many girls are having to head
households because their parents have died of Aids. The Department of
Social Development must re-evaluate the role it can play in involving the
community to accept and support these children and reduce their burden.
Only then can we have firm action as a human right and achieve the goals of
equality, development and peace. Now the picture looks bleak. However, we
are well on our way to getting it right, provided that all the role-players
come on board.

In conclusion, may I say that I am proud to be a woman. I belong to a
special class of people who are referred to as multitaskers who use both
left and right brain thinking to achieve our goals. It is a pity that the
one male who represented the ANC misread the topic of the debate and wasted
his time defending the Minister of Health. That is a clear sign of left-
brain functioning. To today's women out there who have made a difference to
level the playing field, I say, well done, keep up the efforts and always
believe in the power of women. [Applause.]

Ms N M TWALA: Madam Speaker, the debate today is going to be on women and
poverty. The Beijing Platform of Action identified 12 critical areas of
concern. One of the critical areas is women and poverty. In the past
decade, the number of women living in poverty has increased
disproportionately to the number of men, particularly in the developing
countries. In addition to economic factors, the rigidity of socially
ascribed gender roles and women's limited access to power, education,
training and production, including resources, are also responsible.

While poverty affects households as a whole because of the gender divisions
of labour and responsibilities for household welfare, women bear a
disproportionate burden attempting to manage household consumption and
production under the conditions of increasing scarcity. But the Beijing
Platform for Action states that we need to recognise the burden that women
suffer because of poverty. It urges governments and international
communities in all sectors to shape macroeconomic policies and development
strategies to address the needs and efforts of women in poverty. We must
revise laws and administrative practices to ensure women's equal rights and
access to economic resources. We must give women access to banking, savings
and credit, and possible cures for the feminisation of poverty.

South Africa has for decades had one of the greatest income differentials
in the world. While South Africa was rated as an upper middle income
country, the vast majority of our people during apartheid lived in abject
poverty. A minority enjoyed levels of wealth, energy, health care and
education. These inequalities have led to the two-nation theory: one rich
and one poor; one white and one black. South Africa has, however, committed
itself to the Beijing Platform of Action and Beijing Plus Five. Therefore,
the following achievements should be looked at.

The Constitution of South Africa enshrines the attainment of socioeconomic
rights. Welfare and safety nets form an integral part of the Government's
strategy for responding to poverty and inequality. The primary focus of the
Department of Social Development is poverty. Nevertheless, welfare
provisions still bear the marks of the apartheid inequalities, with people
in rural areas having limited or no access to welfare services from
Government or NGOs. Welfare should ideally help people to escape from the
poverty trap, while safety net programmes should ensure that people have
adequate economic and social protection during times of unemployment, ill-
health, maternity, childrearing, widowhood, disability, old age and others.
Gear acknowledges that social security and services, including related
social development programmes, are investments that contribute to social
economic gains and growth. Looking at the Government's strategies, the
White Paper on Social Welfare has a notable feature in its shift to
developmental social welfare, which emphasises helping people to help
themselves and thereby become self-reliant, in contrast to a conception of
welfare handouts.

Coming to social security, close to 90% of the welfare budget is allocated
to social security in the form of old-age pensions, pensions for the
disabled, maintenance grants and social relief. I now address new
initiatives in developmental social welfare. The integrated national
disability strategy seeks to ensure that disabled people are enabled to
develop optimally, are not removed from their families and communities and
that ways of meeting their needs are developed within their communities.
The flagship programme is a three-year pilot one which aims to assist
single women with young children escape poverty.

We are then going to look at the challenges. We believe that South Africa
has yet to refine a mature management system for private-public
partnerships, especially Government-NGO partnerships, particularly in
relation to alleviating poverty. With regard to improvement in service
delivery in the public sector, a Government report stated that despite
legislative and institutional transformation, several shortcomings persist
in the Public Service and that these hamper service delivery, especially
among the poor, the majority of whom are women.

Additional training for some public servants will be recommended in order
to improve service delivery. Whilst the Department of Social Development
initiated this, the challenge is to look at the outcomes of these projects
on a gender basis, ie look at the true reflection, to see whether only
women's basic needs are being taken into consideration as the Beijing
Platform of Action states. But, does it include the denial of opportunities
and choices? What is the role in key decision-making processes and in
projects? What kind of activities are allocated to women, as opposed to
men? [Applause.]

Prof H NGUBANE: Madam Speaker, hon colleagues, I must first thank the
Deputy Minister of Education, the hon Mangena, for sacrificing his three
speaking minutes to enable me to have enough time to pour out my most
profound thoughts and feelings on this International Women's Day.

I was lucky to be one of the seven-member parliamentary delegation that was
part of the larger South African delegation, led by the Minister for the
Public Service and Administration, the hon Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, that
went to New York in June last year. I was grateful for the confidence shown
in me by this Parliament.

To share my reflections on how far we have progressed in terms of the
Beijing Platform of Action, I will pick out two issues raised at the New
York Conference, which I believe serve as indicators. The first indicator
refers to the findings of the International Parliamentary Union, the IPU,
tabled at the conference, which were the result of an analysis of world
parliamentary forums since Beijing 1995. These are the findings, and I
quote:


  Women's participation in parliament and in the executive has undergone
  extremely little change since 1995, and has even decreased slightly in
  certain circumstances.

According to the survey, between September 1995 and August 1999 the overall
number of women heads of state or government declined from 6,4% to 5,3%.
The overall percentage of women in parliament showed only a slight increase
from 11,3% in both Houses to 12,9%. The overall number of women as
presiding officers of all Chambers of parliaments decreased slightly from
10,5% to 10,2%. A similar pattern is discernible for the number of women
presiding officers of parliaments and women as committee chairpersons and
deputy chairpersons.

By contrast, however, the survey reveals that parliamentary awareness of
gender issues has increased substantially. A majority of respondent
parliaments felt that more attention was paid to women's needs when Bills
and budgets were debated. The Beijing Platform of Action seems to have
inspired a variety of legislative measures. A number of specialised
parliamentary committees on gender equality or on the status of women have
been established. The survey reveals a strong correlation between the
proportion of women in parliament and the attention to gender issues.

It also reveals that half of the parliaments that focus more particularly
on women's needs in their legislative debates and decisions, have women as
presiding officers, deputies or in their governing bodies. Having quoted
the report tabled by the IPU, I must mention that it was a great honour for
the SA delegation that, at the end of the report, the IPU pointed out that
the South African Parliament was exemplary in that it has women presiding
officers in both Houses. [Applause.]

Another exciting experience at this conference arose from participation in
a special African forum. Again I am glad to have this speaking opportunity
today in Parliament, because I hope possibly to clear up certain
misunderstandings surrounding the delegation to New York. Before the New
York conference there had been continent conferences, women
parliamentarians from South Africa were invited specifically to attend a
conference in Nairobi, which was to be held a few days before the all-
encompassing and final continental conference in Addis Abeba.

As these followed closely on one another, parliamentarians who were chosen
to go to Nairobi had to proceed to Addis Abeba as well. The hon Lulu
Xingwana and I were delegated to do so. It soon became evident that African
women parliamentarians were specifically concerned with defining women's
positions in the fast-changing cultural world, as well as the constitutions
that were left behind by the colonial powers at independence in the 1960s.
Thus the cultural changes and the political dispensations were seen as
having left women out. Business pertaining to these issues could not be
completed at the two conferences mentioned above. For continuity's sake,
the same delegation had to complete its business in New York as part of a
larger conference. For this reason the hon Xingwana and I had to be in New
York two days earlier to attend the African Women in Parliament workshop
organised by the UNDP.

I think at this point I should mention some of our experiences at these
conferences. The women were very eager to know how the constitution-making
took place in this country and how this country managed to include women in
that process. We also told them that we had documentation about this. They
wanted to know the background. They asked us how we managed, in the first
place, to become part of the negotiations.

Hon members will remember that some of us were part of the negotiations,
but most women were not part of the negotiations. We reminded them that
even though the liberation struggles were fought by both men and women, no
one expected that when the time for negotiations came, the women who were
part of the negotiations would be so few, and that this came as a surprise.
In our presentation, we mentioned the names of women, such as the Speaker,
the Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Women's Brigade of the IFP, and all
the people who had said something which was meant to reach the public to
show South Africa that women needed to be involved.

It became very interesting, in terms of the structure of our delegation,
because I was inside during the earlier part of the negotiations and the
hon Xingwana was outside seeking to get women involved in the negotiations.
Hon members will remember that, at the end, women's coalitions and women's
bodies were calling for a ``one man, one woman'' scenario in the
delegation. They even went on to say that if a party could not find a
suitable woman, the seat allocated to a woman should be left vacant.

All these things excited the women from the various countries in Africa.
They even wanted us to repeat the story because they saw it as a success
story. They also wanted to know how they could actually come to such a
point, and we repeated the stories time and time again.

Then we became concerned that they might think that everything was all
right in South Africa. So we told them that there was still a long way to
go for women of South Africa, and that things were not yet all right. They
did not want to hear that. They said things such as: ``No, you have come a
long way. Do not stop now. We are looking up to South Africa; if South
Africa fails, the whole continent will fail.''

From that point of view, I think men in this House should appreciate that
women are also doing their little bit in trying to raise the standard of
concerns, which are concerns of democracy, and in trying to put across to
the world that we try to work together even though we do not always
succeed. This is the story of our experience.

Having said that, I want to say something about the African Forum. One of
the outstanding papers at the workshop in New York was presented by the
Tanzanian delegation, and it dealt with land reform in that country. There
was general jubilation that Tanzanian women had, at long last, gained
access to land which had been guaranteed by legislation. The whole ethos of
the land laws carried the flavour of the type of rights to land which
women, in most parts of Africa, had always had under African tradition.

Dr Achola Pala O Keyo, a Kenyan who works as a social anthropologist with
UNDP in New York, pointed out that these new land laws are a resurrection
of what is known as ``house property'' in African tradition, where a
married woman had personal property, including her house sites, cropping
land and every other economic outcome emanating from her house over which
her husband had no say, except with her permission. The statement by Dr
Achola was met with puzzlement and astonishment as the younger generation
did not have information on traditions.

What this example indicates is that it may take only one or two generations
to deny them any meaningful and positive understanding of their culture and
themselves. African women therefore have to deal with several levels of
deprivation:  firstly, that which exists in their traditional setting;
secondly, that which arises from erroneous colonial interpretation of their
culture; and, thirdly, that which has to do with rapid changes from
agrarian economics to a monetary economy.

To deal with this situation as a society, especially as a society which has
been traumatised by long years of denial of rights, we need to pause and
ask questions, questions that are differently phrased. For instance, it is
often suggested that outdated African customs such as lobolo should be
abandoned because men tend to enrich themselves while women's worth is
diminished to the level of goods which can be bought and sold. If, perhaps,
we ask: ``What is lobolo supposed to do for the women concerned, that is
the bride, her mother and her mother-in-law?'' we might find that we get
completely different answers, all things being equal.

What is hidden and implicit is that lobolo, if it is properly operational
in its setting, in fact empowers the women economically. Those who know a
bit about this will know that there is `inkomo yamasi', the milk cow, which
a bride gets from some of the cattle which are given as lobolo. There is
another cow which is given to her mother and the rest of the cows are kept
by her family as `amabheka'. Amabheka means an economic hedge against any
economic disaster that the new bride might experience. [Time expired.]

Mev M E OLCKERS: Mev die Speaker, op hierdie Internasionale Vrouedag het
almal van ons weer eens die geleentheid om te fokus op die lewe en tye van
vroue en dogters. Die Beijing Plus Vyf Konferensie is gedurende Junie 2000
gehou, maar dit is baie jammer dat daar 'n totale gebrek was aan enige, of
in elk geval enige noemenswaardige, terugvoering. Selfs dames in baie
senior poste in die Parlement, en in die Staatsdiens, het geen terugvoering
gekry nie. Ek praat hier van persone wat ten nouste met beleid te make het.

Dit sluit aan by die kwessie wat gereeld op provinsiale vlakke en binne
departemente geopper word, naamlik die vraag na die mate waartoe die
nasionale Regering se ondertekening en verbintenis tot die Beijing
deklarasie ook bindend is op provinsiale administrasies. Tot watter mate
stel die Regering ondersoek in, en monitor die praktiese implementering van
die Beijing deklarasie en ander konvensies wat onderteken is?

Van die belangrikste internasionale deurbrake wat op die konferensie
bespreek is, is die aanvaarding van die ``Rome Statute'' van die
``International Criminal Court'', ingevolge waarvan verkragting, seksuele
slawerny, gedwonge sterilisasie en ander vorme van seksuele geweld nou as
oorlogsmisdade en sogenaamde ``crimes against humanity'' aangepak word
wanneer dit binne die konteks van gewapende konflik plaasvind. Ander
belangrike kwessies wat bespreek is, sluit die sogenaamde ``feminisation of
poverty'' asook die gaping tussen die de jure en de facto gelykheid in.

Die kernvraag is dus wat ons Regering en ander regerings doen om die
praktiese inwerkingstelling van al die ondertekende protokols na te kom en
te monitor. Het ons al 'n ``gender equity index''? Nie waarvan ek weet nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, on this International Women's Day all of
us once again have the opportunity to focus on the life and times of women
and girls. The Beijing Plus Five Conference was held in June 2000, but it
is very unfortunate that there was a total lack of any feedback, or, in any
event, of any significant feedback. Even women in very senior posts in
Parliament and in the Public Service did not receive any feedback. I am
talking about people who are closely involved with policy.
This links up with the issue that is often raised at provincial level and
within departments, namely the question of the extent to which the national
Government's signing of and commitment to the Beijing declaration are also
binding on provincial administrations. To what extent is the Government
investigating and monitoring the practical implementation of the Beijing
declaration and other conventions which have been signed?

One of the most important international breakthroughs discussed at the
conference was the adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, according to which rape, sexual slavery, compulsory
sterilisation and other forms of sexual violence are now treated as war
crimes and so-called crimes against humanity when they take place within
the context of armed conflict. Other important issues that were discussed
include the so-called feminisation of poverty, as well as the gap between
de jure and de facto equality.

The central question is therefore what our Government and other governments
are doing to adhere to and monitor the practical implementation of all the
protocols that have been signed. Do we have a gender equity index at
present? Not that I know of.]

And then, if we speak about the feminisation of poverty, let us think today
of women, mostly black and poor, who have recently suffered so much in
Zimbabwe and Mozambique. The floods in Mozambique were an act of God and we
must accept them as such. But that does not imply that we cannot sympathise
with those women, help them where we can and suffer the pain with them.
That stands in stark contrast to the man-inspired behaviour of the so-
called war veterans in Zimbabwe. The rural farmworkers; wives and children
are innocent victims, once again, in the name of politics. They are, in
fact, the war heroes of the past and now it seems of the future also. I
want to draw members' attention to a paper by Thoko Matatshe, director of
Zimbabwe's Women Resource Network in Harare. I quote:


  Violence against women has increased enormously and the political
  violence and violence on farms has worsened the situation for women. For
  the Zimbabwean women, +5 is, indeed, Beijing -5. Yes, we had a long way
  to go from Harare to Beijing, but it seems we did not come a long way
  from Beijing to Harare.
  For the ordinary woman in the streets of Harare ...

[Interjections.]

I am quoting someone else. [Interjections.]


  For the ordinary woman in the streets of Harare, even Beijing +5 was a
  nonevent that slipped by quietly as she grappled with rape, violence and
  invasions of her persona and nation. The backlash, the lack of commitment
  from the government, the failure of NGOs to literally bring Beijing home
  in a language that the woman in the street and in the rural areas
  understands has minimised the gains and impact of Beijing for women.


  Yes, the Beijing conference was an important achievement for the women's
  movement globally. Unfortunately, implementation is a localised process
  that falls to the whims of governments. At the same time, the women's
  movement seems to have lost the energy and momentum it had gathered in
  Beijing.

If that is how the women of Zimbabwe feel about their government, surely
we, as a South African Government that tries to honour our Constitution and
human rights, would be failing the calls of our sisters if we support a
government like that and, indeed, many other governments that are not even
slightly sensitive to the plight of women.

Government should call for zero tolerance as regards violence against
women, because there is an increasing recognition that all levels of
violence against women seriously affect their health. If the root is sick
and dies, the whole plant dies. If all the plants die, the land becomes
barren and dead. Let us hope and trust, but also see to it, that our
Government does not fail its women - the roots of this country. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, Amandla! [Power!]

HON MEMBERS: Ngawethu! [It is ours!]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Miss S RAJBALLY: The MF applauds women throughout the world who have chosen
to break the silence against abuse, oppression and discrimination. We have
succeeded in proactively recognising the pertinent role women play in
sustaining a balance in economic, social and political systems. The Beijing
Plus Five Global Platform is an authentic watchdog to monitor and evaluate
the progress the international community has made in accomplishing and
promoting gender equality.

In this regard South Africa's major achievements are: the Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, the Domestic Violence
Act and the Commission on Gender Equality. Despite the fact that we are
living in a patriarchal society, women are making gradual progress by
empowering themselves with political, social, economic and education
opportunities. However, the MF wants to emphasise that this unfortunately
is not enough, because orthodox cultural and traditional norms, which most
often are in conflict with our contemporary society, play an important role
in determining to what extent women should develop themselves.

The Beijing Plus Five direct crucial international attention on issues that
hurt all women the most. These are issues such as: violence against women,
poverty, economic and educational inequality, women in the decision-making
process, women's health, women and the media and the empowerment of girls.
Together with many other relevant gender equality issues, these issues must
be strategically addressed.

Mobilising and implementing positive strategic action plans on the above
important issues, facilitates the bedrock for promoting gender equality. To
successfully implement the Beijing Plus Five Platform of Action, we require
intensive commitment from men in particular, because real men do not rape,
do not assault women, are not intimidated by empowered women and do not
sexually harass women.

The Beijing Platform for Action is one of the most comprehensive
articulations of governments' commitments to the human rights of women and
girls. It is based on the growing understanding in the 1990s that women's
rights are human rights. If anything, the MF recognises these rights,
therefore the MF's MP holding the seat in Parliament is none other than a
woman. [Applause.]

Dr J BENJAMIN: Madam Speaker, hon members, education is a human right and
an essential tool for achieving the goals of equality, development and
peace.

  Nondiscriminatory education benefits both girls and boys, and thus
  ultimately contributes to more equal relationships between women and men.

This is a quotation from the Beijing Platform of Action, paragraph 69.
Since today is International Women's Day, it is apt to reflect on the state
of education of girls in the world, and not only in South Africa.

In much of the world, recognising education as a human right of girls is
often denied, or even curtailed. Therefore, the Beijing Platform of Action
urges Government and private organisations to ensure equal access,
eradicate illiteracy, particularly for women, improve women's access to
vocational training, science and technology and continue education and
develop nondiscriminatory education and training, allocate enough resources
for and monitor the implementation of educational reforms, promote lifelong
education and training for girls and women.

In the world, despite progress in this area, girls still face
discrimination due to ingrained cultural attitudes, early marriages,
pregnancies, lack of accessible schools and inadequate and gender-based
educational materials. Girls continue to be denied equality education in
science and technology. In our own country we have, from the start, set out
to address these problems by stating, in the Constitution, everyone's right
to basic education.

In the first five years, the gender equity task team was established to
advise the Department of Education on the establishment of a permanent
gender unit, and to advise on all aspects of gender equity. The report
covered early childhood development, schooling, further education and
training, adult basic education and training, gender and disability, gender
and educational management, and sex-based violence in schools.

Early childhood development is important for women and children, because it
frees women for employment and provides employment opportunities. The
Gender Equity Task Team report pointed out that early childhood resources
allocated were seriously disproportionate to other sectors of education.
The report recommended increased budgetary allocation and legislation in
line with our commitment to adult basic education and training, and gender
equality.

Legislation should set out the responsibility of all Government
organisations and managers in educational sites in terms of legal
accountability to prevent all forms of discrimination and harassment and to
take positive steps to redress the effects of discrimination. Gendered and
sex-based violence in educational settings should be defined and made
unlawful.

The National Education Policy Act, Act 27 of 1996, calls for a curriculum
in which all learners will be able to choose subjects which they could
study. However, school and culturally based practices present barriers to
an increase in the number of girls in courses like science, mathematics,
engineering, woodwork and technical drawing. In 1998, the Year of Science
and Technology focused on the achievements of women in science and
technology and launched an advocacy campaign to encourage the participation
of women.

The national education policy allows for full participation of girls and
women in sporting activities. Unfortunately, cultural and social
stereotyping, inadequate and unsafe sporting facilities still tend to
hamper and discourage participation. The Department of Sport and Recreation
has a range of programmes and projects aimed at accelerating equality
between men and women in sport and targets girls.

With regard to violence in schools, the Commission on Gender Equality has
reported that although statistics are absent, it is generally acknowledged
that the incidence of rape, sexual harassment and violence in schools is
widespread. Rape is often reported. However, sexual harassment and violence
are generally ignored. Perpetrators are often not exclusively fellow
students,  but are often teachers and even outsiders who, for instance, may
stalk or harass rural school girls during their long walks to and from
schools and often entice them for sex in exchange for money or food. In
this context, the belief that the girls are responsible for what happens to
them is still widespread within out communities.

Despite enormous efforts on the part of our Government, through policies
and legislation to address these issues, the following factors continue to
contribute to high dropout rates for girls. Unplanned pregnancies and
domestic responsibilities which lead to absenteeism; and girls, more often
than boys, are likely to be victims of sexual harassment, rape and other
forms of violence which result in trauma and lead to a drop in school
attendance. Despite the innovative advances, gender stereotypes continue to
pose a challenge for curriculum development. At universities, women
continue to be underrepresented in science and engineering.

The Beijing Plus Five Platform of Action specified areas for parliaments to
focus on. This Parliament has established the structures, policies and
legislation in the spirit in which our Constitution and the Beijing Plus
Five Platform of Action had intended. What emerges from the aforementioned
is that cultural beliefs and lack of resources continue to act as barriers
and also perpetuate discrimination in education.

I want to focus on the area of public campaigns and advocacy. It is at this
level where we need to strengthen our efforts to teach women and girls
about their rights to challenge retrogressive cultural beliefs and
traditions, for it is often at this level where the difficulties lie in
implementing the law. [Applause.]
Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, listening to the speaker that usually precedes
me, Miss Rajbally, we can clearly boast to the rest of the world that the
voices of women in this Parliament are to be heard loudly and clearly.
[Laughter.] We can put that in our next report.

Everyone in this House must be committed to the mission of promoting the
status and the rights of women. Therefore, it is strange to me that there
was a minor uproar in the ANC benches when the DA proposed a motion in this
regard earlier today.

Die AEB steun Suid-Afrika se verbintenis tot die Beijing Platform vir
Aksie. Ons steun wetgewing, aksies en begrotingsmeganismes wat daarop gemik
is om die posisie van die vrou te verbeter.

Een saak wat nie in die verslag vermeld is nie, maar wat die posisie van
die vrou wel verbeter, is die feit dat in die wetgewing insake
gelykberegtiging, alle vorme van diskriminasie op grond van geslag, ras en
gestremdheid uitgesonder word.

Wanneer 'n mens na ons verslag kyk, dan slaag ons formeel die toets deur
middel van ons wette, aksies en beplanning. Wanneer 'n mens egter na die
werklikheid kyk, dan lyk dinge soms anders.

Wie ly die meeste onder misdaad? Dit is ons vroue en kinders. Wie ly onder
verkragting? Dit is vroue. Wie ly die meeste onder armoede en werkloosheid?
Dit is vroue en kinders. Ons moet hierdie kwessies aanspreek en die posisie
van die vrou sal vanself verbeter.

Een saak waaroor ek bekommerd is, is dat daar nêrens in die Beijing-verslag
iets staan oor die plek en die waarde van die gesin, en oor morele en
sedelike waardes nie. Wat die gesin betref, erken ek dat vroue gelyke
geleenthede moet hê. Hulle moet gelyke geleenthede tot werk hê. Daar moet
geen diskriminasie wees nie.

Maar, dit bly nog 'n kind se reg en voorreg om waar enigsins moontlik, aan
moedersknie opgevoed te word. Daarom praat ons van die ``moedertaal'', en
nie van die ``vadertaal'' nie. Parellel tot alle aksies tot bemagtiging,
moet die deug van die moeder by die huis beklemtoon word.
Sekswinkels en pornografie, daardie skaamtelose uitbuiting van die
vroueliggaam, wat haar verlaag tot 'n handelskommoditeit, tas die waarde
van die vrou in wese aan. Ek daag vroue in hierdie Parlement uit om 'n slag
daarteen te betoog en dit te verwerp in 'n luide optog.

Wie ly die meeste onder sedelike verval? Dit is die vrou wat met die baba
sit, of uit wanhoop gedryf word tot moord op haar ongebore kind.

Ten slotte, daar word gesê die Bybel is 'n chauvinistiese boek wat geskryf
is deur mans vir mans. Tog wil ek die aandag daarop vestig dat daar nêrens
'n boek is wat die waarde en die plek van die vrou so mooi teken as juis
die Bybel nie. Haar prag en sieraad as eggenoot wat bemin word deur haar
man; haar adel as moeder wat haar kinders na die Here lei; haar waarde as
vrou wat met die vernaamstes meespreek en wat uitgaan en handel dryf. In
Spreuke 31 word haar waarde as ver bo korale geplaas.

Dit is die ware Calvinisme wat so dikwels gediskrediteer word. Dis die
basis van hoe my mense die vrou beskou. Waar dit nie gebeur nie, tree hulle
op teen die kodes van die gemeenskap waarvan ek deel is. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The AEB supports South Africa's commitment to the Beijing Platform of
Action. We support legislation, actions and budgetary mechanisms that are
aimed at improving the position of women.

One matter that was not mentioned in the report, but which would in fact
improve the position of women, is the fact that the Promotion of Equality
and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act eliminates all forms of
discrimination on the basis of race, gender and disability.

When one looks at our report, we formally pass the test by means of our
laws, actions and planning. When one looks at reality, however, things
sometimes look different.

Who suffers most because of crime? It is our women and children. Who
suffers most because of rape? It is the women. Who suffers most because of
poverty and unemployment? It is women and children. We must address these
issues and the position of women will improve automatically.
One matter about which I am concerned is that no mention is made anywhere
in the Beijing report about the place and value of the family, or about
moral and ethical values. As regards the family, I admit that women should
have equal opportunities. They should have equal access to work. There
should be no discrimination.

However, it nevertheless remains a child's right and privilege, where
possible, to be educated at his mother's knee. That is why we talk about
the ``mother tongue'', and not the ``father tongue''. Parallel with all
actions to empower, the virtue of the mother's being at home should be
emphasised.

Sex shops and pornography, that disgraceful exploitation of the female
body, which has reduced her to a trade commodity, in essence affects the
value of the woman. I challenge women in this Parliament to demonstrate
against this for a change, to reject it in a noisy march. Who suffers most
because of moral decadence? It is the woman who is stuck with the baby, or
who is driven by desperation to murder her unborn child.

In conclusion, it is said that the Bible is a chauvinist book written by
men for men. I nevertheless want to point out that nowhere else is there a
book that sketches the value and place of the woman as well as the Bible in
fact does. Her beauty and adornment as a spouse who is loved by her
husband; her nobility as a mother who leads her children to the Lord; her
value as a woman who speaks with the most important and who goes out to
trade. In Proverbs 31 her value is placed far above rubies.

This is the real Calvinism that is so often discredited. This is the basis
of how my people regard a woman. Where this does not happen, they are
acting contrary to the codes of the community of which I am a part.
[Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before I call on the next speaker, I would like
to recognise a delegation of women parliamentarians from the Parliament of
Malawi. You are welcome, hon members of the delegation. [Applause.]

Ms S B NQODI: Madam Speaker, as mandated by the Portfolio Committee on the
Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of Women, my debate will be
confined to violence against women.
Indeed, as alluded to by positive and progressive speakers before me, the
South African Government is applauded globally for a series of concrete
measures it has taken in a short space of time in the elimination of
violence against women and in the improvement of the livelihood of women
from all walks of life, irrespective of colour or social, economic and
political background. For this, personally I am proud to be associated with
such a Government.

Let me provide a short synopsis of what this Government has done by way of
addressing the problems stated above. I am sure I am speaking on behalf of
all MPs when I say: Firstly, we are aware of the awareness campaigns
promoted by Government in its endeavours to educate women about their
rights, and its efforts to sensitise communities about the impact of
violence on society as a whole and the impact on women themselves. We are
also aware of the Government's ongoing process of monitoring implementation
of policies and laws that aim at improving the quality of life and
advancing the status of women.

Amongst other Government-driven initiatives, we also appreciate the fact
that sexual offences guidelines have so far been distributed to provinces
for implementation and that the Government is also involved in training of
health providers in victim empowerment and trauma centres, especially in
rural areas. This process is still going on to reach the rural areas. It
also pleased us to learn that the transmission of HIV/Aids through rape is
considered violence against women, according to a decision taken by the
world court to classify rape as a crime.

Over and above this, we welcome the increase in the number of maintenance
claims at some of our magistrates' offices throughout the country, and the
decrease in rape-reported cases from 49 380 to 23 900 between 1998 and June
1999. This indeed is an indication that Government's awareness campaign
programmes are a great success. Therefore, as members of this House, we can
say with confidence that Beijing Plus Five is indeed a +5 when it comes to
bettering the lives of women in South Africa.

Our major concern as the committee is, however, the fact that despite all
these wonderful efforts which measure the delivery of our commitment to
international instruments promoting gender equality and the elimination of
violence against women, South Africa today still has one of the highest
incidences of rape, abuse and violence against women. Locally and globally
this is unacceptable and it necessitates urgent consideration and
intervention by all of us and society as a whole. We should not only
negatively criticise all the time.

I say this, because most of the time, we as Members of Parliament are
confronted by questions such as: Why, in spite of all the political will
and commitment that we have shown so far in particular through the
enactment of the Domestic Violence Act, do we still see a continual
statistical rise in violence against women? What needs to be done, that has
not been done so far, to mitigate this violence that is targeted at women
and girl-children?

How should we do it? What determines sexual behaviour and what can be done
to stop the actions of a would-be perpetrator before he commits a crime?
How far do we need to go in order to persuade the police and the justice
system to enforce the rule of law and to implement our policies, given the
attitudinal problems and resistance to change by some of the law-
enforcement officials and some of the judges presiding in our courts of
law? Lastly, what are the most effective interventions that, as a country,
we can engage in in our efforts to mitigate or eradicate violence against
women, given the budgetary constraints that we still have to live with even
five years down the line in our new democracy?

From these questions it is clear that the solutions to the problems of
gender-based violence need intersectoral, intergovernmental, interregional,
intercultural and interreligious approaches, which should include private
and public sector co-operation. Without these approaches, we are facing a
lifelong problem that will dominate future livelihoods and that will
perpetually promote enslavement of women and girl-children and the
violation of their rights.

As we commemorate International Women's Day, we once more wish to draw the
attention of this Government, and the world at large, to the fact that
violence against women has reached epidemic proportions. Every day and
every minute women worldwide are battered, raped and murdered by their
husbands, partners and strangers. Girl-children are sexually abused and
killed on a daily basis by strangers, fathers, brothers and relatives. They
are victims of cultural, ethnic and racial violence, and of displacement,
war and globalisation.

What needs to be acknowledged is that this gender-based violence is not
only a threat to women's health and a violation of their human rights, but
is also a barrier to development, because it impacts on women's self-
determination and their control over their lives and bodies, and it also
limits their full participation in society. Development and democracy are
only possible when women out there have full access to and control of their
economic, sociocultural and political opportunities in society.

Although reliable national statistics are not readily available, both
domestic violence and sexual assault are pervasive in South Africa. Both
are directed, almost exclusively, against women and girl-children, often in
places where they should be safe, and by men that they know. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs M L NGWENYA: Madam Speaker, allow me to say it is a great honour to
speak in this debate. We have three women presiding officers in this
Parliament, and it is fitting that we should share our concerns, which
affect women throughout the world today. The ANC has brought a large number
of women into this Government and from our position here we have
contributed to the legislation that is transforming our country. We have
shaped the laws that are bringing a better life to our people. What is left
to us is to ensure that they are implemented.

The studies of poverty by the World Bank and others gave us a definition of
poverty in terms of income, jobs and living conditions. The definition is
incomplete, they should have added: ``Poverty weighs more heavily on women
than on men''. Even as we find that poverty is a complex thing, our
successes or failures in programmes to combat this evil rests on the
ability to mobilise women to be involved in uprooting it. We have
information from studies of poverty that 53% of rural households are
surviving on inadequate incomes. Other studies put the figures at much
higher, but it is always worse for households headed by women. Sixty-three
out of every 100 rural women are unable to make end meets.

Despite poverty in the rural areas, it is an evil that we understand and
this ANC-led Government has already started to uproot it. Speaking at the
opening of Parliament, President Mbeki highlighted the progress we have
seen in getting various levels of Government and departments working
together. The integrated rural development strategy and the urban renewal
programmes have the central aim of a sustained campaign against rural and
urban poverty and underdevelopment bringing in the resources of all three
spheres of government in a co-ordinated manner.

We listened attentively when he listed the 10 nodal points throughout the
country which will lead the focus of integrated programmes from the second
half of this year. These nodal points are ready to move to a higher phase
of development. The strategic approach that Government has taken has
resulted in the President's Office already getting a very accurate picture
of precisely what services are required by people for development to occur
and women are the focus of programmes on poverty reduction. To take this
into account all these people who are sent to work at the nodal points will
receive training to recognise the particular needs of women. Through the
needs analysis we will understand the start of poverty and we can swiftly
root it out.

One of the main things that contributes to poverty is when women have no
rights to land, to inheritance and to take charge of their own homes. They
deserve to be treated as equals and with dignity by their spouses. Instead
they are treated as dependants, yet they are the strongest pillars in
maintaining the homes.

Ngithi ake basiphathe kahle obaba. Siyabacela ngoba manje sekuyisikhathi
sokuthi basibheke njengabantu, hhayi njengebantu okufanele benze imisebenzi
yokuhlanzeka nokulungisa nje kuphela. Siyabacela. Siyabacela. (Translation
of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[I am saying that we appeal to our husbands to treat us with dignity. We
ask them because now is the time for them to treat us like human beings,
not just like people whose duties are to clean and prepare things. We ask
them! We ask them!]

One of the main things that contributes to poverty is something that all
women have. Government programmes of poverty alleviation have been
developed! An example is the Working for Water programme, which is an
outstanding model on which the others should be based. It combines social
and economic goals, and spreads benefits throughout a community. The vast
minority of people that are trained are women. I believe the rural women of
this country will respond to the call by our President to continue in
participating in the struggle for genuine development.

Ms L M T XINGWANA: Madam Speaker, today marks the first International
Women's Day in the African century. In my view, this should be declared the
African women's century, because without women there would, indeed, be no
Africa, and without women there would be no world.

On this day we celebrate the struggles and victories of women all over the
world. In particular, we remember women workers who initiated this day when
they demanded bread and roses, and rejected starvation wages and inhumane
working conditions on the factory floor. I also want to congratulate the
World Court of Women against War for Peace on bringing their conference to
one of our townships, Khayelitsha. This is the first time a world
conference has been taken to the people. It is only women who can do this.
[Applause.] We thank all women from all walks of life who supported the
world court. We particularly thank our veterans who shared their stories of
pain under the brutal system of apartheid and racism. The world court has
afforded South African women an opportunity to tell their own experiences.
However, we believe that we have just scratched the surface. We still need
a truth and reconciliation commission to afford her the opportunity to tell
her story. [Applause.]

We still need a South African court that will give us the opportunity to
talk about our pain.

Ke siza kucela noomama bethu abamhlophe beze kuchaza ukuba babebacinezela
njani na oomama bethu phaya emakhitshini nasezifama. [Uwele-wele.]

Namhlanje sisebenzile eMzantsi Afrika. Sirnabulisile, senze umsebenzi
wesakhono kule Palamente. Namhlanje nooSheila Camerer baxhobile. Bayazi
ukuba kukho into ekuthiwa yi`Gender Policy'. Bayazi ukuba kukho inkomfa
ebizwa ngelokuba `yiUN Beijing Conference'. Sabanyula bazii ...
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We are going to ask white women to come and explain how they oppressed our
black mothers when they worked as their domestic workers and on the farms.
[Interjections.]
Today we can proudly say we have worked for South Africa. We have raised
political awareness; we have done commendable work in this Parliament.
Today even the likes of Sheila Camerer are empowered. They know about
something called the Gender Policy.  They know about something like the UN
Beijing Conference. We rescued them from being ...]

... pariahs of the world. They could not move out of this country. Nobody
wanted to touch them. Nobody wanted to touch South Africa.

Mandiphinde kwakhona ndirnabulise ndithi umgaqo-nkqubo wesini waseMzantsi
Afrika sele ukhona, yaye asilo iphepha lokugaya izimvo (Green Paper),
ngumgaqo-nkqubo.

Xa uBenise ethetha ngomhlaba abantu bakowethu abangekabinawo ndicela
ukumkhumbuza ukuba angaqali uchuku. Sicenga abantu phaya phandle, kunzima.
Abantu bafuna ilizwe labo. Makathethe noo`Mrs' noo`Baas' bakhe, bazise
ilizwe lethu. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Ohloniphekileyo uSheila usixelela ngokuba uRhulumente ufuna ukutyhalwa
akenzi zizalisekiso. Wazalisekisa ntoni yena ngokuya wayenguSekela-
Mphathiswa wezoBulungisa?
Ngexesha uqabane uManto Tshabalala-Msimang ebenguSekela-Mpathiswa
wezoBulungisa babethetha gqitha besithi `wazi ntoni ngomthetho engugqirna
nje?' Namhlanje inkuknu isikw' umlomo. Ohloniphekileyo uManto wasikhulula
thina. Sinemithetho mithathu, siyayibala. YiDomestic Violence Act 116,
1998, Maintainance Act 99, 1998; iCustomary Marriages Act ka 1998 ivele
ngaye esihla enyuka nathi bafazi, esibuza ukuba sifuna ntoni na,
simchazela, ngoba uyayazi ukuba usebenza phakathi kwabafazi.

Ndifuna ukuphinda ndithi namhlanje uyiphethe ingxaki enkulu egqibe umhlaba
wonke, iHiv/Aids. Sifunda emaphepheni namhlanje ukuba isantya sosuleleko
phakathi kolutsha lwethu sihlile. Namhlanje abantwana phaya eziDyunivesiti
abatsho okokuba abayifuni ikhondom, babuza besithi: Yomelele ngokwenene na.
Le iyasebenza na? Bafuna ikwaliti yekhondom, nto leyo ethetha ukuba nkqubo
zokufundisa zikaRhulumente wethu ziyasebenza.

Ndiyavumelana no mama uMbuyazi xa esithi uRhulumente wethu usebenzile.
Imigaqo-nkqubo ekhoyo nale mithetho sithetha ngayo yeye-ANC. Sikule ndawo
sikuyo nje namhlanje kungenxa ye-ANC.

Ndivumelana naye ngelithi nkqubo zeBeijing masizise ezantsi ebantwini,
zingapheleli ekubeni yimicimbi yesizwe kuphela, zingapheleli apha
ePalamente. Masizise koomama phaya emaphandleni. Masizise kumaphondo
nakumasebe ethu.

Ndiphinde ndivumelane notata obethetha ngoYizo Yizo ngelithi thina boomama
bomthandazo, thina boomama besililo sithi: Le nto imdaka kangaka ing. uYizo
Yizo ibuyela ntoni na? Ingcolisa abantwana bethu.

Sithi Iqumhu loSasazo loMzantsi Afrika malime ngoku ngenxa yokuba kusuke
kuthi ubani esahleli nabantwana besitya isidlo sangokuhlwa, kungekabikho
sebusuku, sibone ngabantu sebekhulula, sebedlala imidlalo yabantu abadala,
angazi ubani nokuba amcime umabonakakude okanye agxothe abantwana kusini
na. Yingxaki esinayo ke leyo. Siyacela ke ukuba iqumrhu loSasazo loMzantsi
Afrika malibuye kwelo nyathelo.

Ubundlobongela buboniswa kakhulu. Imiboniso bhanya-bhanya yobundlobongela
mininzi ngokukodwa kwiQumrhu loSasazo loMzantsi Afrika. Siyacela okokuba
noko ziphungulwe.

Sicela iinkqubo ezakhayo, eze ... (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)
[Again let me share this with you and say that the gender policy of South
Africa exists, and it is not a Green Paper, it is a policy document.

I would like to tell Bernice that talking about our people's land is a very
sensitive issue. We are pleading with people out there, and it is
difficult. People want their land. She should tell her ``Madam'' and
``Baas'' to give us back our land. [Applause.]

The hon Sheila is telling us that the Government needs to be pressurised,
as it is not delivering. What did she implement when she was the Deputy
Minister of Justice?

When Comrade Manto Tshabalala-Msimang was the Deputy Minister of Justice
they asked: ``What does a doctor know about justice?' Today they have
nothing to say. Then hon Manto saved us. We can now count three Acts. They
are the Domestic Violence Act, No 116 of 1998, the Maintenance Act, No 99
of 1998 and the Customary Marriages Act of 1998. In the process of
producing these Acts she was working amongst us women, wanting to know what
we wanted and we would say it, for she knew that she was working with other
women.

Again I want to say that the problem of HIV/Aids that is ravaging and
destroying the entire world is on her shoulders. We read in the newspapers
that the number of youth being infected has dropped. Today students at
universities no longer say that they want to use the condom, but they ask
whether it is really strong. Does it really work? They want to know about
the quality of the condom. That means that the educational programmes that
our Government established are working.

I concur with Mrs Mbuyazi when she says that our Government has worked. The
policies and the Acts about which we are talking were all initiated by the
ANC. We are where we are today because of the ANC.

I agree with her when she says that we should introduce the Beijing
programmes to the people on the ground, and that they should not just be
national issues and end up here in Parliament. Let us take them to our
provinces and to our constituencies, our branches.

I want to agree with the hon member who talked about Yizo Yizo and say that
we women of prayer are asking: Why has this disgusting show Yizo Yizo come
back? It spoils the minds of our children. We say that the SABC should stop
now because most often one would be sitting with children having supper,
and it would not be that late in the evening, when we would see people
taking off their clothes, participating in adult scenes. At that time one
would not know whether to switch the TV set off or ask the children to
leave the room. That is the problem that we have. We would like to ask the
SABC to refrain from showing such programmes.

There are too many violent scenes shown. There are too many action movies
shown by the SABC. We would like to ask that their number be reduced.

We would like to ask for constructive programmes about ...]

... nation-building, which will bring back the true values ...

... zabantu bethu, zabantu base Afrika.

Ndilusizi kuba uNokuzola ubalekile. Okokuqala, ndicela lo uhloniphekileyo
enze laa ngxolo inkulu ebeyenza apha phaya kuGeneral kwa-UDM. Masibone
oomama begcwele phaya kwa-UDM, engahambi yedwa engumama wakwa-UDM.
Mabangene bagcwale. Okwesibini, andazi ukuba uthetha ngantoni na xa esithi
masilingane. Andinakho ukulingana mna noRita Ndzanga, andinakho ukulingana
nomama uLydia, andinakho ukulingana nomama uIvy Gcina. Ngamagqala lawo,
ngoomama bam. Ndandiba uyawazi amasiko nezithethe zakowethu. IUDM isekwe
izolo oku, iza kuthini ukulingana ne-ANC?

Xa ndiza kuhlala phantsi, ndifuna ukukhumbula oomama abanxiba le bhatyi
okokuba benza umngcelele besiya kwi-Union Buildings besiya kulahla amapasi.
Ndikhumbula uLilian Ngoyi, uHelen Joseph, uDorothy Zihlangu, uDorothy
Nyembe nabanye abaninzi abalwayo banikezela ngeempilo zabo nangobomi babo
ukuze namhlanje thina sisonke, ngakumbi thina boomama sibe silapha kule
Palamente, sisilwela amalungelo ethu.

Kwakhona xa ndiza kuhlala phantsi ndikhumbula oomama abaphila kumazwe
ekusekho kuwo ungxunguphalo oomama baseCongo, eAngola, eBurundi, eSierra
Leone, ePalestina nase Kosovo. Sicela uRhulumente wethu aqhube, abaxhase
ekusebenzeleni uxolo emazweni abo, sisithi oomama mababekhona xa kuxoxwa
ngolu xolo, xa kusakhiwa olu xolo ngoba nabo bayachaphazeleka.
[Kwaqhwatywa] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... about our people, about the African people.

I am sorry that Nokuzola has run away. Firstly, I would like to ask the hon
member to make the big noise that she was making here to the UDM. We would
like to see quite a number of women in the UDM and not only she. They must
come and take up positions.  Secondly, I do not know what she means when
she says that we should be equal. I could never be equal to Rita Ndzanga; I
could never be equal to Lydia; and I could never be equal to Mother Ivy
Gcina. Those are veterans, they are my mothers. I thought that she knew
about our norms and values. The UDM was formed only yesterday, how could it
be equal to the ANC?

Before I sit down, I would like to pay tribute to the women who used to
wear this top, the women who marched to the Union Buildings to destroy
their passes. I would like to pay tribute to Lillian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph,
Dorothy Zihlangu, Dorothy Nyembe and many others who gave up their lives
and struggled so that all of us today, especially us women, could be in
this Parliament, fighting for our rights.

Before I sit down, I would once again like to pay tribute to women who live
in countries where there is tension, like Congo, Angola, Burundi, Sierra
Leone, Palestine and Kosovo. I would like to ask that our Government
continues to support them in their endeavours to bring peace in their
countries, saying that women should participate in the discussions about
peace because they are involved. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Speaker,
members of this House, women of South Africa and of the world, 8 March 2001
is, indeed, a day we celebrate, reflecting not only our triumphs but also
our challenges.

There are still too many tears flowing, not only those of the women of the
world, but I believe those of the progressive people as well. But we are
today not going to adopt a victim syndrome. Progressive women in South
Africa, like those in the South, progressive men and women internationally,
have always been survivors and a part of the movement for change and the
eradication or rolling back of oppression and any forms of inequity.

We reflected it in our courage in this country when we took bold steps and
put in place policies that would ensure that that change can take place.
And when we took those bold steps we did not, like the developed world,
say: Let us do it incrementally in order to ensure that the machinery is
fully in place to roll out the change. We said that women of South Africa,
the progressive people of South Africa, should rally.

Today we have in this House - hon Lulu Xingwana mentioned a few of the
women, but I want to isolate only one woman, because there are many here
today - MamZangwa, as part of South African women who form part of the
first democracy in this country. [Applause.] There are some women in this
House who earlier today asked: ``What have we achieved: little or
nothing?''

Travel the journey with MamZangwa. In 1969 MamZangwa was imprisoned with
her husband. She served various banning orders. She had four young
children. For her the pain of separation, where there were children without
parents, is not something she read about, it is something she lived. In
October 1976 MamZangwa lost her husband while she was in prison. He died at
the hands of the security police. They never allowed her to go to the
funeral. Her children were alone while she was in prison from October into
the next year.

Where were those who shout and say nothing has happened? MamZangwa is part
of the democratic forces of women who are marching on a journey today,
saying: We are not here as helpless victims. We are going to make a
difference. We are the voices of women who must ensure that implementation
takes place. We are the women who say we are still challenged ...
[Applause] ... and we are part of the progressive movement that says we
still have a long way to go.

We have just started out on the march. We are but at the beginning. The
road ahead is long, and that road does not merely need voices and
spectators. That road needs each and every one of us in this House to
participate in the process of ensuring that implementation of Government
policy at local level is happening.

If we are to ensure that the women of South Africa feel the difference, let
us be part of the machinery that makes the difference. Let us not stand and
shout about it. Let us not say, as some have, that we represent the woman
on the ground. Many of us here come from the belly of this country. We are
part of these women. We were born of those women. We are here to ensure
that we take forward and change the machinery.

Changing the machinery is not only about what the Government must do for
the people. It is about what we all do together, with the Government
machinery being the implementer. Each and every one of us must make sure
that more than 50% of the 1 million public servants that those women gave
birth to understand the challenge on March 8, 2001. The challenge is that
they must be part of the implementation making the difference.

We must ensure that as part of governance we join the marchers that say to
the pharmaceutical industry that if we are to implement that part of the
platform for action that talks about women and generic drugs must be
accessible to women of the developing world. [Applause.] And we should not
merely talk about it in Parliament, we must be there in the trenches. We
come from the trenches. We are part of the trenches, we did not hear about
them. We must be there. [Applause.]

There is a second issue. As we talk about violence against women, let us
not be defensive about it.

Dit is 'n aanklag wat sny tot op die been. [This is an allegation which
goes to the crux of the matter.]

It is something that crosses class, that crosses gender, that crosses
culture, that crosses religion, and it is not merely intervention through
laws and enforcement agencies that will make a difference. What are all of
us doing to make that difference? [Applause.] What is happening in the
communities? Let us ensure that, as we celebrate this day and as we
consider the challenges, when we look at the tears on this day, let us talk
and do what was stated by the President, namely to make sure that we are
involved in action for change.

Are all of us part of that group? Is everybody willing to be part of that
group, or do we once more want to sit back and say: What is being done for
me by someone else? The women of South Africa never, ever wanted things
done for them. Hence, when the pass laws were first extended to men, women
stood up and challenged those pass laws - they had not reached them yet.
They said: ``We are clear that it will come to us'', and they stood up.

I want to say here today that as we deal with these challenges, let us call
on women in the media to come and actually join us in challenging the
approach by the media that project women in authority as not deserving to
be there. [Applause.] The media projects women in positions of authority
across society as getting there by dubious means.

What has happened to the fact that it was the women of this country who
were willing to say that they were not going to be held back or wait for
actions to come their way while they merely look on? We are going to take
things head-on. I think the time has come now for the media not to see us
women merely as vehicles for making or carrying messages, or as victims of
this or that, ie public sources affected by crime or victims of sexual and
domestic violence.

The media portrays women in authority in a significantly negative and
personal manner, merely focusing on their level of beauty, their femininity
and their role in family life. They should see us as an active part of the
force that says: We are going to play a role as active agents for change in
South Africa, in the region and internationally.

Those members who dare talk about a so-called ``vrouestaat'' do not deserve
even to say those words, because I do not think they can make any ``staat''
happen. They should try to take us on. The expression, ``Wathint' abafazi,
wathint' imbokodo'' did not come about for nothing. If one touches the
women, if one tries to break the consensus that there is in the progressive
movement, then one ought to be careful. It is said that we women are the
ones who hold the knife at the sharpest edge, because we are the ones who
give birth; we are the ones who will ensure that language grows in a
society; we are the ones that build. But we want to do all that with the
men in society. If they want to join us, they should join the progressive
forces. It will not help to complain about percentages if one is one of
those who are against progress. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

 CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS -
                    CONSTITUTIVE ACT OF THE AFRICAN UNION

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:03.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance:
         (a)     Government Notice No R.164 published in Government Gazette
              No 22084 dated 23 February 2001, Policy Holder protection
              rules under the Short-Term Insurance Act, 1998, made in terms
              of section 55 of the Short-Term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 53
              of 1998).


         (b)     Government Notice No R.165 published in Government Gazette
              No 22085 dated 23 February 2001, Policy Holder protection
              rules under the Long-Term Insurance Act, 1998, made in terms
              of section 62 of the Long-Term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 52
              of 1998).


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Foreign Affairs and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil to
         establish a Joint Commission, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committees on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs, on Minerals and Energy, on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism, on Health, on Communications,
         on Transport, on Education, on Trade and Industry and on Public
         Works. It is also referred to the Select Committees on Land and
         Environmental Affairs, on Economic Affairs, on Social Services, on
         Labour and Public Enterprises, on Public Services and on Education
         and Recreation:


         Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil on
         Technical Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health and the Select Committee on Social Services:
         (a)     Government Notice No R.44 published in Government Gazette
              No 21983 dated 19 January 2001, Regulations relating to
              registration as a Dental Technician and related matters, made
              in terms of section 50 of the Dental Technicians Act, 1979
              (Act No 19 of 1979).


         (b)     Government Notice No R.43 published in Government Gazette
              No 21983 dated 19 January 2001, Regulations regarding
              processed foodstuffs, made in terms of section 15(1) of the
              Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54
              of 1972).


         (c)     Government Notice No R.127 published in Government Gazette
              No 22052 dated 12 February 2001, Regulations in terms of the
              Allied Health Professions Act, 1982, made in terms of section
              38 of the Allied Health Professions Act, 1982 (Act No 63 of
              1982).


         (d)     Government Notice No R.16 published in Government Gazette
              No 22052 dated 12 February 2001, Commencement of the
              Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Second Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 50 of 2000) on
              12 February 2001, made in terms of section 41 of the
              Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Second Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 50 of 2000).


         (e)     Government Notice No R.156 published in Government Gazette
              No 22076 dated 23 February 2001, Regulations regarding the
              registration and training of Student Dental Technicians and
              Student Dental Technologists, made in terms of section 50 of
              the Dental Technicians Act, 1979 (Act No 19 of 1979).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Board of Control of the
     Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal for 1999-2000.


