---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 April 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2001-04-05
---

THURSDAY, 5 APRIL 2001
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr P J C NEL: Mr Chairman, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the release of the long-awaited report of President Mbeki's
       controversial Aids advisory panel, which, as the DA predicted for
       months, has produced no concrete results to help the millions of Aids
       sufferers in South Africa;


  (2) further notes with shock that, by the Government's own admission, the
       report has no effect on the current Aids policy and thereby confirms
       the fact that this multimillion-rand exercise was put in place only
       to satisfy the curiosity of our President, who is now left with even
       more questions rather than answers;


  (3) acknowledges that the report confirms the ANC's contradictory stance
       on the use of antiretrovirals, which differentiates itself from the
       DA's policy, in which the DA supports antiretroviral use; and


  (4) calls on the Government to stop using the report as a cover up for
       their feeble fight against HIV/Aids.

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, I give notice
that at the next sitting of this House I shall move:


  That the Council -
  (1) notes with concern that a shopping complex that was looted and
         destroyed in Itsoseng Township, North West, in the violence of
         March 1994, has not been reconstructed;


  (2) notes that the absence of this business centre has caused the
         residents untold hardship and suffering; and


  (3) calls on the provincial government to do all in its power to rebuild
         the centre and give credibility to the RDP.

                     REPORT ON ILL-TREATMENT OF ELDERLY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M E SURTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note of and acknowledges with thanks the release by the
         Minister of Social Development of two volumes of a report compiled
         by the ministerial committee on the abuse, neglect and poor
         treatment of older persons in all nine provinces;


  (2) notes the shocking facts mentioned in the report in respect of the
         abuse and brutalities committed against senior citizens, not only
         in institutions for the aged and state hospitals, but also within
         the family context of our communities;


  (3) thanks the Minister of Social Development for this investigation by a
         special committee and for the comprehensive reports that have been
         released for all to read; and


  (4) regards this matter as so important that it be debated as soon as
         possible.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   WORLD HEALTH DAY FOCUS ON MENTAL HEALTH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) supports and endorses World Health Day on 7 April 2001, particularly
         since this day is being used to highlight mental health problems;


  (2) calls on all members to heed the call by the Minister and her
         department to ring a bell at noon on World Health Day for mental
         health;


  (3) takes cognisance of the fact that the World Health Organisation and
         the World Bank have declared that -


        (a)      mental health problems can affect anyone and have
              calculated that one in five people suffer from mental health
              problems in their mildest or severest form; and


        (b)      depression as a mental health problem is regarded as being
              the disease with the fourth highest incidence; and
  (4) encourages members both of the Council and the community at large to
         eradicate the stigma and superstitions attached to mental health
         problems.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): I call upon the hon
member Bhengu.

Mr M J BHENGU: I do not have a motion, Chairperson. [Interjections.]

                           ACTION AGAINST CHOLERA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I wish to move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that three deaths relating to cholera were recently reported in
       Alexandra;
  (2) commends the Gauteng provincial government for speedily activating a
       cholera joint operations centre comprising a team from the Gauteng
       Health Department and local government in response to the latest
       deaths;


  (3) recognises the major boost which the fight against cholera received
       through the announcement by the Minister of Water Affairs and
       Forestry of a R3 billion investment to provide basic water and
       sanitation services over the next three years; and


  (4) believes that these interventions confirm the Government's commitment
       to curb the spread of cholera and to create a risk-free health
       environment for the country's poor.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    ANC YOUTH LEAGUE NATIONAL CONFERENCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I wish to move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the African National Congress Youth League is holding its
       National Conference at the University of the Free State in
       Bloemfontein;


  (2) recognises the important contribution the youth of South Africa have
       made in the struggle for our liberation;


  (3) believes that as the future leaders of this country, the youth should
       be encouraged to engage in debates around critical issues that
       confront our country; and


  (4) wishes them well during their deliberations and hopes that they will
       emerge with a renewed sense of commitment to confront the challenges
       facing our country.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: May I move an amendment, Sir? I agree with the motion,
except that I feel that the advertisement for the meeting of the ANC Youth
League should be left out. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Do you agree to that,
hon member?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: No, Chairperson, I do not agree to it.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Since there is an
objection to the motion, it may not be proceeded with. [Interjections.] No,
it is an objection to the amendment. Is there any objection to the motion
in principle? There is no objection.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Dr E A CONROY: I am sorry that we did not amend this motion, Chairperson.
The conference should be held in Johannesburg, not Bloemfontein.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order!

                     GOOD WISHES FOR EASTER AND PASSOVER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr J L THERON: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that Christians in South Africa and all over the world will be
       observing Easter next weekend;


  (2) notes that the Jewish community will be celebrating the Passover; and


  (3) wishes these two religious communities and all South Africans well
       over the Easter and Passover holidays and prays that they and all MPs
       will have a safe journey to their different holiday destinations.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   REFUSAL OF CAPE TOWN UNICITY MAYOR TO APPEAR BEFORE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the refusal of Unicity mayor Peter Marais to appear before the
       Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation to explain allegations of
       racism in the Newlands Stadium soccer row;


  (2) expresses its concern over statements attributed to Mr Marais that he
       would never accede to the request to appear before the portfolio
       committee, even if he was summoned to do so;


  (3) recognises that section 56 of the Constitution empowers National
       Assembly committees to summon any person to appear before them and to
       compel such person to comply with the summons; and


  (4) believes that Mr Marais' stated intention to ignore any summons from
       the portfolio committee to appear before it, displays a flagrant
       disregard for the Constitution of this country and the institution of
       Parliament.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Is there any
objection to the motion? In the light of the objection, the motion may not
be proceeded with, and it will become notice of a motion.

          OPEN LETTER FROM DR ALLAN BOESAK TO MINISTER OF EDUCATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K D S DURR: Mr Chairman, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) notes the inspired open letter, written from prison, by Dr Allan
       Boesak to Minister Kader Asmal, in response to the Minister's
       criticism of the successful Christian rally held at Newlands on 21
       March 2001, attended by over 45 000 people;


  (2) calls upon South Africans generally and the Government in particular
       to carefully consider Dr Boesak's profound message and to heed his
       heartfelt warning that accurately reflects the feelings of a great
       multitude of South Africans; and


  (3) commends Dr Boesak for his courage in speaking out as he has.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr M V MOOSA: I have no objection, Chairperson, but I move as an amendment:


  That the following paragraph be added after paragraph (3):


  (4) further notes that Minister Asmal has apologised to the relevant
       community for the statements he made.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Do you agree to the
amendment, hon member?

Mr K D S DURR: I do, Mr Chairman, as an addition to the motion.

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely: That the Council -


  (1) notes the inspired open letter, written from prison, by Dr Allan
       Boesak to Minister Kader Asmal, in response to the Minister's
       criticism of the successful Christian rally held at Newlands on 21
       March 2001, attended by over 45 000 people;


  (2) calls upon South Africans generally and the Government in particular
       to carefully consider Dr Boesak's profound message and to heed his
       heartfelt warning that accurately reflects the feelings of a great
       multitude of South Africans;


  (3) commends Dr Boesak for his courage in speaking out as he has; and


  (4) further notes that Minister Asmal has apologised to the relevant
       community for the statements he made.

   SIGNIFICANCE FOR INDIGENOUS LANGUAGES OF MR MANDELA'S PARTICIPATION IN
                     KLEIN KAROO NATIONAL ARTS FESTIVAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) verheug daarvan kennis neem dat oudpresident Nelson Mandela op 7
       April 2001 die gasspreker is op die Klein Karoo Nasionale Kunstefees;


  (2) die organiseerders en borge van die fees gelukwens met die inisiatief
       om mnr Mandela te nooi;


  (3) sy dank uitspreek dat oudpresident Mandela ingestem het om die
       feesgangers toe te spreek en hierdeur weer eens sy verbintenis bewys
       om Afrikaans en die ander inheemse tale hul regmatige plek in Suid-
       Afrika te gun;
  (4) van mening is dat die versugting om tale hul regmatige plek te laat
       inneem, spoedig gestalte moet vind in 'n nasionale talebeleid en
       talewet; en


  (5) die organiseerders en die feesgangers 'n genotvolle ervaring wat met
       groei gepaard gaan, toewens gedurende die Klein Karoo Nasionale
       Kunstefees.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) is delighted to take note of the fact that former President Nelson
       Mandela will be the guest speaker at the Klein Karoo National Arts
       Festival on 7 April 2001;


  (2) congratulates the organisers and sponsors of the festival on the
       initiative of inviting Mr Mandela;


  (3) expresses its gratitude that former President Mandela has agreed to
       address the festivalgoers, thereby once again proving his commitment
       to granting Afrikaans and the other indigenous languages their
       rightful place in South Africa;


  (4) is of the opinion that the desire to have languages assume their
       rightful place should be realised speedily in a national language
       policy and language Act; and


  (5) wishes the organisers and festivalgoers a pleasurable experience
       associated with growth during the Klein Karoo National Arts
       Festival].

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                 CONDITIONS FOR ELDERLY AT PENSION PAYPOINTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) commends the Minister of Social Development for his commitment to
       improve the conditions experienced by elderly persons at paypoints;


  (2) supports the Minister's concern regarding the length of time spent in
       queues, lack of shelter, lack of toilet facilities and of all other
       necessary essentials to make paypoints conducive to serve our senior
       citizens;


  (3) notes that no national or uniform standards are applied to private
       contractors who pay pensions in most provinces: paymasters arrive
       late, machines break down and sometimes money runs out; and


  (4) supports any further steps by the Minister which would positively
       influence the treatment of elderly persons at paypoints.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    DEATHS IN PRISONS CAUSED BY HIV/AIDS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note of the contents of the Annual Report of the Inspecting
       Judge for the period 1 April to 31 December 2000, especially that -


       (a)  the number of ``natural'' deaths in prisons has escalated from
           186 such deaths recorded in 1995 to 1 087 recorded for 2000 - an
           increase of 584% during the past five years;


       (b)  from the postmortem reports those ``natural'' deaths would
           appear to have been caused by HIV/Aids in most of the cases; and


       (c)  a projection based on the figures of the past five years was
           made of the number of deaths that could occur should the
           escalation continue and based on that, unless a cure is found,
           deaths caused by HIV/Aids will amount to 7 000 prisoners per
           annum in five years and to 45 000 per annum in 10 years; and


  (2) is of the opinion that appropriate steps should be taken as soon as
       possible to prevent the spread of HIV/Aids in prisons and to protect
       HIV-negative prisoners from being infected by HIV-positive prisoners.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

       RECOMMENDATIONS OF JOINT SUBCOMMITTEE ON POWERS AND PRIVILEGES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move that the following
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper be adopted:


     (1)    notwithstanding Joint Rule 35(1), the Joint Subcommittee on
         Powers and Privileges report its recommendations to transform the
         existing law and practice on existing parliamentary powers and
         privileges;


     (2)    the Council refers the draft bill on Powers and Immunities of
         Parliament to an ad hoc Committee of the Council for consideration
         and report, and for that purpose establishes a committee in terms
         of Rule 160, the committee to -


         (a)     consist of 15 members;


         (b)     consider the bill in accordance with Chapter 10 of the
              Rules;


         (c)     exercise those powers that may assist it in carrying  out
              its task;


         (d)     confer with a corresponding committee in the National
              Assembly; and


         (e)     complete its task by 30 November 2001.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
                  ADVISORY BOARD ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms L JACOBUS: Comrade Chairperson, Minister and members of the Council, the
Advisory Board on Social Development Bill is the culmination of a long
process of consultation with NGOs, government departments, educational
institutions and a number of stakeholders within the social development
sector. As individual members of the select committee, some of us
participated in the informal and formal stages of deliberations by the
Portfolio Committee on Social Development in the National Assembly.

The establishment of this advisory board is another step closer to the
total transformation of this particular department. It also signals the
consolidation of, firstly, a partnership between Government and civil
society. This partnership is based on the principles of inclusivity,
representation, diversity, transparency, mutual accountability and
autonomy.

Secondly, it signals the consolidation of co-operative governance by
working with local government to address social development needs, and I
refer the House to clause 3(a)(iii) under ``Objectives of Board''.

Since the board will be composed of a minimum of nine and a maximum of 11
members, including departmental representatives, we as representatives in
the NCOP must ensure that suitable people from our respective provinces are
nominated when the Minister calls for these nominations in the various
newspapers, radio stations and other media.

Clause 5(2) also places a responsibility on the Minister to ensure a
geographical spread in the appointments which will be made on the
recommendation of the select committee and the portfolio committee. I refer
members to clause 5(5) on this matter.

In order to achieve the objectives of the advisory board, which are to
advise the Minister and act as a consultative forum for the Minister on
social development matters, the advisory board has the following duties:
firstly, to identify, promote, monitor and evaluate policy, legislation and
programmes; secondly, to facilitate dialogue between Government and civil
society; thirdly, to promote stakeholder participation; fourthly, to submit
annual reports to the Minister and to Parliament; fifthly, to make formal
reports available to the public to ensure transparency and accountability;
sixthly, to keep abreast of international developments and social
development policy; and last, but not least, to establish clear guidelines
on communication with all stakeholders, including the parliamentary
committees.

The White Paper for Social Welfare, which was adopted in 1996, acknowledges
the inadequacies of governance structures of the past which lacked
legitimacy and inclusivity, and which perpetuated selective service
delivery. It recognises the need to turn this tide around. The
establishment of this board will greatly enhance dialogue between civil
society, social development structures and the different spheres of
government structures. It will indeed turn this tide around and contribute
towards ``the building of unity in action for change'', which is the slogan
of the Department for Social Development.

With those few words I would like to place on the table the report of the
select committee, as a sign of how well we worked together as all political
parties. Since this is section 75 legislation, we agreed that we would not
have a speakers' list, but that I would make a statement on behalf of the
committee in support of this legislation before us.

I place before the House the adoption of the committee report as outlined
in the ATC.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Chairperson, hon members, thank you
for the opportunity to address the NCOP on the occasion of the Second
Reading of the Advisory Board on Social Development Bill. The Bill is the
product of an extensive consultative process, and there is general support
of the objectives and features of the Bill across the social development
sector.

By creating a representative board that advises the Minister, and acts as a
consultative forum on social policy, the Bill reinforces the principles of
participation and accountability that are the backbone of our democracy.
There is general support for the objectives and features of the Bill.

I will focus my address on the critical role that the NCOP must play in
ensuring that the board is representative and grounded in its composition.

The NCOP also has a continuing role to play in monitoring the performance
of the board, and I will speak to this issue too.

My extended visits to the provinces, where I saw a great deal of suffering,
were an eye-opener in many respects. One factor that stood out was the
absence of an NGO presence in the rural and remote areas of our country. It
is therefore important for us to question our traditional assumptions about
who speaks for these excluded people who live on the margins of our
society.

The NCOP has a critical role to play in ensuring that the people selected
to serve on the board have more than a passing familiarity with the
material and social conditions of the rural poor. This requires proactive
action on the part of all members of the NCOP, to encourage and solicit
nominations from the community-based organisations that are traditionally
excluded from such forums.

There is some validity to the charge that the mechanisms used in the
consultation process were not sufficiently accessible to the poor,
marginalised and vulnerable members of our society. An appropriately
focused and workable board is nevertheless being proposed and we all now
have an opportunity to correct this injustice. The NCOP also has a critical
role to play in ensuring the validity of the board. This requires that
members of the NCOP bring issues from their constituencies to the attention
of the board and ensure that these issues are pursued.

It is also required that the NCOP regularly monitors and interrogates the
performance of the board. As is generally the case with a statutory body,
the board will be required to adhere to, and deliver on, the objectives set
out in the legislation.  What, however, differentiates this board is the
fact that its purview speaks directly to the challenges and consequences of
poverty and inequality in our country.

These challenges are the core of Government's programme of action for the
year 2001, and require an ongoing dialogue with all social partners, faith-
based organisations, civil society in general, the business sector and
organised labour. The Advisory Board on Social Development creates a
platform for an authentic partnership in the areas of policy development,
service delivery and programme monitoring, and deserves nonpartisan
support.

In conclusion, I would like to conclude my comments by thanking the members
of the Select Committee on Social Services for the guidance and support
they provide to my Ministry. The major challenge facing all of us, in the
coming years, will be to invigorate and strengthen local government. I look
forward to working with the NCOP and the Advisory Board on Social
Development in this task. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): I thank the Minister
for this short but meaningful debate. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 24 - Agriculture, and Vote No 28 - Land Affairs:

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Ladies and gentlemen,
allow me to welcome the hon the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs
to this House. I recognise and note members from the provinces, our special
delegates, who are also welcomed. I see that the hon the Deputy Minister is
sitting in the corner, and I welcome him, too.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon members,
honoured guests present here and fellow South Africans, as we meet here
today, the ANC Youth League is meeting in Mangaung, Bloemfontein, the
historic birthplace of the ANC, to chart the way forward and redefine their
role in building our democracy. Among the issues being deliberated upon in
that gathering is the role of youth in agricultural development.

As a Ministry we are heartened by the focus as it reflects a continuation
of engagement on strengthening youth participation in the agricultural
sector. This indicates the maturity of our young people in understanding
the importance of food security. The decisions taken at this conference
will have a major bearing on policy and planning for food security in the
future. It is our hope that other youth political formations and civil
society organisations will indeed follow this good example.

The commitment of the ANC-led Government to an equitable and sustainable
land dispensation is what we have to fulfil in implementing our policy. It
is, however, a critical challenge to acknowledge that our land reform
addresses social justice requirements in relation to asset allocation and
compensation as well as giving an impetus to the meaningful economic
development of our people through participation in the agricultural
economy.

This approach is clearly demonstrated in the Government's programme of
action for the year 2001. In this context, the Ministry for Agriculture and
Land Affairs has been assigned the strategic role of facilitating the
achievement of the overarching government objectives of equitable access to
land, land redistribution, security of tenure for the landless, sustained
food security, maximisation of the contribution of agriculture to the
economy and ensuring the nurturing and wise use of our natural resource
base.
In order to achieve this, the Ministry, through its two departments, will
spend the current budgetary resources to continue with a focus on
accelerated land delivery for quality human settlement and economic use, as
well as to support the economic growth and the deracialisation of the
agricultural sector.

A second key thrust will be to act in such a manner as to actively
contribute to poverty eradication, rural development and urban renewal.
Intergovernmental relations and civil society participation in this
implementation are therefore critical and important. As part of our social
mobilisation, the Ministry has been engaged in discussions with farmers'
organisations, commodity groups and private companies in order to build
consensus on what the critical actions for the country in the agricultural
sector are.

These discussions have led to an agreement in the presidential working
group on developing an agricultural sector strategy. This process will
clarify individual and collective responsibility in the implementation of
the strategy. I would like to acknowledge the input that has been given
through this dialogue by Agri SA, Grain South Africa, Nafu, Capespan and
other commodity organisations that we have engaged with in the past year.

Within the land arena, we have undertaken consultation with the traditional
leaders on the future of land administration in communal areas. This
consultation has been necessary and will continue to be so, until we are
able to find a balance that will accommodate the needs of various sectors
in those communities, both in land use and in development.

The Ministry's Land Indaba, held last year, in part built consensus around
the various products of land reform which will address human settlement,
tenure reform and agricultural development.

There was also acknowledgement that there is a need for continuous dialogue
with the land NGOs, in order to find common ground on which we can work to
address the needs of vulnerable communities who lack security of tenure.
Clearly, the tensions around access to land and for what purpose need to be
managed through dialogue, particularly with those who are direct
beneficiaries, and also local government representatives and broader
communities.
It is also important to acknowledge the interface that we have had with our
provincial counterparts, my MECs, some of whom are present here today. We
have all agreed that it is necessary that we are able to co-ordinate our
activities and support one another in line with our co-operative governance
system. Our understanding as this political leadership has been that, while
we have a concurrent power on agriculture and direct responsibilities for
representation, we nevertheless manage the agricultural sector as one
system. This collaboration has enabled us to monitor the implementation of
our priorities which we agreed upon in 1999.

The way in which we have dealt with the outbreak of foot-and-mouth in
KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and the Northern Province is a lesson worth
sharing with everyone on the valuable co-operative governance approach that
we undertook. All the members of the executive council, some of whom are
present here, and their officials were ready to support and, in actual
fact, gave their personnel from the veterinary services to the command
centre, particularly in KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and the Northern
Province. I must say that I and my Deputy Minister present here, together
with Cabinet colleagues, were very heartened by this kind of solidarity
which clearly demonstrated our commitment to our country as a nation. I am
confident that all of us seated here indeed would like to give praise to
all the MECs and their staff for the way in which they have made us proud
as a nation. It is true that co-operative governance can indeed work.

Clearly our financial resources at national level should support the work
that is done by the provinces in three ways. One of these would be to
ensure that we keep agriculture as a system by ensuring that norms and
standards in a number of areas are set and monitored. Secondly, the
interface with international organisations in order to find support for the
work that we do and also opening markets out of our borders becomes a
critical element of our work. Thirdly, where there are programmes that have
a national character, a single financial mobilisation strategy should be
used. We can all agree here, particularly those of us who have been working
in the agricultural sector, that the land care programme is one such
example that has seen participation by the national Government in the work
of the provinces, and even its direct support financially.

It is in this context that programmes and budgets of both the Department of
Agriculture and the Department of Land Affairs, which are reflected in
Votes 24 and 28, will indicate where our resources will be allocated.
Central to this, however, is ensuring that work continues to be reviewed,
improved and expanded on the scope of Government programmes necessary to
ensure that we indeed improve the quality of life of all South Africans.

Members will recall that last year, in addition to outlining our programme
particularly on land reform, we highlighted a number of areas where we
proposed new programmes as well as policy changes. As we have identified
the lack of a clear link between land delivery and development as one of
the major shortcomings in our previous land reform policy, we have remedied
that anomaly with the introduction of one area that was lacking, which is
the integration of land reform with agricultural development.

The land reform and agricultural development programme is essential as a
programme of farmer settlement through land reform. Through this programme,
beneficiaries ranging from potential small-scale producers through medium-
scale farmers to large-scale farmers would be assisted by Government
through the Department of Land Affairs with grants on a sliding scale. It
is acknowledged that these are entrepreneurs and are therefore also able to
contribute on their own to these programmes. Clearly this programme will
assist these farmers around the acquisition programme.

On the other hand, the agriculture departments, both nationally and
provincially, will be able to give extension services as well, and the
agricultural research institute will be able to continuously support these
farmers with whatever necessary information and research capacity is
required. On the other hand, in order to manage such disbursement we will
work with the Land Bank to ensure that indeed some of these top-up loans to
these beneficiaries will be done through the Land Bank and even those other
commercial banks that will be willing to come to the programme.

We are proud to announce that the first phase in our implementation of this
programme, as we agreed last year in the Land Indaba, will be around the
disposal of the agricultural state land. I know when I was here last year
some members asked why Government was concerned about the acquisition of
new land when the Government itself was a custodian of state land that was
not utilised. True to our commitment, as we said again, we identified that
agricultural state land that can be used for agricultural development by
the new entrants.

One of the programmes around which we can start to dispose of land is in
the area of the Eastern Cape, in Port St Johns. It is also necessary to
inform honourable members that as a Ministry we have committed ourselves to
disposing of 669 000 ha of state land nationally in this current year. We
are confident that we will be able to meet that target. The strategy for
acquisition through the land and agricultural development programme will be
undertaken through targeting available land, preferably in the areas where
there is high-potential agricultural land.

It is also worth informing this august House that we have been working with
commodity organisations such as Grain South Africa and Capespan in
particular to find a way in which they can come as supportive organisations
to ensure that the marketing infrastructure and whatever extension service
that they have available within their organisations can be shared with the
new entrants.
Furthermore, a large district-based land reform implementation project,
which the DLA is engaged in, is within the Amatola district municipality in
the Eastern Cape. Our commitment to this programme has been to the tune of
R15 million in this current budget. This is aimed at strengthening local
government structures in the implementation phase of land reform.

The number of approved projects in the past year within the land
redistribution programme has indeed shown growth as well as change in the
quality of the project, which seeks to address the needs of the various
beneficiaries. It is, however, worth noting that some of these projects
that we are dealing with still date back from the 1997-98 financial year.
The reason for this is that some of the projects had to be redefined to
ensure that the larger groups can actually be catered for by separating
them into two projects so that indeed one does not have pressure on the
land, but also the quality of the project becomes sustainable.

It is also necessary to indicate that because of the time lag between
approval and spending, one will realise that the audit report that will
come up will indicate underspending. Those are committed funds, but, in
terms of the cash flow, the accounting system which is used by the Auditor-
General actually does not capture what has been approved when the money has
already gone into the project. However, the Director-General of Land
Affairs and the chief financial officer have undertaken to shorten this
time lag so that indeed in the next year we can see a correct analysis of
what has been happening around our projects.

Tenure reform, as we have all agreed, is one of the important elements,
particularly now that we have to undertake our rural development programme.
It is critical that we resolve the issues of land administration in
communal areas. We are undertaking some pilots in the three provinces, such
as the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and the Northern Province, through the
support that we got from the Swiss government, which amounts to about R6
million, so that we can find a better way around which we can resolve some
of the tenure and land administration issues in the rural areas.

I also wish to inform hon members that a national conference on land tenure
reform in communal areas and land rights is scheduled to be held in Durban
during the third quarter of this year.

This will help us to reassess the Extension of Security of Tenure Act of
1997 as well as the Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Act of 1996 effectively.
Within this context, it is necessary to indicate that the drafting of the
communal land Bill has already started. We will be consulting with hon
members in the provinces and here, together with other stakeholders, so
that, indeed, we can come with a legal regime that will define the
structure of ownership in communal areas, as well as the nature of land
administration that has to occur.

It is also necessary for me to share with members that last year when we
were here we promised to increase the pace of restitution. That commitment
has been met. Members will recall that by March 2000, 3 916 claims had
already been settled. As we speak today, as of 22 March this year, 12 093
claims were settled.

If one may indicate the provincial breakdown, one would say that in the
Eastern Cape, we have settled 2 898 claims; the Free State, 405; Gauteng, 3
382; KwaZulu-Natal, 419; the North West, 388; the Northern Cape, 409; the
Northern Province, 330; the Western Cape, 3 860; and Mpumalanga, two.

This good trend in restitution is set to continue and, in fact, accelerate
as more claims are on the verge of finalisation. This means that if this
trend continues, the programme will be wound down in the near future.

I must say that out of the 67 000 claims that were lodged, there are
already 220 claims that have been rejected. By the end of this year, we
will be able to share with hon members exactly how many claims, out of the
ones that were launched, are valid, because we have undertaken a validation
process which will end by December 2001 and which will actually help to
clarify how many claimants lodged their claims from 1995 to 1998, and out
of those, how many are not valid and how many of them we are supposed to
deal with.

It is necessary to indicate that through this process we have already heard
some of the people in District Six and other communities, like Kroonstad in
the Free State, who have indicated that they would want to make a proposal
for reopening the registration process because they fell out of the
deadline set by us here. I think this is not a matter for the Ministry for
Agriculture and Land Affairs alone, but for hon members as well, who are
public representatives.

When such requests come up, we would have to deliberate clearly, and
understand the enormity and the uncertainty that such processes may
actually open up. I am raising this because here in Cape Town, after the
resolution of the District Six claim, members would realise that there were
people who marched and said they were left out of the process. They were
not left out of the process because they were not accommodated, but because
they missed the deadline.

I think it is important that we raise those issues of clarifications so
that members can have an understanding of what have been the challenges we
are facing. I must indicate to all that the expenditure trend in this
programme is that expenditure has increased and is going to continue to
increase. Therefore, whatever decision we might want to take in revisiting
the deadline, the process should take into account the financial enormity
that we might have to face as a Government.

It is important that we acknowledge that part of the programmes of land
reform, which, again, we indicated last year we were going to put some
emphasis on, is in the area which is administered by the Deputy Minister,
that of special planning and information.

It is necessary for all of us to understand why we have elevated this
programme. We have done so because it is a very important programme which
assists in the development planning, which is a very difficult and
imprecise undertaking where no clear spatial planning is in place. This is
always a problem. It is therefore our intention to ensure that we do
whatever is necessary, in terms of policy and legislation, to actually sort
out this area, so that all of us can have better settlements which are well
planned.

It is also necessary for me to speak briefly on the other Vote, the
agricultural Vote. The transformation process of the agricultural sector
has indeed moved to a higher platform. This is reflected by the decision of
Cabinet to identify agriculture as one of the growth sectors.

It is also necessary for us to look at the trends of what happened in the
last year. Gross farm income from agricultural products amounted to
R43 381 million for the year that ended 31 December 2000, which is about
2,9% lower than the previous year. Of this, the relative contribution of
the different subsectors was as follows: 44% from the livestock sector,
29,4% from the field crops, and 26,2% from the horticultural sector.

Increases in incomes were observed largely in the animal products and a
slight increase in the field crops. The horticultural sector experienced a
decrease in income of almost 2,7%.

Major issues of concern include the fact that the trend seems to be that
the prices that the farmers are paying for their inputs are rising more
rapidly than the prices the farmers are receiving for their goods.

It is in this context that as Government, when we deliberated on this
sector, we decided to reintroduce the diesel fuel rebate, albeit in the
face of global trends in the oil prices. This was intended as a first step
to confront the challenge of reducing the cost of inputs in the
agricultural sector.

Furthermore, we have embarked on a very comprehensive process, to ensure
that the complex, but critical sets of issues that affect agricultural
development, such as the one I will mention, are addressed. These issues
include the implementation of the farmer settlement programme, which in our
view - and I think hon members will agree with me - would allow us to
introduce new entrants into the agricultural economy. It is also important
that this will allow us to achieve our objective in the deracialisation of
the agricultural industry. But as important as this, I must say, is the
support that we as Government and also other partners will put into
supporting these new entrants.

The other important element is facilitating and co- ordinating
infrastructure support to agriculture. I think it is necessary to share
with hon members that working together with Public Works, as we indicated
last year, has actually given some positive results. Projects that we have
undertaken with Public Works supporting us in infrastructure would include
areas such as Lumbers in the Eastern Cape, Makhathini flats in KwaZulu-
Natal and others in the Northern Province.

It has also enabled us to allow those farmers who are actually settled on
agricultural state land in particular to get better infrastructure, some of
which has been rehabilitated and some of which is new, which will support
their agricultural development. The other critical challenge that we have
is to ensure access to finance for those people who have been previously
disadvantaged.

I must say that it is also important in this area not only to talk about
access, but also to raise the issue that all of us have to deal with - the
issue of the agricultural debt both in the development sector and in the
established sector.

It is important for us to manage this issue because it is very critical for
the success and the competitiveness of the agricultural industry. We also
have a task and we have agreed, within Cabinet, that we need to put in
place incentives and systems to increase competitiveness within the
agricultural sector. We have also agreed, through our experience,
particularly on foot-and-mouth as well as anthrax and lumpy skin diseases
that have affected our country, particularly late last year and early this
year, that we enhance our animal health system as well as our national
regulatory framework.

We have also acknowledged that it is important, if we want to maintain our
competitive edge internationally, that we start targeting some of the
higher-value crops within the agricultural sector in areas such as hemp and
sisal, which can actually give better returns to the producers and also
realise better income for the country. I must also indicate that one of the
very interesting events we had in the past year was the Female Farmer of
the Year competition, whose theme was ``a millennium free of hunger-women's
role in promoting food security''.

This programme has enabled us to raise the profile of female farmers
annually, and also recognise their role in feeding the nation and building
the economy. Hon members will be happy to know that this year one of the
partners who will be coming with us to give this award to women is SA
Breweries. Hon members will recall that SA Breweries had its own programme,
which was known as Women in Rural Areas, or Wira. They have decided that we
should have a joint venture and form an association of businesswomen in
agriculture. We need to congratulate SAB for the work they have been doing,
and will continue to do, amongst women engaged in agricultural development.

It is also necessary for me to indicate that in keeping with the work we
have to do on agricultural trade and economic policy analysis, we have
established a new crop estimate committee, in response to unacceptable
variability in the crop estimate that was seen in 1999.

The 2000 annual farm survey was undertaken, and information on the emerging
farm sector will be made available for the first time. It is also
interesting to note that our engagement, particularly with the Western Cape
department of agriculture, has helped us to sharpen our economic analysis
in other areas. This is a further indication of intergovernmental relations
that have to be nurtured by all of us.

Around the issues of the South African and EU agreement, there were quotas
that were allocated for exports. Some of these have already been utilised.
We are monitoring the trend to see how far our producers have taken
advantage of this programme. Clearly, not everything has been resolved, as
we all know. The issues around wine negotiations are still matters that
continue between ourselves and our EU partners.

Tariff downphasing schedules for agricultural products were finalised, as
well as rules on crop origin, with the exception of wheat, wheat products,
tea, coffee and food preparations. Attention was also given to capacity
constraints with regard to guaranteeing the health status and quality of
South African products. This capacity is crucial, not only for the trade,
but also for ensuring the safety of food on the domestic market.

Coming close to home, a workshop was held by members of the SACU. This was
intended to discuss our World Trade Organisation commitments, as well as
the positions that we need to take collectively around the WTO agricultural
negotiations, which will resume this year.

We also undertook in that workshop to do a comprehensive trade analysis, in
order to identify specific countries of importance for our agricultural
trade. In collaboration with the National Agricultural Marketing Council
here at home, a facilitating committee was established for initiatives that
require us to actually open new markets for the development sector in
particular. Collaboration and financing in this area were also secured from
the Food and Agriculture Organisation.

It is very interesting to note that those who participated in this workshop
have indeed gained some skills in how they could assist, particularly at
provincial level, in improving marketing opportunities for our producers.

One inquiring aspect we need to address is the review of our of
Agricultural Marketing Products Act. We are now in a better position to
analyse what has happened since we deregulated our industry and what type
of instrument we need, therefore, in order to regulate our marketing system
locally and internationally. I hope that members in the provinces will be
able to work with us to achieve a better legislative regime.

Around nurturing our natural resources, our flagship programme, the Land
Care Programme, has actually helped in ensuring that we manage our soils,
water and pastures better. Approximately 800 hectares of potential
agricultural land were rehabilitated through soil care projects in the
Eastern Cape, Mpumalanga and Kwazulu-Natal, whereby approximately 1 786
jobs were created.

Altogether, 25 Land Care projects were implemented in the North West
province, resulting in the rehabilitation of about 10 000 hectares of
agricultural land and the creation of 640 temporary jobs. Junior Land Care
projects, where we have been working with the young people, have been
established in a number of provinces. This is one of the important
elements, that we inculcate in young people at an early age the necessity
and importance of managing their natural environment.

A number of databases were created by the agricultural geographic
information system, which was also used as a tool for information
dissemination and a decision support mechanism, when we were developing the
integrated rural development strategy.

A total of 1 610 new applications for the subdivision of agricultural land
and 409 applications for rezoning were dealt with, while 1 501 consents
were issued.
I must say that integration in government is starting to bear results.
Together with the Departments of Water Affairs and Forestry and
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, we undertook a joint programme aimed at
eradicating the invasive plants within our communities.

The Department of Agriculture compiled a pamphlet and distributed it to
inform and educate the general public about problems that these plants
cause, and the detrimental effects that they have on the natural resources
of our country. Control operations involving 249 hectares of land were
undertaken in order to control the growth of Nassella, and on 8 250
hectares of land we were able to remove one of the invasive plants which is
known as the Queen of the Night. These have been declared alien invasive
species. During the coming year, we would welcome an opportunity to
interface with the NCOP, particularly the Select Committee on Agriculture
and Land Affairs, so that hon members can work as champions of that
programme.

A total of 1 589 inspections with regard to overgrazing, erosion, key soil
conservation works, declared weeds and the burning of veld, as well as the
subdivision of land and environmental management for mines, were conducted.

It is also important to share the fact that in working around natural
resource management, we have established partnerships with Avcasa and Trees
for Africa, which have resulted in partnership in Eduplant, linking land
care to food security.

It is important for me, as I conclude, to indicate that in the way in which
we have managed and implemented the programme, we have also been able to
improve our capacity to manage the public purse. Both departments, through
their chief financial officers, have been able to meet their commitments in
terms of the Public Finance Management Act. They have been able, monthly,
to give the Deputy Minister and me, as the politically responsible persons
in this sector, an account of the spending patterns in the department's
programme.

This has enabled us to understand better, in time, where there may be
difficulties in spending on certain programmes, so t hat we are able to
introduce whatever processes are required to ensure that there is
improvement.

We are sure that, at least in the coming year, we will be able to report
timeously through other interactions with members on how our spending
patterns are occurring in the departments.

We must also say that, in line with the Public Finance Management Act, we
were able to set up the audit committees so that we ensure that internally
we put in place instruments that monitor what is happening to the money
that members, as well as other South Africans as taxpayers, contribute to
the work that we have to undertake. With this system in place, I am
confident that both departments are well prepared for the implementation of
the programmes that we have set for ourselves for the year 2001.

In conclusion, I would like to thank particularly the leadership of the two
departments who are here, Dr Mayende, Director-General of Land Affairs, and
Bongiwe Njobe, Director-General of Agriculture. I would also like to thank
the Deputy Directors-General from Land Affairs, in particular, and our
Chief Financial Officer, Sarah Tswane. The Deputy Directors-General are
Glen Thomas, Makgalemele and Attie Swart. Attie Swart is acting in the
Department of Agriculture as the Deputy Director-General of Trade together
with Masiphula Mbongwa. I would like to thank them for the work that they
have done together with their teams in ensuring that we meet the
commitments that we set ourselves for last year.

But more importantly, I would not be doing justice if I did not thank my
Deputy Minister, who has been a legal wizard to advisers on some of these
legal issues that sometimes become a problem in the work that we do. I
would also like to thank him for his support in the programmes and for
taking the lead in some of these areas, which has helped all of us to be
here. I would not be honest if I did not say that these hon members,
particularly those who are in the select committee, have been
conscientious, time and again, in keeping us on our toes, so that we always
answer to the electorate about the work that we do.

I would also like to thank my colleagues who are here, Mary Metcalfe and
Van Rensburg from the Western Cape. I would like to thank them very much
for the support they have always given as colleagues and hope that again
this year, as we implement, we will work as a team, as we have always done
in the land and agricultural sector. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon Minister,
you will note that you were given 20 minutes, but because they wrote
``plus, minus'', I decided to give you a plus.

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, Chief Whip of
the Council, special delegates, members of the department, members of my
committee and hon members, I think it is appropriate to thank the Minister
for Agriculture and Land Affairs for the commitment she has shown and the
progress her department has made in the struggle to ensure a more equitable
distribution of land and agricultural resources.

What makes her Ministry's achievements more remarkable is the fact that
they were made in the face of fierce resistance from those forces who
benefited from the former regime's discriminatory land and agricultural
policies. The issue of land has always been an important political
question, not only in South Africa, but in Africa in general.

It has its origin in the advent of colonialism and the ensuing
expropriation of land belonging to the local people. This illegal
expropriation, which was legitimised by legislation such as the 1913 Native
Land Act, resulted in the massively unequal land ownership in favour of a
small minority.

These patterns of distribution became the basis of grossly unequal capital
accumulation and dominance by this minority at the expense of the masses of
our people. The inequalities established in this way have become a major
cause of disgruntlement amongst the landless which, in some instances, has
boiled over into mass anger as we have seen happening in Zimbabwe.

The land issue finds additional political significance in the fact that the
repossession of expropriated land was an important element of the
liberation struggles of many of the states in Southern Africa. Hence, the
fact that the issue of the inequitable distribution of land remains
unresolved. In essence, this implies that the issue of liberation itself
remains unresolved.

Given the potential which the lack of access to land has to create
political instability, it is essential that we promote and extend equity in
land property rights to our communities which were so crudely dispossessed.
The key question is: How do we go about getting people back to the land?

The department has come up with a number of strategies through which it
will provide access to land and extend the rights to land to previously
disadvantaged communities. These strategies build on, and strengthen, the
existing measures which the department has implemented over the last few
years. They are based on an evaluation of existing strategies to identify
problems which impact on the speed with which land and agricultural reform
proceeds.

Some of the problems which exist were identified during a nationwide study
tour on land claims and restitution which the Select Committee on
Agriculture and Land Affairs undertook. These included community
frustrations at delays in resolving claims; the lack of unity amongst some
communities, which prevented them from putting their case as one unit; the
lack of adequate housing and other infrastructure, such as proper roads on
land in dispute; and the fact that different provinces such as Mpumalanga
and the Northern Province are served by the same office with a single field
worker.

In its discussions with the department, these and other problems, such as
the lack of telecommunications facilities like faxes and telephones, have
been highlighted. The Minister has committed herself to addressing the
concerns of the communities and some progress has already been made.

To speed up land claims cases, the department has, for example, introduced
legislation which allows more cases to be solved by administrators. Before
the legislation, all the cases had to go to court. Now, only legally
disputed cases are heard by the Land Claims Court. This will significantly
speed up the processing of land claims.

The department is also in the process of establishing separate offices for
Mpumalanga and the Northern Province to enable land claims to be processed
faster in those provinces. We are all aware of the fact that our programme
to redistribute land to communities which lost their land under the former
regime is based on the ``willing seller'' principle. However, the
Government has the power to resort to expropriation if an owner of disputed
land refuses to sell. It has, however, been the approach of Government to
exhaust all legal avenues to attain a negotiated settlement before
resorting to any expropriation.
This is the reason the expropriation notice served on the owner of
Boomplaats was withdrawn. The withdrawal of the expropriation notice does
not rule out the fact that the Government may resort to expropriation if an
amicable negotiated settlement with the owner cannot be reached.

It is important to note that since 1995 the Government has spent more than
R300 million on land restitution. During this same period thousands of
people have also been moved back to the land from which they were
forcefully removed.

In addition, the Government has enacted legislation to prevent people from
being evicted from property on which they have stayed for a specified
period of time, and has given farmworkers security of tenure on pieces of
land which they were given in exchange for their labour to farmers.

There can be no doubt about the commitment of the Minister to reforming our
racially skewed land distribution pattern. The Minister needs our support.
She needs the support of farmers, farmworkers, their families,
nongovernmental organisations and all other role-players, who must work
with her department so that we can create a harmonious working
relationship, and ensure that we all travel together on the road to a
better society.

We cannot deny the fact that we are moving away from the South Africa of
two worlds, where there was no equality. The endeavour of this Budget Vote
is to create one world where people from both worlds shall unite and forge
ahead, so that we can be in a position to bring about a better life for all
the people of this country. [Applause.]

Dr E A CONROY: Agb Voorsitter, minister Didiza, adjunkminister Du Toit,
provinsiale Ministers van landbou, Mary Metcalfe en Gerrit van Rensburg, en
kollegas, wanneer ons oor die posisie van landbou in Suid-Afrika praat, kan
'n mens nie anders as om dit met gemengde gevoelens te doen nie.

Daar word sterk klem geplaas op versnelde groei in die ekonomie en terwyl
die wêreldekonomiese vooruitsigte in 'n wolk van twyfel gehul is, blyk dit
dat 'n 3%-groeikoers tog vir Suid-Afrika haalbaar kan wees. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr E A CONROY: Hon Chairperson, Minister Didiza, Deputy Minister Du Toit,
provincial Ministers of agriculture, Mary Metcalfe and Gerrit van Rensburg,
and colleagues, when we talk about the position of agriculture in South
Africa, one cannot but do so with mixed feelings.

Much emphasis is placed on increased economic growth and while the world
economic prospects are shrouded in doubt, it appears that a 3% growth rate
could nevertheless be attainable in South Africa.]

President Mbeki's call that the country be placed on an accelerated growth
path by utilising scarce resources more competitively and efficiently, in
the process creating stable employment opportunities, while at the same
time addressing poverty and inequalities, is exactly what is needed in the
agricultural sector.

The reality is, however, that since 1998, 59% more loans have been turned
down by agricultural businesses and the number of clients against whom
action was taken increased by 63%, while the amount of money involved
increased by 255%. This means that more agricultural producers are now
dependent on loans.
Serious consideration must be given to solving the problems in agriculture,
and to creatively thinking of incentives rather than punitive measures.

The diesel rebate which was terminated in 1998 cost the agricultural sector
roughly R250 million per year. The reinstatement thereof comes as a welcome
relief, but it is R700 million later for the agricultural sector.
Competitiveness can only be improved by lowering input costs throughout the
economy. We wait in suspense for the next exciting episode in this survival
drama. Will the charming Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs be able
to persuade the tightfisted Minister of Finance to increase the diesel
rebate even further?

Dit is baie belangrik dat die agb Minister weer eens verseker word dat ons
die beleid steun van grondhervorming wat restitusie insluit. Dit is van die
grootste belang dat dit in Suid-Afrika moet slaag. Die sukses van 'n
vreedsame en welvarende transformasie in Suid-Afrika begin juis by
grondhervorming. Die verantwoordelikheid hiervoor rus swaar op die skouers
van die agb Minister en haar nuwe span by die departement, en ons wens
hulle sukses toe.

Die groot uitdaging lê op verskillende vlakke. Die verwagtinge en
aspirasies van die nuwe toetreders en die regte van bestaande grondeienaars
moet gerespekteer word.

Dit is verder belangrik dat produksie gestimuleer word, maar dat hulpbronne
op so 'n wyse aangewend word dat dit ook vir ons nageslag behoue sal bly.

Ons verwelkom die versekering van die departement dat daar hierdie jaar
daadwerklik gewerk sal word aan lewering, want sedert 1995 het die
departement nooit daarin geslaag om al hulle begrote fondse vir
grondhervorming aan te wend nie. Daar is elke jaar miljoene wat oorgerol
moet word.

Dit is jammer dat die departement nie sy onderneming aan die Gekose Komitee
oor Landbou en Grondsake om inligting ten opsigte van ongebruikte fondse
voor hierdie debat beskikbaar te stel, gestand kon doen nie.

Dit is belangrik om daarop te let dat daar groot bereidwilligheid en baie
welwillendheid bestaan by die kommersiële boerderysektor en die sakesektor
om sinvol betrokke te raak by grondhervorming. Landbou is egter 'n bedryf
waar talle sektore 'n rol speel, byvoorbeeld veiligheid en sekuriteit. Die
plaasmoorde destabiliseer die totale landbousektor en daarom is dit nie net
'n kwessie vir Minister Tshwete nie, maar by uitnemendheid ook die agb
Minister van Landbou en Grondsake se verantwoordelikheid. Ek is bevrees dat
ons te min van haar in dié opsig hoor en sal haar insette hieroor vandag
waardeer.

Die vergoedingsformule, die sogenaamde Gildenhuys-formule, by restitusie
wek kommer. Die toepassing van die formule was vir die eerste keer ter
sprake met die Majeng-eis en nou weer met die eis by Lydenburg in
Mpumalanga. Die riglyne vir die formule word in die grondwet vasgelê, maar
die toepassing kan onbillik wees. Daar is onduidelikheid oor hoe die bedrae
wat van markwaarde afgetrek word, bereken word en wat alles in ag geneem
moet word by die toepassing van die formule. Dit het nou belangrik geword
dat die hof duidelikheid gee oor die bepalings van die Grondwet.

Ter afsluiting, kan ek noem dat ons die geïntegreerde volhoubare strategie
van die departement verwelkom en glo dat die teorie, anders as in die
verlede, nou 'n werklikheid in die praktyk sal word. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[It is very important that the hon the Minister should once again be given
the reassurance that we support the land reform policy, which includes
restitution. It is of the utmost importance that this should succeed in
South Africa. The success of a peaceful and prosperous transformation in
South Africa in fact starts with land reform. The responsibility for this
rests heavily on the shoulders of the hon the Minister and her new team in
the department, and we wish them every success.

The major challenge lies at various levels. The expectations and
aspirations of the new entrants and the rights of existing landowners
should be respected.

It is furthermore important that production be stimulated, but that
resources should be utilised in such a manner that they would also survive
for our descendants.

We welcome the assurance by the department that this year real action will
be taken in respect of delivery, because since 1995 the department has not
succeeded in spending all its funds that have been appropriated for land
reform. Every year there are millions that have to be rolled over.

It is regrettable that the department could not keep its promise to the
Select Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs to make available
information in respect of unutilised funds the Select Committee on
Agriculture and Land Affairs prior to this debate.

It is important to note that there is great willingness and much goodwill
on the part of the commercial farming sector and the business sector to
become significantly involved in land reform. However, agriculture is an
industry in which many sectors play a role, for example safety and
security. The farm murders destabilise the entire agricultural sector, and
for that reason it is not a question for Minister Tshwete only, but by its
very nature also the responsibility of the hon the Minister of Agriculture
and Land Affairs. I am afraid that we hear too little from her in this
regard and will appreciate her input about this today.

The compensation formula, the so-called Gildenhuys Formula, in respect of
restitution gives cause for concern. Mention was first made of the
application of the formula in respect of the Majeng claim, and once again
now with regard to the claim in Lydenburg in Mpumalanga. The guidelines for
the formula are contained in the Constitution, but the application could be
unfair. There is uncertainty about how the amounts deducted from the market
value are calculated and what exactly must be taken into account in the
application of the formula. It has now become important for the courts to
provide clarity on the provisions of the Constitution.

In conclusion, I can mention that we welcome the integrated sustainable
strategy of the department and believe that, unlike in the past, the theory
will now become a reality in practice. [Applause.]]

Mr P NGCOBO (KwaZulu-Natal): Mr Chairperson, I would like to salute and
congratulate the Minister on her budget speech for 2001-02. We, as KwaZulu-
Natal, would like to endorse the programmes of the Vote as stipulated. But
there are some issues that we would like to raise. We would like to bring
to the attention of the Minister the potential for agriculture in KwaZulu-
Natal, which poses as a challenge at both national and provincial level.
This potential is not being exploited and fully unlocked as yet. We want to
appeal to the national Minister to attend to this matter together with our
MEC.
The question of food security in KwaZulu-Natal for the poor, especially in
the rural areas, has not been exploited or maximised as yet. There is a
need for a real move from small gardening projects to real involvement in
agricultural business. The Xoshindlala Project which has been introduced by
the Minister has in fact not addressed the general problems that we have
had thus far. It has been dealing with small projects like gardening and
sewing, and we feel that it has not risen to the occasion. We are pleading
for finished product on farm settlements in KwaZulu-Natal, so that we are
not known as raw materials producers, exporting the raw material without
converting it into a finished product.

In 2000 expectations of access to land were already raised, but we feel
that the process is slow at the moment. The MEC has been exaggerating when
addressing this matter. Things are not as rosy as he put it. There is a
serious danger if these expectations are not met. We would like to find out
from the Minister about the launches of the projects that have been spoken
about, because the MEC has been promising us that they will be launching
some of these projects.

We would also like to know from the Minister whether she is going to have
lead projects. I am very happy about the Makhathini Flats project that she
mentioned, and we are hoping that there is going to be co-operation between
the provincial and the national departments.

Concerning the question of transformation in the agricultural sector, I
just want to give hon members the example of Kwanalo, an organisation that
represents farmers. It is, in fact, led by a person who is not even a
farmer, which is quite interesting. He happens to be black. So one can see
that the gentleman has been used so that people can say that we have
transformed the industry. It has not transformed as yet. The agricultural
land under amakhosi has not been used to its maximum.

Now I address the question of access to finance. People have been coming to
portfolio committees complaining about the fact that they are not getting
opportunities from the Land Bank if they want to use the land.

With regard to small farmers, they are still very poor, especially in the
sugar industry. The Minister would know that they have not been assisted as
yet, and they are complaining to portfolio committees.

In conclusion, we want to appeal to the Minister and this House to be aware
of the fact that in KwaZulu-Natal, particularly in an area called Mkhuze,
we have a farmer there by the name of Senekal who made his farm available
to 30 families, which is supposed to be used for low-cost housing and
farming. We want to appeal to other farmers as well to take the cue from
the gentleman who has made his farm available to the community. [Applause.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Chairperson, my co-students during my high school career
were fond of quotations. One of the quotations I never took seriously was,
and I quote: ``Agriculture is the backbone of a nation.'' It is only after
46 years that I came to realise the gravity of the situation.

Black South African experience in agriculture, or rather farming
activities, leaves much to be desired. We know that European settlers
influenced governments to restrict black land rights and created reserves
that were too small to support independent agriculture.
We know that, firstly, as early as 1890 European farmers experienced
serious competition from black farmers who could supply food at lower
prices; secondly, the Glen Grey Act of 1894 restricted farm ownership among
blacks; thirdly, the Native Land Act passed in 1913, and which was
confirmed by the 1936 Act, restricted black farmers to the reserves, which
made up only 7,9% of the country. This Act also confirmed the 1894 Glen
Grey Act. Given this background, the department's programme on the
promotion of participation by historically disadvantaged groups as well as
on agricultural support and development is a step in the right direction.

A recent survey that involved 1,2 million people in the rural population
throughout South Africa indicated that there were 823 000 subsistence
farmers, and that out of that number 586 000 were women, while 236 000 were
men. Put differently, for every 100 men subsistence farmers, there will be
more than 200 women subsistence farmers. What does this tell us? It is a
pity that I do not have enough time, I would expand further on this.

The survey goes on to reveal the shameful market trends experienced by this
group of farmers. I take it that the hon the Minister is aware of the
following information: that the annual income from the sale of crops among
relatively few households is as follows: 19% could only earn R1 000 and
above per annum; 13% could only earn between R500 and R1 000; 14% could
only earn between R200 and R500 per annum; and 53% could only earn R200 or
less per annum. This is quite shameful.

The above findings leave one with no doubt that an immediate intervention
by the department is critical. The department is commended for the launch
of the Female Farmer of the Year competition that attracted 150 entrants
throughout the provinces. The deeds of the department have spoken louder
than its words this time. It has proven beyond reasonable doubt that women
can do it. In the Northern Province the competition has produced people
such as Grace Dinkwanyana, Pauline Mukatuni and Cecilia Mamabolo, and we
are very proud of these three ladies. The quality of products produced by
these ladies is such that their produce could even be marketed as far away
as France.

With regard to turning developing farmers into commercial farmers, I am
made to understand that the United States Aid Agency for International
Development is currently engaged in assisting what has hitherto been an
insignificant category of farming in South Africa. The sooner the services
of this institution commence in the Northern Province, the better.

The need to transform the large number of historically disadvantaged groups
into commercial farmers cannot be overemphasised. Commercial farming is not
a matter of size or the number of stock that one has, but, I think, a
question of attitude. A small farm of a hectare can still satisfy ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, the IFP has now, on several occasions,
stressed the need to educate emergent and aspirant farmers. Once again we
emphasise this point.

There is no dispute about the need for land reform in South Africa, and it
is recognised that in the Departments of both Agriculture and Land Affairs
very comprehensive structures exist to service most of the needs in new
agriculture. However, as stressed earlier, the unforgiving nature of fickle
weather and equally unreliable markets make successful usage of land and
natural resources a hazardous undertaking. Any established farmer will say
that three good years in ten is a norm, and this in itself exposes the need
for some ``isikhwama'' or reserve for those bad years, which will surely
come.

In the case of an untrained farmer with limited resources the prospect of
success is even further removed. Therefore, the highly sophisticated
systems available to the emerging farmer must also include intensive and
ongoing training in land use, crop protection and marketing, without which
the laudable skills available will be rendered impotent.

It is also considered imperative in land restitution that planning of land
use capability be an integral part of the process, lest deep disappointment
at long-awaited restoration follows.

The department of agriculture in KwaZulu-Natal is fully aware of the needs
and is prepared to implement them. The Department of Land Affairs does
need, however, to expedite land claims and the validation of claimants. It
would seem that this whole process is becoming bogged down in bureaucratic
red tape. The growing impatience of people, so long denied access to land,
should not be underestimated, and it is suggested that outsourcing some of
the functions of Land Affairs will hasten this vital process.

Lastly, any attempt at the commercial production of agricultural products
must be accompanied by the establishment of a reliable market, as nothing
is more soul-destroying than to spend a season producing a crop, only to
find that it sells at a loss.

Sihlalo, ngethemba ukuthi ngisenayo imizuzwana emincane. UNgqongqoshe
wezoLimo nezemiHlaba ubhekene nesimo esinzima kakhulu sokugculisa abantu
abasuswa ezindaweni zabo. Ukubanxephezela kudinga ukusheshiswa kakhulu.
KwaZulu-Natali, ngokusho kukaNgqongoshe, abantu asebelungiselwe
izinxephezelo bayi-119. Engabe-ke bangaki abasasele ngoba abanye banikezwa
umhlaba, abanye baqoma ukuthatha imali ngoba phela basuke sebesebenzile
kumhlaba abanikwa wona. Akuyona into elula ukulungisa iphutha leminyaka.

UNgqongqoshe wezoLimo nezemiHlaba makazi kahle ukuthi abantu bayaludinga
usizo. Usizo oluvelayo lushiya inqwaba yabantu ngaphandle ingasizakalanga.
Ukhulumile omunye umhlonishwa esinaye lapha wakhuluma ngoXoshindlala. Asazi
ukuthi utholwa ngabanjani. Kungangcono ukuba lolu sizo lunikwa wonke
umphakathi ofuna ukuzithuthukisa, kuthi imali ephumile eyisigaxa abantu
babelane ngayo kube yilowo nalowo ahlephule, nomunye ahlephule. Akufuneki
ukuthi abanye badle konke, abanye basale bebukela bencinta izithupha kodwa
nabo bebe bedla imbuya del ngothi.

Sengathi impela lokho uNgqongqoshe wethu angakulandela abone ukuthi lezi
zimali eziphumayo zabiwa kanjani. Kufuneka abheke nokuthi basizakala bonke
yini labo abasuke befake izicelo. Iyasikhalisa kakhulu le nto ngoba kuye
kuthiwe: Nangu uXoshindlala, funani abantu. Sibafune abantu futhi abantu
banawo amakhono. Siye sibasize-ke labo bantu kodwa bangatholi lutho.

IPHINI LIKASIHLALO WOMKHANDLU KAZWELONKE WEZIFUNDAZWE [Mnu M L Mushwana]:
Thulani! Uxolo mama, isikhathi sesiphelile. Ngiyaxolisa. [Ihlombe.]

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, I hope I still have a few minutes to continue with my speech.
The hon the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs has a difficult
challenge, that of satisfying people who were removed from their land. The
process of compensation needs to be speeded up. In KwaZulu-Natal there are
about 119 people whose compensation arrangements have been made. We do not
know the number of the people who have not been attended to. Some people
chose to take money because they had already worked on the land that they
were given. It is not an easy thing to correct a mistake that has existed
for a long time.

The hon the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs should know very well
that people need help. Many people did not receive the assistance that has
been offered. One hon member has spoken about Xoshindlala. We do not know
what kind of people got it. It would be better if this assistance were
given to all communities who wanted to improve themselves. If there is a
sum of money, it should be distributed to all people. It is not good if
some receive assistance while others do not, since they are all in the same
state of poverty.

We want the hon the Minister to follow this up. She must know how these
moneys are used. She must ensure that all applicants get assistance. We are
worried about this thing, because people say: "Hey, here is Xoshindlala,
bring people here". We then search for people, qualified people. We give
the names of those people, only to find that they are not given anything.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order, Excuse me,
mama, your time has expired. I am really sorry. [Applause.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mr H G VAN RENSBURG (Western Cape): Chairperson, Minister Thoko Didiza,
Deputy Minister Dirk du Toit, colleague Mary Metcalfe - she is not here at
the moment - members, agriculture produces for all, and that is why
agriculture brings about change in the lives of ordinary people.
Agriculture produces food and clothing and work for all the people of South
Africa.

Die landbouer se sukses is nie sy eie sukses nie. Die landbouer kan alleen
suksesvol wees as die grond, die son en die reën hom genadig is. Dán kan
die landbouer produseer.

Ek wil die Minister gelukwens met 'n goeie toespraak. Ek wil haar ook
bedank dat sy in die komende jaar die volgende probleme gaan aanpak:
eienaarskap van grond, insetkoste, landbouskuld en mededingendheid. Ek wil
haar ook bedank vir die beskikbaarstelling van hennep en sisal en dat ons
weer na die Wet op die Bemarking van Landbouprodukte gaan kyk.

Die Wes-Kaap is verantwoordelik vir tussen 55% en 60% van die landbou-
uitvoer van Suid-Afrika, met die Europese Unie die enkele belangrikste
bestemming. Uitvoerpogings is die afgelope dekade grootliks ondersteun deur
die beëindiging van sanksies en die bevryding van die handel.

Ons is nou in die post-sanksietydperk waarin die venster van nuwe
geleenthede 'n versadigingspunt bereik het. Die landbou is nou blootgestel
aan die harde werklikheid van internasionale mededinging. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[A farmer's success is not his own success. A farmer can only be successful
if the land, the sun and the rain are merciful to him. The farmer can then
produce.

I want to congratulate the Minister on a good speech. I would also like to
thank her for the fact that she is going to address the following problems
in the coming year: ownership of land, input costs, agricultural debt and
competitiveness. I also want to thank her for making available hemp and
sisal and for the fact that we are going to look at the Marketing of
Agricultural Products Act again.

The Western Cape is responsible for between 55% and 60% of agricultural
exports from South Africa, with the European Union the single most
important destination. During the past decade attempts at exports have been
greatly supported by the lifting of sanctions and the liberation of trade.

We are now in the post-sanction period during which the window of new
opportunities has reached saturation point. Agriculture is now exposed to
the hard realities of international competition.]

When does one disinvest? When one drops research. Agriculture cannot afford
not to invest in research. That would mean disinvesting in the economic
future of South Africa. Lately it is specifically the deciduous fruit
industry that has come under extreme financial pressure as a result of
deregulation and drastic decreases in product prices.

Following insufficient funding a research initiative, the Sterile Insect
Technique, came under so much pressure that it would have been abandoned if
an external funder had not been found. The Western Cape government came to
the rescue of the project and funded it with R1,5 million. We hope that
this funding will contribute to keeping the deciduous-fruit-producing areas
of the Western Cape free of fruit fly.

This is a method of stabilising our comparative advantage over European and
other foreign markets. At present agriculture is looking for additional
funding to support our local deciduous fruit industry with its research.

For every US dollar received by farmers in South Africa, Government
directly or indirectly subsidises only 4 cents. In Canada, the USA and the
EU, government subsidises respectively 16, 22 and 45 cents for every US
dollar received by their farmers. This puts RSA exports at a disadvantage.
Agritourism can contribute positively to maximising the use of natural
resources, to stabilising farm income at micro level and to broadening the
experiences of visiting tourists.

Landbou doen tans navorsing oor die ontwikkeling van ekonomiese modelle vir
verskillende agritoerismebedrywighede. Die modelle gaan ontwikkelings- en
operasionele koste vir bedrywe soos gastehuise, konferensiegeriewe en 4X4-
roetes kwalifiseer en kwantifiseer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Agriculture is currently conducting research on the development of
economic models for various agritourism industries. The models are going to
qualify and quantify developments and operational costs for industries like
guest houses, conference facilities and 4X4 routes.]

Consumers increasingly demand food that represents more than mere fuel.
Many consumers want quality food and they are willing to pay a premium for
it. Quality can mean different things to different people. Quality can be
measured in terms of health or food safety. It can also be measured in
terms of nutritional or cosmetic value. Many consumers are demanding food
that is produced in an environmentally friendly or humane way without
pesticides, hormones or GMOs.

This trend has been fuelled by recent food scares with which hon members
are familiar, that is mad cow disease and foot-and-mouth disease. Besides
information on how a product is produced, consumers want to know exactly
where a product was produced. Consumers are increasingly looking for
authentic or traditional food, food that is wholesome and healthy and often
symbolic of a cultural heritage.

From these trends we can see that consumer preferences are changing,
especially in the EU, the prime export destination for South African
products. These changes present local producers with many opportunities,
especially bearing in mind the fierce competition in commodity markets.

For these reasons Western Cape agriculture has identified organic farming
and products of origin as avenues for local product differentiation. Both
command premium prices, with organic farming having further environmental
benefits. Agriculture is at present preparing the institutional framework
to enable producers to market these niche products.

Products of origin have spin-offs for rural economies such as tourism and
rural development in terms of rural cuisine and crafts. Products of origin
also encourage cultural identity and traditions. The agricultural sector is
investigating the institutional framework appropriate for the local
producer and in terms of future trade.

Elsenburg Landboukollege se reusebydrae tot die poel van landboukundigheid
in die provinsie en Suid-Afrika, moet nie gering geskat word nie.

Vanjaar is twee belangrike kursusuitbreidings ingestel, naamlik 'n
spesialiskursus in landbouvoorligtingkunde vir studente in hul derde jaar.
Studente met 'n tweejarige hoër sertifikaat in landbou kan nou in hul derde
jaar in landbouvoorligting spesialiseer. Suksesvolle studente sal 'n
nasionaal-erkende diploma in landbouvoorligting verwerf. Dit maak Elsenburg
Landboukollege een van die paar instellings vir hoër onderwys wat
landbouvoorligting as hoofstudierigting aanbied.

Tweedens word agritoerisme vanjaar vir die eerste keer as vak vir die
werwing van die hoër sertifikaat in landbou aangebied. Van aanstaande jaar
af sal dié studierigting uitgebrei word tot spesialisvlak in die derde
studiejaar. Studente sal 'n diploma in landbou met agritoerisme as hoofvak
kan behaal. Studente word dus toegerus om die opwindende geleentheid wat
landbou in die toerismebedryf bied, ten volle te ontgin.

Elsenburg Landboukollege ondersteun die filosofie van lewenslange leer en
uitkomsgebaseerde onderwys. Die kollege bied kort kursusse aan sodat
landbouers, plaasbestuurders en -werkers op die hoogte kan bly van die
nuutste ontwikkeling.

Die afgelope paar jaar konsentreer die kollege op die opleiding van nuwe en
opkomende boere. Weens begrotingstekorte het dit lank geneem om hierdie
inisiatiewe in die praktyk deur te voer. 'n Toekenning van R1,2 miljoen vir
die 2001-02-boekjaar sal vir dié opleiding aangewend word. Altesaam 524
boere uit agtergeblewe gemeenskappe het verlede jaar 'n verskeidenheid van
45 kursusse in 10 studierigtings hier voltooi. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)
[Elsenburg Agricultural College's enormous contribution to the pool of
agricultural expertise in the province and in South Africa must not be
underestimated.

This year two important course extensions are being introduced, namely a
specialist course in agricultural extension training for students in their
third year. Students with a two-year higher certificate in agriculture can
now specialise in agricultural extension in their third year. Successful
students will receive a nationally recognised diploma in agricultural
extension. This makes Elsenburg Agricultural College one of the few
institutions of higher education which offer agricultural extension as a
primary direction of study.

Secondly, this year for the first time agritourism is being offered as a
subject for obtaining the higher certificate in agriculture. From next year
this direction of study will be extended to the level of specialist in the
third year of study. Students will be able to obtain a diploma in
agriculture with agritourism as their major subject. Students are therefore
being equipped to take full advantage of the exciting opportunity offered
by agriculture in the tourism industry.
Elsenburg Agricultural College supports the philosophy of lifelong learning
and outcomes-based education. The college offers short courses so that
farmers, farm managers and farmworkers can stay up to date of the latest
developments.

For the past few years the college has been concentrating on the training
of new and emerging farmers. Due to budget deficits it has taken a long
time to implement these initiatives in practice. An allocation of R1,2
million for the 2001-02 financial year will be utilised for this training.
A total of 524 farmers from disadvantaged communities completed a range of
45 courses in ten directions of study here last year.]

It is necessary to correct the imbalances in landownership which exist in
South Africa and to empower previously disadvantaged farmers. Land reform
should be planned and implemented responsibly, constructively and in good
time by all roleplayers in a fashion conducive to local and international
investment.

Stable land value is one of the most important factors that will influence
business confidence in agriculture. It is deemed necessary to maintain
credibility concerning the realistic market and production value of
agricultural land.

The concept of willing buyer, willing seller, should be applied.
Expropriation should be the last alternative, and then still at realistic
market prices.

Die provinsiale Direktoraat Veeartsenydienste was die afgelope jaar baie
suksesvol in die beheer van die uitbreek van Afrika perdesiekte, die
voorkomende inenting teen hondsdolheid, en die toepassing van die nuwe
vereistes teen newcastlesiekte vir die voortgesette uitvoer van volstruise
en volstruisprodukte.

Oor die hele wêreld heen is die verbruiker toenemend bewus van
dieregesondheid. Maar wat doen ons in die Wes-Kaap om te verseker dat ons
mense onbesmette vleis eet? Die Direktoraat Veeartsenydienste monitor alle
kommersiële kuddes in kommunale en informele vestigings vir tuberkulose en
brucellose. Diere wat positief getoets word, word van kant gemaak.

Ons inspekteer alle volstruiseenhede, en ent voëls in teen newcastlesiekte.
Voor slagting behandel ons voëls teen eksterne parasiete soos die
bontpootbosluis. By al ons geregistreerde abattoirs word diere voor
slagting ondersoek, en alle karkasse en afval word vir wantoestande
geïnspekteer. Ons monitor persele vir higiëne en afvalbeheer.

'n Bek-en-klou-seer werkgroep het 'n vyfpuntnoodplan vir die provinsie
saamgestel. Hierdie noodplan is so saamgestel dat dit ook by uitbreke van
zoönotiese siektes aangewend kan word. Op hierdie manier het landbou 'n
amperse ramp omskep in 'n groot geleentheid vir die provinsie. Met die bek-
en-klou-seer krisis nou in Europa, en regoor die wêreld, kan ons sien hoe
die siekte met rasse skrede versprei het. Ek dink ons kan nou met groot
trots terugkyk, en met die besef dat bek-en-klou-seer suksesvol beheer is
in Suid-Afrika, en dat ons amptenare met internasionale kundigheid toegerus
is.

Ek wil Minister Didiza en haar amptenare op nasionale vlak bedank vir die
puik hantering van hierdie situasie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[During the past year, the provincial Directorate: Veterinary Services has
been very successful in controlling the outbreak of African horse sickness,
preventative vaccination against rabies, and the implementation of the new
requirements against Newcastle disease for the continued exporting of
ostriches and ostrich products.

Across the world consumers are increasingly aware of animal health, but
what are we doing in the Western Cape to ensure that our people eat
uncontaminated meat? The Directorate: Veterinary Services monitors all
commercial herds in communal and informal settlements for tuberculosis and
brucellosis. Animals which test positive are then destroyed.

We inspect all ostrich units, and vaccinate birds against Newcastle
disease. Prior to slaughtering we treat birds against external parasites
like the bontlegged tick. At all our registered abattoirs, animals are
inspected prior to slaughtering, and all carcasses and offal are inspected
for ills. We monitor premises for hygiene and waste control.

A foot-and-mouth disease working group has compiled a five-point emergency
plan for the province. This emergency plan has been compiled in such a way
that it can also be used for outbreaks of zoonotic diseases. In this way
agriculture transformed a near disaster into a great opportunity for the
province. With the foot-and-mouth disease crisis in Europe now, and across
the world, we can see how the illness has spread with rapid strides. I
think we can now look back with great pride, and with the realisation that
foot-and-mouth disease has been successfully controlled in South Africa,
and that our officials are equipped with international expertise.

I want to thank Minister Didiza and her officials at national level for the
excellent handling of this situation.]

Under the leadership of Minister Thoko Didiza and Dirk du Toit, the MECs
have become an agricultural team. It is important for agriculture that we
learn from one another's knowledge and experience. We have to look for and
apply each province's successes and steer clear of our failures. In this
manner we can prevent each province from reinventing the wheel.

We believe agriculture can produce food and fibres for all the people of
South Africa, and also export. In an employment-friendly environment,
agriculture can create more jobs than any other sector.

Agriculture can produce prosperity for all the people of South Africa.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairman, it is
always a pleasure to talk in this grave, dignified and, may I say,
sometimes rather austere and disciplined House, coming from the rather
rowdy one on the other side. [Applause.]

I want to address two matters which I regard as important. One is a matter
of co-operative governance, and the other is about expropriation.

On co-operative governance, I think we can be very thankful in Agriculture
and Land Affairs in this country. Our Minister has succeeded in creating
one of the best co-operative sectors in this country. However, sometimes it
does not work. I want to address one of those instances today, because I
think it is a matter of concern. Although we have very good relations with
the Western Cape, this concerns the Western Cape.
Before I continue, whatever I may say, addressing this matter in a serious
way today, we have the intention, and that is the style of my Minister,
that the way forward on this matter will be one inspired by the principles
of co-operative governance. So we will be going into the negotiating mode
in this regard.

The matter is about the Western Cape government's intention to establish a
statutory agricultural development service in the Western Cape. This
service will actually take over all the functions and operations of the
provincial department for agriculture. This matter has been decided. The
last decision of the Western Cape cabinet was on 2 February 2000. They then
decided to establish the statutory Western Cape Agricultural Development
Service, and that it be implemented on a priority basis.

Firstly, and this is a matter of concern, I do not think this matter has
been sufficiently co-ordinated with the national Government, and in actual
fact, I had to get the papers myself to be able to establish the facts
about this service. One of the principles of co-operative governance is the
sharing of information, and talking to one another. It is a question of
mutual trust. The Constitution says it is a question of -


  ... mutual trust and good faith by - fostering friendly relations; ...
  informing one another ... co-ordinating their actions and legislation
  with one another ...

This is a matter in which there should have been co-ordination. We intend
to establish a basis of co-ordination in this regard. In actual fact, what
happens in this proposed action of the province is that this service, which
is a public entity and has a separate legal personality, will implement and
apply legislation applicable to the agricultural sector in the Western
Cape. It will be the implementer of the legislation.

In the Constitution in section 125 it says on a province's executive
authority:


  The Premier exercises the executive authority, together with the other
  members of the Executive Council, by-


  (a) implementing provincial legislation in the province;

So he must implement it. The problem which arises is that in terms of
international arrangements, for example the SPS agreement, the sanitary and
phytosanitary agreement, other governments look only to the national
Government for certifying for example, sanitary and phytosanitary matters.
For exports, for example, the national Government must look to another
body, or to itself, to satisfy those international requirements, for
example, veterinary requirements for the export of beef, or for the export
of plant products.

We can only do it if there is a politically accountable body that does the
certification. If it is not there, if it is a privatised institution, that
province runs a grave risk of damaging its export capacity. It is not a
thing which is in the interest of the farmers of that province. We should
talk about this seriously. Such a province is risking its farmers and
exports. We should work in a co-operative fashion, and things like this
should be cleared up between national Government and provincial government.

There does exist a rather spurious letter from the National Treasury. Let
me inform hon members how it works. In terms of the Public Finance
Management Act, there is a section 38(1)(m) which says that the director-
general of a province must, before realising the intent to create a public
entity, first get the permission of the National Treasury. Section 38(1)(m)
reads that the DG -


  ... must promptly consult and seek the prior written consent of the
  National Treasury on any new entity which the department or
  constitutional institution intends to establish or in the establishment
  of which it took the initiative.

This Act came into operation on 1 April 2000. In actual fact, the Western
Cape cabinet took the decision before that, but at this moment in time, it
is still an intended institution, and the permission of the National
Treasury must be sought.

This spurious letter exists, signed by a person who is not the DDG of the
National Treasury. I checked this out with the National Treasury. I do not
know what happened there. According to this letter the National Treasury
was consulted in February 2001.

The National Treasury, in terms of section 5(1) of the Public Finance
Management Act, consists of the Minister and the national department. So,
obviously, if the National Treasury must act, it must have the signature of
the Minister, and if that permission has not been obtained, the Minister
can, in terms of this Act, rescind any possible decisions. Of course, the
National Treasury will not give that permission if it does not consult with
the national Department of Agriculture, and that is the position of the
Treasury as well.

Here we sit with a problem in that we have a Bill on the verge of being
introduced. I do not even know if it has been introduced in the Western
Cape legislature. The problem with this type of Bill is that there is no
developmental perspective in it. I actually get the impression that this
Bill, the Western Cape Agriculture Development Service Bill, is a Bill to
get all the investment in the agriculture department of the Western Cape
and make it available for commercial agriculture in the Western Cape. I do
not get a single developmental perspective in this Bill. That is why we
have to talk. That is why we have co-operative governance, and that is why
we cannot leave it at that. [Interjections.] I do believe that this is an
unconstitutional process and that it must be righted.

The next matter I want to talk about is the question of expropriation.
Expropriation is causing a lot of emotion, and I will tell hon members why.
It is because people in South Africa think of expropriation in terms of the
way it used to be exercised in the days of apartheid. I will prove it to
hon members because it is not like that at all anymore. I will quote from a
judgment of the Appeal Court in 1966: Pretoria City Council v Molimola. I
do not believe Molimola was a white farmer. However that may be, this is a
judgment by Judge of Appeal Van Blerk who was quite famous in a way. He
gave this quite unyielding opinion. Unfortunately the quote is in
Afrikaans. This is how expropriation has always been perceived. The judge
said the following:


  As die owerheid in sy wysheid van oordeel is dat grond vir die doel
  waarvoor dit benodig word onteien moet word, dan word die eienaar deur
  die uitoefening van dié reg sy eiendom ontneem deur oormag waarteen hy
  geen weerstand kan bied nie, en geen saak het om te stel nie, behalwe wat
  betref aanspraak op vergoeding. Hy is soos een wat getref is deur casus
  fortuitus.  [Interjections.] Ja! [Yes!] [Laughter.]

In fact, the conception was that when one is being expropriated it is as if
one is being struck by an apparition from the Book of Revelation, or, to
use the term that the Minister used in her speech, being struck by some
alien invasive species called the Queen of the Night infestation.
[Laughter.]

The Constitution changed all that. We are now living in a civilised,
constitutional, democratic country. [Interjections.] Expropriation, as is
the case in other countries, is a necessary, just, equitable, progressive
and civilised instrument of advanced and enlightened democratic societies
and states. I will tell hon members why. If one does not have this, the
door for corruption is wide open. Why? If one gets a situation in a country
in which the state should not acquire land or assist in the acquisition of
land, or if the purchase price of such land is not market-related, the door
is open for corruption. There is the famous case in which the American army
ordered toilet seats, at the end paying thirty times the normal price for
them. That is why we have expropriation.
If the state requires land and cannot reach agreement with the owner of the
land for the purchase thereof on a voluntary and market-related basis, the
land should be expropriated and compensation determined in terms of our
legislation, read with our Constitution.

I am of the opinion that the state is permitted to resort to expropriation
under these rightful circumstances. But we have a problem in that we have
to review our expropriation law in this country. The Expropriation Act we
have dates from 1975. There has been intervening legislation. We have a new
Constitution, and a new framework for local authorities which is contained
in the municipal structures and systems Acts. It is actually at the local
authorities and municipalities levels where the bulk of expropriation
happens every day. Furthermore, the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act
has been promulgated, and this Act should also be worked into a draft Bill.


Why do we need this? If one looks at section 2 of the Expropriation Act, it
says that the Minister may - that is the Minister of Public Works - subject
to an obligation to pay out compensation, expropriate any property for
public purposes. That is where the problem lies. We can only expropriate,
in terms of the Expropriation Act, for public purposes. That means one can
expropriate, for example, to build a post office, city hall or a railway
for public purposes.

However, in the case of Administrator Transvaal v Van Strepen - a Kempton
Park matter - it was said that one cannot expropriate in the public
interest where property is expropriated from individual A by the state to
give to individual B, because that is not expropriation in the public
interest. The property is not going to be used for a public purpose. That
makes it imperative that we, with utmost haste, get our expropriation
legislation up to date. Let me just explain a bit around this. In view of
the policies of this Government - reform, redistribution, tenure - in
circumstances in which negotiations for the acquisition of land prove to be
unsuccessful on realistic terms, we must expropriate land to prevent
corruption. We must do that.

Immediately after the interim Constitution came into effect in 1993,
revision of the Expropriation Act was conducted in view of the provisions
of the interim Constitution. Then a new Bill was drafted by the committee.
But this did not proceed much further than that. There was a draft Bill,
and there was also a draft amendment to the Expropriation Act of 1975. We
still need it, and this is continuing every day - since 1993, since 1994
and since 1996 when the new Constitution came into effect.

Expropriation is continuing, because government in all three spheres must
continue to do their functions. Despite the delay, hundreds of
expropriations have been undertaken in terms of the old Expropriation Act
for the purposes of roads, municipal servitudes and, for example, for the
dewatering of the dolomitic components in the Oberholzer area. In that area
30 summonses were issued from a total of 62 expropriations, and in not a
single instance was the constitutionality of the Expropriation Act of 1975
challenged. It is a tragedy that no constitutional challenge reached any
law report in respect of these hundreds of expropriations. Why? I will tell
hon members why.

The reason is fundamentally that our expropriation is based on
internationally accepted principles of compensation. We have it in section
12(5) of the present Expropriation Act, which has a long history and has
developed from principles originating from Commonwealth countries,
especially from England.

All these considerations strike an equitable balance between the interests
of society as represented by the state on the one hand and those of the
individual who is visited by the compulsory acquisition of his property. We
have in fact got an excellent system. All that we have to do is to bring it
up to date. It is not a difficult task to bring it in line with the
Constitution.

The Constitution says that we can, in terms of the law of general
application, expropriate for the public interest. We can do that. In terms
of the Constitution we may, but we must just have a law which says that we
can do that. I can just promise that this will be done quickly.

One of the problems which we have at the moment is the difficulty that the
moment it comes to public knowledge that the state is wanting to
expropriate a property or properties, the open market immediately reacts to
that fact, which will then be to the disadvantage of the state. Market
values may suddenly soar, especially where the administrative procedure
becomes a relatively lengthy one.
At the moment the valuation amount is assessed as it is at the date of the
notice of expropriation. That date of notice of expropriation may be
preceded by lengthy negotiations to acquire the property and thereafter a
procedure where there must be a hearing of the person affected, and the
market will react to that.

What is needed is the thing which they have in America. I will stop with
that because I think my time has run out. I want to thank the members of
this House for their patience. What they do in America is they give what
they call a notice to treat at the moment that there is an indication that
one wants to expropriate. In that way the value of property is fixed at the
beginning of the whole process and not allowed to escalate the moment it
becomes known that the expropriation is happening.

I think a review of the Expropriation Act is urgently necessary. Drafts are
available and it must just be brought into line with the new Constitution.
We are hoping that we can finish this process in a reasonable time.
[Applause.]

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me first respond to my colleague who
happens to be my friend and doctor, Dr Conroy, who said that the right of
owner had to be respected. The only question is: Which owner is he
referring to? The original owner or the current legal owner?

How true it is that the only way to get to the top is to get off your
bottom. The word ``delivery'' can easily be associated with the Departments
of Agriculture and Land Affairs. In last year's budget debate, we made
certain proposals. We aired some concerns. We pointed out some of the
shortcomings in the departments. It is pleasing to note that the
departments responded positively and practically.

I want to thank the hon the Minister and her legal wizard for finally
appointing regional land claims commissioners for Mpumalanga and the
Northern Province. We are now convinced that land restitution and
restoration will be accelerated. The only appeal we can make is that the
two commissioners should operate from both provinces and not from Gauteng
or Pretoria. That would make them acceptable to the people they will be
serving.

On 8 December 2000 the Chief Land Claims Commissioner, Adv Mgoqi, who was
acting as regional land claims commissioner for the Northern Province and
Mpumalanga, met all stakeholders in Bushbuckridge. It was so surprising
that the commissioner could really come down to Bushbuckridge. We were used
to the practice that if one wanted to see a commissioner, one should drive
to Pretoria. It was such a nice feeling. Here was a man who was prepared to
sacrifice his time and energy to better the lives of our people.

To prove this in the few months in which he was acting as regional land
claims commissioner, he managed to settle more claims than his predecessor.
In that spirit, the secret of success is to be like a duck - smooth and
unruffled on top, but paddling furiously underneath the water. Yes, history
remembers us not by our looks, but by the work that we have done.

During last year's budget review debate, I informed the Minister about a
very sensitive matter concerning the farms in Nyaka and Waterval near
Bushbuckridge. We had more or less five claimants lodging claims to the
same farms. What surprises one is that one claimant is busy settling people
on those farms. The question is: Who gave him permission to settle people,
while other claimants are still waiting for a formal response from the
department or the commission? I posed the same question to the director-
general and his officials when they were briefing the committee on 28 March
2001. If this matter is not addressed speedily, I will smell a rat. The
question of land is more serious than war. Hopefully, I will not need to
ask the same question again next year.

One other concern raised by communities is why it is so difficult for the
Government to the dispose of state land.

Communities in Sekhukhuneland are packed, squeezed and so congested because
of forced removal, for example the Ramaube community, the Rammupudu
community in Tafelkop, the famous Dinkoanyana community in Leboweng and the
Molete community in Acorn Hoek. These are but a few examples of communities
that were forcibly removed from their original places to where they are
now. Living conditions in these areas are just unbearable. How is the
department planning to remedy this situation? I know the hon the Minister
will not disappoint me. We should just sit and listen and then we will hear
her warm response. What a wonderful Minister she is. [Interjections.]

What does this budget mean to the rural people in the Northern Province?
How are they going to benefit from this budget?

On 1 March 2001 the committee visited the Umzimkhulu feed lot at Ebutha
farm. This is one project which needs to be supported. Is there any plan by
the department to rescue this project so as to achieve its intended
objectives?

I am not biased, but it is a fact that Bushbuckridge is one of the areas in
the Northern Province where few cases of foot-and-mouth disease reared
their ugly head.

I would like to thank the Minister and the department for acting swiftly to
avoid the spread of this disease. I would also like to thank all
stakeholders in that region for co-operating with the department. The only
unfortunate thing is that some stakeholders, like magosi and some NGOs, are
not assisted financially when attending these meetings with the department,
which are held every week from Monday to Friday. I hope the department will
do something about this.

Le a tseba gore tsie e fofa ka moswang. Mmetla sapo la tlala o betla a
lebile ga gabo. Tlala ga e na nkgwete. [Everything has a source of
inspiration. Charity begins at home. There is no grave caused by hunger.]

There is a belief by some cattle owners, right or wrong, that meat from
these affected animals can be edible. They go on to say that the disease is
not new in South Africa and, in days gone by, they had a way of dealing
with it, other than slaughtering these animals. Can the wonderful and
honourable Minister confirm or deny these facts?

Another concern is the amount of money paid to these owners, after their
cattle are slaughtered. They are querying the criterion used in determining
the amounts they are paid.

Can I also find out from the hon the Minister why the supply of dipping
medicines has been discontinued? Cattle owners are now expected to buy
their own medicine. Departmental officials, when questioned, say that that
was a directive from above. The only problem with this new arrangement is
that during the annual stocktaking, they are made to pay for the same
service.

Here is this outstanding leader who always appeals to the hearts of her
followers, not their minds. She never sets herself above her followers,
except in carrying responsibility. She is so understanding, humble but
decisive, forthright and articulate. She is not like those leaders who will
demand concessions as a condition of friendship, but she is that kind of
leader who is able to separate the people from the problem.

These accolades were specifically reserved for none other than my Minister.
Well done, Minister, we support your Vote. [Applause.]

Mev A M VERSFELD: Voorsitter, in 'n onlangse verslag van die Wêreldbank
word Suid-Afrika as 'n waterskaarsland bestempel. Na aanleiding van die
bevolkingsaanwas sê die bank in sy vooruitskatting Suid-Afrika sal binne
twee dekades in 'n waterarmland verander.

Die verslag stel dit ook duidelik dat Suid-Afrika dan in 'n staat van
permanente droogte sal verkeer. As 'n mens in ag neem dat slegs 3% van al
die water in die wêreld vars water is, is dit 'n somber prentjie wat ons
verplig om reeds vroegtydig navorsing te doen en met alternatiewe gewasse
te eksperimenteer.

In die Wes-Kaap is 'n groep sakemanne met vernuwende denke onder die naam
Ecoindustry International Pty Ltd, in samewerking met die ministerie van
landbou en Elsenburg, tans besig om so 'n projek te ondersoek en te
evalueer. In Suid-Afrika was die eerste stap 'n proefplaas aan die weskus
by Velddrif. 'n Boer was bereid om 3 000 hektaar vir dié projek beskikbaar
te stel.

Kleinboere vorm deel van die projek en, terwyl ek van kleinboere praat, wil
ek net vir die adjunkminister sê ek dink daar is êrens 'n misverstand oor
die landelike ontwikkelingsdiens van die Wes-Kaap want die opleiding, die
voorlegging en die hulp aan nuwe boere is vir ons minister in die Wes-Kaap
so belangrik dat hy dit self gaan doen. Dit gaan nie deur die landelike
ontwikkelingsdiens gedoen word nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek wil terugkeer na die onderwerp. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mrs A M VERSFELD: Chairperson, a recent report of the World Bank
characterised South Africa as a country which has a shortage of water. The
bank states in its forecast that, due to the population growth, South
Africa will within two decades be transformed into an arid country.

The report also clearly states that South Africa will then be permanently
drought-stricken. If one takes into consideration that only 3% of all the
water in the world is fresh water, this is a sombre picture which compels
us to timeously conduct research and experiment with alternative crops.

In the Western Cape a group of businessmen with innovative ideas operating
as Ecoindustry International Pty Ltd, are currently studying and evaluating
such a project, in co-operation with the ministry of agriculture and
Elsenburg. In South Africa the first step was an experimental farm along
the Western Coast at Velddrif. A farmer has made 3 000 hectares available
for this project.

Small farmers form part of the project and, while I am talking about small
farmers, I just want to tell the Deputy Minister that I think there is a
misunderstanding somewhere concerning the rural development service of the
Western Cape, because the training, submission and assistance to new
farmers are so important to our minister in the Western Cape, that he will
be doing it himself. This will not be done by the rural development
service. [Interjections.]

I want to return to the topic.]

Agriculture, as an endeavour, lends itself to innovation, and therefore we
should focus on exploiting underproductive, underutilised and novel natural
resources, which include waste land, waste water, brackish water and
seawater, to produce crops which have potential for significant value-added
processes and products.

The investment in farming Salicornia, Belobi, wild beet and fodder
represents such an opportunity, since the entire harvest is used in
generating both the primary export product and a number of value-added by-
products, resulting in extremely high yield harvests.

Miskien kan ek net kortliks vir agb lede sê Salicornia kan geëet word.
[Perhaps I should just briefly tell hon members that Salicornia can be
eaten.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, you are far from the mike.

Mev A M VERSFELD: Dankie, Voorsitter.

Salicornia is 'n produk wat soos 'n aspersie gebruik word. Die boonste
gedeelte kan geëet of uitgevoer word, die res van die Salicornia se steel
kan uitgepers word vir huishoudelike gebruik en die vesel van die steel kan
ook gebruik word as voedingsblokke vir diere. Dit word twee keer per jaar,
in 'n siklus van 16 maande, geoes. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mrs A M VERSFELD: Thank you, Chairperson.

Salicornia is a product which is utilised like asparagus. The top part can
be eaten or exported, the rest of the stem of the Salicornia can be
expressed for household use and the fibre of the stem can also be used as
feeding blocks for animals. It is harvested twice a year, in a cycle of 16
months.]

This farming activity is a viable alternative to any other agricultural
commodity in this country. The integration of land-based agriculture, using
seawater, and mariculture, using species such as telapia, because it is
very easy and fast- growing, and shrimp, is even a viable alternative to
our poverty-ridden fishing communities. [Interjections.] Yes, fishing.

Technology intended to introduce this alternative agriculture is sourced
from the USA and the germplasm is a costly initial input. Perhaps this is
where co-operative government comes. It is of importance to note that the
plant material is not genetically engineered, but that these salt-resistant
strains have been developed by a selective propagation of an already
naturally salt-tolerant plant species.

The experience in places where these plant species have been cultivated
indicates that three permanent jobs are created for every 10 hectares.
Areas such as Mexico, Saudi Arabia, India and Eritrea are some of the
places where saltwater farming is fully commercialised. I realise that it
is quite expensive, but we can look into it.

Two members of this company, Ecoindustry International, attended the
international symposium on prospects of saline agriculture in the GCC
countries, held in Dubai from 18 March to 20 March, in 2001. It is
important to note that this symposium was held under the patronage of,
amongst others, the International Centre for Agricultural Research in Dry
Areas.

The recommendations from this symposium, I think, could be extremely
valuable to our country, for example establishing an effective network on
saline agriculture to share information, data and models. The International
Centre for Bio-saline Agriculture will spearhead this network.

I will just read two or three of these recommendations: convening an
international conference on saline agriculture every two years; an expert
group on saline agriculture to be formed; very importantly for our country,
efforts to be intensified towards capacity-building in relevant countries
and institutions which emphasise development of national manpower, and new
technologies to be utilised in developing salt-tolerant plants and saline
water.

The Deputy Minister talked about co-operative government, and I would like
to say that the Deputy Minister must put his money where his mouth is. I
trust that the Minister will, in this province, give us all the necessary
help for this first saline agricultural project in the Western Cape and in
South Africa. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Let me take this opportunity to recognise
the presence of the Leader of the Official Opposition in our Parliament, Mr
Tony Leon. You are welcome, sir. [Applause.]

Mr A T METELE (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy
Minister, and hon members, let me greet all in the name of our Lord, Jesus
Christ, Amen.

HON MEMBERS: Hallelujah!

Mr A T METELE: The Eastern Cape department of agriculture and land affairs
is committed to rendering essential agricultural support services in order
to promote rapid economic growth and food security, and to contribute to
the improvement of the quality of life of the people of the province.

While the strategic objectives and the mandate of the department has not
changed, following the budget indibano [meeting], the department will
concentrate on food security and providing an economic base for integrated
rural development during the years 2001-04. Existing programmes will be
refocused to realise this new emphasis.

Regarding the vision of our department, we need a dynamic agricultural
support service provider that stimulates catalysis and promotes rapid and
sustainable agricultural growth and economic development within the
framework of resource, conservation and equitable land administration.

Our mission is to facilitate and co-ordinate optimal agricultural
production and sustainable development in order to ensure food security and
an improved quality of life for the people of the province through,
firstly, appropriate agricultural development and support programmes;
secondly, client participation and empowerment; thirdly, agricultural
resource development, management and conservation; fourthly, formulation
and administration of appropriate policy and legislation; and fifthly,
effective and efficient administration and leadership.

Our strategic objectives are as follows: to promote sustainable utilisation
of natural resources; to encourage increased food and fibre production,
thus contributing towards food security; to stimulate increased economic
activity from agriculture; and to provide enabling legislation.

These objectives are located within the provincial growth and development
policy objectives and continue to inspire us in the strategies we are
taking. They provide an exceptionally good basis for tackling rural poverty
in a sustainable manner, providing an economic base for rural development
and contributing towards the availability and distribution of food within
the province. The department's programmes and projects have been adjusted
to align themselves with the national and provincial priorities.

The promotion of sustainable utilisation of national resources is an
objectives which will be met through land use planning and which is
intended for the sustainable use of natural resources. A Land
administration Bill is in the process of being developed, so as to enforce
this prerequisite. This Bill will enable the department to manage rural
agricultural state land in terms of the demarcation, allocation and
utilisation of land.

Coupled with the land administration Bill, there is an ongoing land care
programme which is supported by the national Department of Agriculture. It
includes soil preparation, rotational cropping, soil management,
maximisation of water retention capacity, and the prevention of water and
wind erosion.

The objective of encouraging increased food and fibre production will be
achieved through the promotion of biological productivity of both crops and
livestock farming units. Here reference is made to the appropriateness of
our technological innovations. Appropriate technological innovations in
crop farming entail the use of high-yielding seed varieties, affordable and
properly packaged fertilisers, whether organic or inorganic, sound
cultivation and proper management practices.

In livestock farming, technological innovations entail livestock
improvement. Key to this is the improvement of the genetic pool of our
herd. Comparatively, the commercial sector inspires us through the quality
of animals they produce and the use of correct stocking rates which are in
harmony with the carrying capacity of their grazing land. This has
unfortunately not been applicable in communal grazing areas, where there
are no camps in which to practise rotational grazing, resting management
practices and controlled breeding.

Regarding the stimulation of increased economic activity, the department is
currently implementing a meat production and marketing strategy which seeks
to create space for the participation of communal farmers in the marketing
of livestock. Although the largest portion of the livestock population in
the province is in the hands of the communal farmers, their access to the
markets is very limited. In order to redress the situation holding farms,
which would be managed by farmers themselves, have been identified in all
district council areas. Negotiations are at an advanced stage for the
acquisition of the Abacor.

For crop-producti on farmers, farmers' markets and agroprocessing plants
have been planned. This is going to help farmers to add value to their
produce and increase the storability of crops, thereby increasing economic
returns for farmers.

I am now going to address the question of scientific use of agricultural
potential. In order to promote the sustainable use of natural resources,
account of the environment has been taken. Sustainable development is about
meeting the needs of the present population without compromising the needs
of future generations.

The agroeconomical zones will create the parameters within which each zone
can be planned and will determine the nature of the farming system. The
department will introduce a Bill on land use planning at the legislature
during this year's session. [Applause.]

Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, hon Ministers present, hon members of the
House, special delegates, I greet everybody and thank them for their
presence during this lenten season of the Christian year.

The Free State province is gravely disturbed at the continued violence that
is adversely affecting the farming community and the province as a whole.
It continues to polarise the Free State on racial lines. The reaction to
such violence has strengthened plausible but baseless rumours and
suppositions that there are people from Johannesburg who have been paid to
murder farmers in the Free State. These rumours have been vehemently denied
by police Superintendent Steven Hugo of the Welkom police station. He
stated, and I quote:


  We fully investigated the claims and could not find any confirmation.
  That information is as old as the hills.

Superintendent Charmaine Muller emphatically stated that the farmers'
unions have been unable to substantiate the claims. She added that reports
of a video training cassette demonstrating how to carry out a farm killing
were also baseless.

This does not negate the fact that there are murders on the farms in the
Free State and in other provinces too. These murder crimes widen the gap
between white farmers and farmworkers, who are indigenous Africans.
Statistics abound on murders of white farmers, but none are available on
murders of African farmers and farmworkers who are often beaten, exploited,
dehumanised, murdered and illegally evicted.

This past Friday, near Ficksburg in the Free State, a farmer named André
Swanepoel of Spitskop Farm allegedly personally recruited farmworkers from
as far as the Eastern Cape for his cucumber farm.

He allegedly pointed a gun at his workers when they demanded their three
months' pay. The local police feared him and hesitated to visit his farm
because he is allegedly notorious for his shooting sprees.

Workers are illegally evicted and dumped outside the farms in complete
disregard for their human plight, for the laws of the country and without
even a semblance of conscience.

A visit any day to the Ficksburg location, known as Meqeleng, will show
night soil buckets at gate entrances being picked up in broad daylight. The
toilet huts were built at gate entrances and drinking water taps were
installed next to the toilets. What a humiliation! In the land of our
birth, for that matter!

Whenever a white farmer is murdered, hundreds of farmers gather to vent
their anger, as if African workers do not feel the same. But when an
African farmer is ill-treated or murdered, such gatherings do not take
place, even though farm-owners and farmworkers depend on each other for
survival.

While we may not have the answers to these serious problems, it is very
clear that these hurts and pains are caused by racism, poverty, greed and
heartlessness, to name a few.

For decades, long before the word ``apartheid'' was bandied about, Africans
were made landless, voiceless and leaderless, but not powerless. Many white
farmers were assisted in purchasing land and selling their produce through
loans and subsidies that were made available to them. Some inherited the
land from one generation to the next. Africans were denied, and often
dehumanised, while seen and treated often as sources of crude labour. They
were forced to accept Christianity as their faith. The oppressors loved
God, but not God's people, who were Africans. How could they know heavenly
things when they did not know earthly things, as the Lord said?

Those whites who showed compassion often had to show it stealthily to avoid
the wrath of their compatriots. The examples of inhumanity are numerous, as
are those of whites who also suffered for justice.

We are encouraged to heal the land by men, women and youth who now boldly
condemn and reject racism and violence. There are white farmers in the Free
State who were seen in the public media when they were visited by human
rights commissoners during Human Rights Week. These farmers, who have
changed their hearts and minds, have built new, strong and beautiful
classrooms on their land for the children of farmworkers in their own
neighbourhood. They showed Hou-aan School, towards Bultfontein. Other
schools were near Harrismith, Warden and Mooihoek.

These families give us great joy and encouragement for sharing whatever God
has given them so that others too may have life abundantly. They
acknowledge the diversity and celebrate it rather than letting it divide
us. Men and women of all backgrounds are banding together against these
murderers, whose deeds hurt all Free Staters of all races.

Many of the murders are committed by non-Free Staters, just as many highway
traffic accidents are caused by non-Free Staters driving through our
centrally placed province, which is the navel, mokgubo, of our motherland.

A growing number of firms, industries, schools, colleges and universities,
as well as NGOs, are extending hands of help, particularly to the small
African farmers, by making priorities and strategies for developing
resources for poor and small farmers in the Free State.

The agricultural production of the small farmer can be turned around to
deal with the poverty, economy and food security of the country. This is
happening in many countries. Right now the agricultural products of the
small farmer are estimated at 10%, while those of commercial farmers are
80%, of the state's output.

We can learn from other parts of Africa. For example, the paper of the Free
State MEC for agriculture that was read in the Free State legislature on 16
March 2001 cited the following examples: that smallholder farmers in Kenya
produce 75% of the milk, in Uganda farm 90% of the cattle, in Zimbabwe have
the largest gross domestic product multiplier, and in Mozambique farm 87%
of the cattle. Ethiopian small farmers produce 90% of that country's
agricultural produce.

We could do the same in the Free State and the whole country. Our beloved
Premier, Ms Winkie Direko, at the African Century celebration in
Bloemfontein on 16 February 2001, gave us a bold challenge as a province
when she said:


  There is only one way to rid our province of crime, and that is: Every
  man, woman and child will make a stand and blow the whistle against
  corruption, violence against farmers, farmworkers and their families and
  against violence that is perpetrated against helpless elderly people, men
  and women.

She said: ``The African Renaissance does not only pertain to the black
people.'' If one is in Africa, one is an African. One has felt the African
sun and rain on one's back. One has embraced Africa, and the African soul
pulsates in one's heart. One has seen her poblems and offered oneself for
their solutions. If one is this person, then one should stand up and be
counted regardless of one's colour, creed, religion or social standing.

I beg the hon the Minister to focus without delay on farmworkers who are so
ravaged by HIV/Aids epidemic that there is now an acute shortage of farm
hands because the disease is right on the farms, where poor people are
dying in greater numbers than in the cities, where people have information,
guidance and resources. These people on the farms are infected and
affected.

In conclusion, I challenge those involved and beg them to admit that they
have been part of the problem by being racist, prejudiced, selfish, greedy
and bitter, no matter what reasons they may have for these attitudes. There
is enough in this world for every human greed, but there is not enough for
every human breed. And that is the problem.

All the rules and regulations will be less effective unless people's hearts
and minds are changed, and that change is made right away. Let us turn
enemies into friends. Let us condemn violence and expose criminals. We need
each other so that we can finally be a fear-free, greed-free, hate-free
people in the Free State and in our motherland. We are in the NCOP because
we care; we share and dare stand up for what is worthwhile. May we have a
meaningful Easter. Pray for our leadership.
We support the Vote. God bless you all. Haak Vrystaat! [Go, Free State!]
[Applause.]

Ms M E METCALFE (Gauteng): Madam Chair, hon Minister Didiza, Deputy
Minister Du Toit, my colleague Mr Van Rensburg, all members of the
agricultural team, as well as members of the House and special delegates, I
want to thank the Minister for the very excellent report she gave today on
the work of the deparments, what has been achieved as well as the very
insightful and strategic overview of the work which lies ahead. In
particular, I want to join with many other members in today's sitting who
have congratulated the Minister on progress with land restitution. In
Gauteng there are many communities that are still celebrating the work of
the land claims commission.

We also want to thank her for the emphasis that she has placed on the steps
that are necessary to achieve the equitable redistribution and distribution
of land, as well as an equitable distribution of agricultural resources.
Both of these are fundamental to the implementation of our Constitution.

In terms of looking ahead, we want to thank her for those initiatives which
are going to assist, in particular, the ongoing work of land restitution,
and I look forward to working with the land claims commission on Evaton in
particular, a community where the demands of dealing with unresolved land
claims are a burning issue.

Very important work is being done in terms of economic development and she
is taking steps to further develop a strong commercial agricultural sector
with increasing participation by black people, particularly women. We look
forward to working with the department on the implementation of the
integrated programme for land redistribution and agricultural development
and to benefiting from all the work she has reported on regarding trade
initiatives.

The last issue to note, and to thank her for, is the work that has been
done on sustainable usage of our agricultural resources.

What I want to do today is to focus on our appreciation of the ways in
which the vision of the Ministry for Agriculture and Land Affairs will
assist us in Gauteng in dealing with one of the most marginalised groups in
our province, and that is the rural poor.

I think that many members of this House might have a perception of Gauteng
that is dominated by the vision of a very highly urbanised province which
is very commercially orientated and very industrialised. There is probably
a visual image not only of the Hillbrow Tower and the skyline of
Johannesburg, but also of the mining dumps, the mining camp of Gauteng.

But, in fact, the reality is that in terms of its land, much more than half
of Gauteng is rural and periurban. We are, indeed, a very successful
agricultural province. About 7% of the gross national farming income is
generated by Gauteng on only 1,4% of the land. We have competitive
advantages which assist us with this very high level of productivity.

We also have an estimated 50 000 farmworkers in Gauteng. We are running
very effective programmes for the settlement of our farmers. We already
have over 260 farmers who have been settled on state land and are, on a
leasehold basis, moving to acquire that land.
What might also surprise the farmers from more rural parts of the country
is that we have as many as 819 households that are benefiting from urban
agriculture in townships with our household food security programme.

But I want to return to the question of the deep and disempowering poverty
of people living in the rural and peri-urban areas of Gauteng. The
chairperson of the selected committee, Rev Moatshe, has already spoken
about the very deep impacts of the historic dispossession of people in this
country from land. This dispossession is the single most important factor
contributing to the levels of poverty and the levels of social fabric
distortion in those rural areas.

In my work, over weekends and in our daily work, I frequently deal with
people living and working in rural areas. When one engages with those
communities there is a list of issues which one hears across the length and
the breadth of the rural areas of Gauteng. The first is that, despite the
legislation that we have passed, there is terrible hardship that continues
to be experienced on the basis of illegal evictions. People living in rural
areas have no alternative place to go to when they are illegally evicted.
They have long ago lost contact with their extended families. They are
often completely destitute and, in their poverty, have absolutely nowhere
to go.

I am continually shocked at the serious abuses that continue to be
practised in rural areas in terms of our labour relations. The Basic
Conditions of Employment Act seems to be completely ignored. Other members
have spoken about the frequency of physical assault and the way in which
the whole concept of developing a working, productive and constructive
relationship between an employer and an employee, which is the basis of our
labour legislation, seems to be completely ignored and not understood at
all. Underlying the abuses that happen in terms of labour and illegal
evictions is the fundamental undermining of the constitutional rights of
people to freedom of movement and to family life.

Another issue of concern, which I know the Minister is working very hard at
in response to the request of our President, is the reality of the
inaccessibility of Government services in rural areas. Because people are
isolated, because of the distances that they need to travel to even get
hold of a telephone to contact the Department of Labour, because they have
such limited access even to information about whom to phone when there is a
problem, many of these communities and individuals and families within
communities are, in fact, in despair and isolated in a very lonely way.

Of course, we need to remember that issues of the exploitation of women, in
particular, underlie all of these problems deeply, that it is women and
children and the disabled who suffer the most from many of these
injustices. What we must do, working together with the Departments of
Agriculture and Land Affairs and with all the relevant stakeholders, is to
take heed of what the Deputy Minister said today, that we cannot allow the
people of South Africa to live outside of the reach of the civilised
democratic country that he spoke about.

We have to work, as we do, very effectively with the provincial office of
the national Department of Land Affairs to ensure that the Extension of
Security of Tenure Act is, indeed, implemented. But I think that whilst
there is ongoing legal work in revising and strengthening the Extension of
Security of Tenure Act, we must remember that it is a very important piece
of legislation. When it was passed in 1997, the ethos of that Ac t captured
the very spirit of co-operation and working together that was part of our
constitutional dispensation, when the oppressed and the oppressor came
together to work out a just and equitable solution which was conclusive and
which would build democracy in this country.

We must remember that the preamble to our Constitution calls on all of us
to recognise the injustices of the past, and to recognise that the land
belongs to all who live in it, and that we have, collectively, an
obligation to heal the divisions of the past and establish a society which
is based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights.
This must be the reality in the rural areas. We cannot have vast areas of
our country living outside these basic principles of the Constitution.

The Extension of Security of Tenure Act takes forward the position where in
all of the solutions to the problems that exist in terms of insecurity of
tenure, the solutions lie in co-operative relationships between owners and
occupiers. The Extension of Security of Tenure Act stresses that there must
be a balance between the interests and the rights of both owners and
occupiers.
The way in which we must take forward the Extension of Security of Tenure
Act is to, firstly, be able to understand that what the Act says about the
rights of farmworkers is that one does not, when one moves into the rural
areas and lives on private land owned by somebody else, lose one's basic
citizenship. One has the right to receive visitors; one has the right not
to be denied access to water; one has the right to maintain one's family;
one has the right to be visited by one's wife.

We understand that the Extension of Security of Tenure Act requires that
the owners and occupiers together agree on reasonable conditions for such
visits, but this is not happening. And we understand that the hostile
behaviour towards visiting rights and the unwillingness to agree on
reasonable periods is behaviour that is fuelled by anxiety. However, we
also need to remember the words of our Constitution and to know that the
solution is not to laager but to build a network of positive relationships
with communities. The solution is to build families within rural
communities, to build a social fabric, and then we may start enjoying the
reality of having peace with justice. We all know that we cannot enjoy
justice where there is no peace.
We also will be working very closely with the Minister's department on some
of the positive obligations of the state in terms of the Extention of
Security of Tenure Act. We will work with the Minister in facilitating on-
site ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, colleagues, may I
say just how much I value the speech of my colleague who spoke earlier, as
well as Rev Chabaku's. I think that if we approach life in South Africa the
way these people do, then there is great hope for our country and also for
agriculture.

I also welcome the tenor of the Minister's speech. I also thought it was an
outstanding speech and enjoyed it very much. I think, however, that we have
to define the problems of our country well. Churchill said: ``A problem
well-defined is a problem half-solved.''

We have the impression that some of our commercial farmers are so very well
off. Well, they are not. South African farmers operate in one of the
toughest environments in the world. We are far from our markets, our soil
is only an average of 45 cm deep, our rainfall is erratic, we are subject
to bouts of droughts and flooding, input costs are high, diseases are many,
we suffer from security and stock-thieving problems, etc.

A farmer in Australia or the US has few of these problems. I visited a farm
in Australia. I studied in Australia, and I used to go with a farmer when
he flew to his farm of 30, 40, 50 hectares. He visited it twice a year by
aeroplane. There would be nobody there at all. He would round up the cattle
or sheep once or twice a year, and that would be that. No innoculation, no
diseases, no nothing. No stock thieving, no problems of any kind.

Our farmers are operating under very difficult circumstances and they are
doing extremely well. Unlike other farmers in competing countries, our
agriculturists receive very little help from Government. The Minister from
the Western Cape mentioned that. That we remain a significant player is a
remarkable story, and it is a tribute to our whole industry, all of the
people that work in the industry and all of its elements.

However, something will have to be done if we are not to lose this major
asset in our socioeconomic life. I had three friends who went abroad
recently. This is wrong and I tried to discourage them. There are lots of
South African farmers farming in Western Australia. There are South African
farmers that have left this country and are now in Queensland and in
Florida, and they are doing extremely well. I often hear of another farmer
going. We really have to do those things that would make that kind of
action unnecessary.

I want to mention only one problem to the Minister for Agriculture and Land
Affairs, and that is the trend of subdividing often poor agricultural land.
It is something which really concerns me. This is because, certainly in the
commercial farming sector, one has economic units. What we are seeing now
are speculators taking poor agricultural land, cutting it up into two-
hectare and 10-hectare lots, and selling it on the grounds that this is for
the formerly disadvantaged groups or for scientific farming. It is none of
those things. It is just an attempt to make a fast buck out of land which
was uneconomical in the first place, and to make some more money out of the
land.

Those subdivisions then lie there, they become infested with alien
vegetation, they become rural slums and are useless. They erode, whereas
they should have been consolidated into other, better agricultural units.

What worries me further is that I understand that the control of the
subdivision of land and land zoning is soon, possibly, to pass to local
authorities. The Minister might be able to elucidate on this. They will
then have the right to subdivide and to rezone, or to alter the use of
land. I understand that this process is quite far advanced. I would say
that it would be extremely unwise if we were to allow that to happen.

It is absolutely vital that the Minister's department, and those
departments with concurrent competence in the provinces, retain a strong
say in determining land use, particularly the change of land use of
agricultural land. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, I have an announcement to make,
because I see people are starting to move out. After the sitting we are all
invited, that is the House and the members in the gallery, to the
restaurant downstairs in the Marks Building.

Nksz B N DLULANE: Mhlalingaphambili, mandibulise kuMphathiswa, kuSekela-
mphathiswa nakwisebe ngokubanzi. Ndithi makhe ndixhamle nam kule mini
inkulu kangaka. Ndinexhala xa lo ungaphaya kwam, umhlekazi uDurr,
ekhankanya umzekelo weAustralia kule Ndlu. Singoobani na thina bantu be-
ANC? Sisuka ebugxwayibeni, kwaye sisalwa nenkuntyula yetyala awasishiyela
lona amaNashinali. Ndiqinisekile ukuba uvile uMphathiswa.

Emva kokuba urhulumente wamaNashinali wathabathela kuye ulawulo ngonyaka ka-
1948, waqulunqa inkqubo yokuguzula abanxusi watshintsha ngolunya nemithetho
eyayikhusela amalungelo abasebenzi esebenzisa umthetho owaphunyezwa
ngonyaka ka-1936. Amalinge okutshayela abanxusi kwiifama zabamhlophe
nasezidolophini asekwa kumthetho owawudala ubutyala kubanxusi kwiifama
zabamhlophe nasezidolophini, iPrevention of Illegal Squatting Act of 1951.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs B N DLULANE: Chairperson, I would like to greet the Minister, his
Deputy and the department in general. I would also like to taake this
opportunity on this great day. I am a little bit worried though when Mr
Durr, who is seated over there, cites an example of Australia in this
House. Who are we people of the ANC? We come from very difficult times and
we are still struggling to pay debts that we inherited from the
Nationalists. I am sure that the Minister heard that.

When the Nationalist government came into power in 1948, they promulgated
the Prevention of Illegal Squatting Act and changed the laws that protected
workers' rights in 1936. Attempts to evict squatters from white farms and
urban areas were based on a law that made it an offence for squatters to be
on white farms in the towns, the Prevention of Illegal Squatting Act of
1951.]

Lo mthetho wawugunyazisa amafama amhlophe kunye namabhunga oomasipala ukuba
bagxothe abahlali basezifama ngolunya. Ukuqinisekisa ukuba lo mthetho
wawusebenza, kwaqulunqwa umthetho obizwa ngokuba yi-Bantu Laws Amendment
Act ngo-1964 owawugunyazisa ukukhutshwa ngokungenalusini kwabahlali
basezifama kunye nabahlali beendawo ezazisenomtsalane kwabamhlophe ...
[This law gave white farmers and municipalities authority to drive away
people who lived on the farms. To ensure that this law worked, the Bantu
Laws Amendment Act of 1964 was passed.]

Ukususela kunyaka ka-1960, endazalwa ngawo, ukuya kunyaka ka-1983, izigidi
zabantu abamnyama zasuswa emakhayeni azo aza anikwa amafama amhlophe.
Ndiyayazi ke loo nto kuba ndiyixelelwe kwa-ANC. Ndiyazi nokuba bafika
basidudula basisa kwiinkqantosi zomhlaba ukwenzela ukuba bahlale kumhlaba
owawufumile unenqatha.

Isiqingatha sesigidi sabantu sasuswa kwezo ndawo zazinomtsalane sisuswa
ngamafama ngokwawo kunye namabhunga eedolophu ngetshova. Ekubeni
urhulumente wamaNashinali ezifezekisile iimfuno zakhe, wathi
wayitshabalalisa loo mithetho esebenzisa umthetho obizwa ngokuba yi-
Abolition of Influx Control Act, umthetho ongunombolo 68 ka-1986, esenzela
ukuba angabonakali engurhulumente woontamolukhuni kwamanye amazwe.
Babehlutha, kuba besahlutha nangoku.

Phaya eMpuma Koloni, kwa-ANC, apho ndisuka khona, siye sagunyazisa inkqubo
ebandakanya idyunivesiti kunye neDohne Agricultural Development Institute
yethu. Le nkqubo iye yabhentsisa ukuba kwezolimo, iphondo leMpuma Koloni
livelisa ama-30 eepesenti ngaphantsi koko belinokukuvelisa. Ama-70
eepesenti emveliso kukutya nemveliso evela ngaphandle, ziinto ezo
ebelinokuzivelisa ngokwalo eli phondo. Umzekelo, ngoku siyazi ukuba
sivelisa isiqingatha kwimveliso yombona kunokuba besinakho. Ihekthare inye
ingavelisa iitoni ezine kumhlaba olulwalwa onemvula eninzi. Umzi onamalungu
asithoba ungenelwa ziitoni ezimbini zombona ngonyaka.

Ukuba singandisa imveliso yethu, lo mzi unganokutya okuphindwe kabini
kunokuba njalo. Loo nto ingenza ukuba nathi sibe nakho ukuthumela kwamanye
amaphondo nakwezinye iindawo, nto leyo engaphuhlisa uqoqosho kweli phondo.
Kuphela kwecebo elilelinye esinalo, singadanga sibonele kwiAustralia
esingenakukhawuleza sifike kwinqanaba layo.

Le nkqubo ingayimpumelelo kuphela xa uRhulumente wesininzi enokwandisa
ulwabiwo-mali kweli phondo. Akunakunceda ukuba neengcamango kodwa
zingafezekiswa. Siyazi ukuba uRhulumente akathathi ntweni, usalwa
nenkuntyula yetyala esashiywa nalo.

Uninzi lwabantu basezilalini lwayanyaniswa nezolimo. Kodwa ngenxa
yobunzima, ukunqongophala kwezibonelelo, ukunqaba kwamathuba emisebenzi
nokunqaba kophuhliso kunye neenkxwaleko ezidalwa kukungabumbani
kwabezolimo, amafama akakwazi ukuqhubela phambili. Esi simo sibangwa
nalulwabiwo-mali olungakwaziyo ukubonelela zonke iimfuno zamafama. Le mbali
yokuthatyathwa kwemihlaba ngolunya ngabamhlophe beli, ishiye ingxaki enkulu
efuna ukuqwalaselwa ngamandla.

Makungabonakali nje umthetho umiselwa, koko makubonakale ugunyaziswa;
ukwenzela ukuba kuvele amathuba kwabo bangenamhlaba. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[From 1960, the year in which I was born, to 1983 millions of black people
were forcefully removed from their homes, which in turn were given to white
farmers. I came to know about that from the ANC, and also that they drove
us to barren places while they reserved fertile land for themselves.

Farmers, together with their municipalities, forcefully removed half a
million people from such interesting places. When the Nationalist
government had accomplished their mission with all their needs attended to,
they abolished those laws by passing the Abolition of Influx Control Act,
Act 68 of 1986, so that they would not be seen as tyrants by the
international world. They enriched themselves and they still are rich.

The ANC in the Eastern Cape, where I come from, launched a partnership
programme between the university and the Dohne Agricultural Development
Institute. This programme showed that the province of the Eastern Cape
produces 30% below the expected level. 70% of the produce was imported and
those are things that the province could produce itself. To cite an
example, now we know that we produce half the expected produce of mealies.
One hectare could produce 4 tons on a fertile land and where rain is
abundant. A two-person household could survive on 2 tons of mealies a year.
If we could increase our production, the province could double what it is
now getting. That could enable us to supply other provinces and other
places outside of our country, something that could boost the economy of
this province. That is the only plan we have and we do not need to compare
ourselves to Australia, whose standard we could never reach overnight.

This programme could succeed only if the majority government could increase
this province's budget. It would not help just to throw around ideas and
not to utilise them. We do know, however, that the Government is still
fighting the huge debt that we inherited.

The majority of people in the rural areas are associated with agriculture,
but because of certain difficulties, scarcity of resources, lack of
infrastructure, lack of employment opportunities and development and
disunity among the farming community, farmers are finding it hard to move
forward.  This situation is also caused by the kind of budget that does not
seek to provide for all the needs of the farmers. The stealing of land by
white people left a very serious problem that must really be looked at.

The law must not only be passed, but it must be seen to take its course so
that those who do not have land could get an opportunity too.]

Justice must not only be seen to be done, but must manifestly be seen to be
doneÿ ...

ISebe lezoLimo neMicimbi yeMihlaba lifumanise ukuba njengokuba ndithetha
umhlaba ongokaRhulumente onokunikezelwa ebantwini ngabanye naseluntwini
uziihekthare ezingamawaka angama-260. Eli sebe liqulunqe inkqubo
yokunikezela ngalo mhlaba kaRhulumente eluntwini, i-state disposal
framework. Le nkqubo ithi umhlaba osemagunyeni amagqwetha ngama-15000
eehektare, iitayitile zemihlaba neefama ezithengiswayo eNgqushwa ngamawaka
angama-50 eehekthare; eGwatyu ngamawaka angama-38 eehekthare; eUmnga Flats
ngamawaka ali-15 eehekthare; eGuba Farms ngama-17 500 eehekthare; eDikeni
ngama-100 000 eehekthare; ePort St. Johns li-1 700 eehekthare; kwaMankazana
ngama-3 775 eehekthare; kwaMasakhane ngama-4 400.

Lo mhlaba uza kwabiwa kusetyenziswa inkqubo yokubuyiselwa komhlaba
nophuhliso lwawo, kwaye lujolise ekufezekiseni iimfuno zabantu ukuze
kuphuhliswe le mibandela ilandelayo: Ezolimo, ezokuhlala, ezorhwebo,
ezamahlathi, ezolondolozo lwendalo, ezolonwabo. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

The Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs found that even as I speak
the Government land that could be given to individuals and communities is
260 000 hectares. This department worked out a programme, the state
disposal framework, through which land will be given back to people. This
programme says that at Peddie there are 50 000 hectares; at Gwatyu 38 000
hectares; at Umnga 15 000 hectares; at Guba farms it is 17 500 hectares; at
Alice it is 100 000 hectares; at Port St Johns it is 1 700 hectares; at
Mankazana 3 775 hectares; and at Masakhane 4 400 hectares.

This land will be distributed according to the integrated programme of land
redistribution and agricultural development and its objective is to service
the needs of people and to focus on the following things: farming,
social/community issues, economy, forests, environment and recreation.]

The major focus of the provincial department of agriculture and land
affairs is to promote sustainable utilisation of natural resources, and to
shift from subsistence farming to semicommercial and, ultimately,
commercial farming.

Ukuze eli phulo liphumelele, kuye kwabonakala ukuba kufuneka likhatshwe
zizindululo eziya kuphicothwa libhunga. Kufuneka kuqulunqwe umthetho
ojongene nolwabiwo lomhlaba, umgaqo-nkqubo wolwabiwo lomhlaba kunye
namalungiselelo okuyixhasa ngemali le nkqubo. Ezinye zezi zindululo
ndisandul' ukuzikhankanya sele ziqulunqiwe. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[In order for this campaign to become successful, it became clear that it
would need to be accompanied by some proposals that the committee would
have to deal with. A law, which would be aimed at looking at the
distribution of land, a policy document and funding, should be passed. Some
of the proposals I have just mentioned are already being processed.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, your speaking time has expired.

Mrs B N DLULANE: Mhlalingaphambili, siyaluxhasa olu lwabiwo-mali.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] [Chairperson, we support this budget. [Applause.]]

Ms B THOMSON: Chairperson, hon Minister, members and special delegates, the
question of land continues to be a thorny issue in South Africa. Meanwhile,
the frustrations of the rural landless continue, and in time we may not be
able to contain these frustrations. Economic power relations between white
owners of land and the black rural poor still exist. Stakeholders in the
land reform process, particularly the white owners of land, seem to have
forgotten the case for Government's land reform policy.
The importance of land reform arises from historical policies of
landownership in apartheid South Africa. Land was also the basis for
political representation. Let me remind hon members that land dispossession
of black people had taken place at the hands of white colonisers.
Successive white governments restricted the land available for black
occupation, and changed the system of land administration.

We need to understand that land provides an important productive resource
for the community. Land is significant for community stability, cohesion
and production. [Interjections.] The impact of land restriction has
terrible consequences for the community. We should expect to see a
breakdown in community cohesion, an increase in the number of landless
people and a reduction in food security, with some people worse off than
others. [Interjections.]  Consequently, we also should expect to see an
increase in crime. Therefore, land must be effectively utilised by all
members of the community for the maximum benefit and security of all.

Kumhlonishwa wami mangithi lapha-ke ngizama ukusho ukuthi mhlawumbe elinye
ikhambi lokuthi siqede ukubulawa kwabalimi emapulazini ngukuthi sidedele
wona lawa mapulazi ngoba abanye bethu banodedangendlale bawo.

[I would like to give the hon the Minister a solution to the problem of the
killing of farmers. They must give away parts of their farms because some
of these farmers have huge farms.]

Yet this does not seem to be the case, as we encounter obstacles to land
reform. Last week an illegal attempt to evict a family of six farm tenants
was made by a farmer at Howick in KwaZulu-Natal. The family has lived on
the farm since 1948. This is despite the fact that the land is the subject
of a pending land claim by the family.

One of the family members is a 74-year-old pensioner, while there is a
special protection in the Extension of Security of Tenure Act which forbids
the eviction of pensioners. Also, the Department of Land Affairs must be
notified of the eviction, and this has not been the case. This failure has
rendered the eviction illegal. Although this eviction has been stayed,
certain items belonging to the family have not been returned.

We need also not to lose sight of the recent attacks on the farming
community. The importance of agriculture seems to go unnoticed. Agriculture
is not only important to the economy, but also to our daily livelihoods.
Remember: no farmer, no food. Just on Sunday, gunmen shot dead a woman and
seriously injured her boyfriend while the two were returning from church in
Mpumalanga. A gang of eight killed a farm labourer east of Nelspruit.

Not only are such brutal acts, unfair evictions and delayed land reform a
recipe for disaster, but they may also create sour relations in the
countryside. I quote from a certain writer:


  If blood is spilt, we make the future difficult. Blood is a means of
  binding us together, but blood that is spilt does not bind us together,
  but it creates a gulf, a deep gulf which in the history of people like
  ours might be unbridgeable.

I am confident that the Ministry of Safety and Security will leave no stone
unturned in bringing the perpetrators to book. I also send our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims of the farm attacks.
Speeding up and removing obstacles to land reform is a duty we will not
escape. I want to point out to Mr Durr that it will be unwise to entertain
the interests of commercial agriculture, while ignoring the peasantry in
the countryside. It is not a secret that the white commercial farmers have
enriched themselves at the expense of cheap black labour, land
dispossession and abuse of basic human rights. The majority of rural people
are poor and black. A great many people still go hungry and young children
are the most vulnerable.

The availability of land becomes a conerstone of food security. If a nation
is well fed, particularly the young children who are at the early stages of
physical and mental development, it will improve the nutritional status of
the nation at large. The incidence of disease will be minimised and the
effects of this will be great savings on health expenditure. Funds can thus
be channelled to other areas of development.

The meaning of land reform needs to be redefined, and particular areas of
our legislation need to be revisited. The primary reason for land reform is
to redress the injustices of apartheid, and to alleviate the impoverishment
that it caused. We are therefore far from achieving that goal.

South Africa is not a fertile country, agriculturally. This problem is even
worse in the former homelands, because of bad land management practices.
Much of the arable land in the former homelands is on slopes and subjected
to wind and water erosion. Stock farming is usually the viable type of
agriculture in these areas.

It therefore stands to reason that land on the white-owned farms should be
made available to the rural poor, but how can such land be acquired?
Attempts to expropriate a farm near Lydenburg in Mpumalanga have been
blocked by the present owner, who is demanding between R1,5 million and R2
million. The state was offering about R850 000. Would one truly say that
this is fair, given the fact that this farmer bought the land with soft
subsidised loans? [Interjections.] It is very true that the land has
appreciated in value over the past years, but then what is the meaning of
redress and reconciliation?

This is the first case in which the land claims commission is seeking
expropriation. If this is to be the attitude of present landowners, then we
are far from redressing the past injustices. Alternative routes will have
to be sought if nation-building and reconciliation are to be our
priorities.

Amendment of present legislation may well be one such route, in addition to
a closer look at section 25 of the Constitution, the property clause,
however thorny that may be. What is needed is a change in the whole mindset
of farmers. This change is applicable not only to land reform, but to a
range of other issues like labour relations on farms. Perhaps this might go
a long way towards ending the brutality that we see. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon members, I
must say that it was interesting to listen to the debate, and members kept
us on our toes about delivering what we promised in last year's budget. I
want to thank the officials who have understood the importance of the Batho
Pele campaign - people first. Without that understanding they would not
have been able to deliver with speed some of those things we mentioned last
year.

I must also indicate that we will continue, as the ANC-led Government, to
ensure that the work in which our civil servants attend to the task of
serving the South African people becomes true to the objective that our
role is to improve the quality of life of all South Africans. I think,
through the debate, the issues that we raised in part challenge us to find
common ground around which, as South Africans, we can build consensus for
our future. I think the debate illustrates in some way that this is the
challenge that we still face.

I could hear, as I sat here, some of the voices that articulate the
interests of those who are relatively developed and other voices
representing the poor in society. One must say that that is correct,
because this is the situation we are in. Sometimes what worries me is the
way in which some of those voices also represent the racial polarisation in
our society. I hope we will reach a position one day when all of us as
South Africans can articulate the needs of the South African people,
regardless of who they are.

I must say that as I sat here and listened to hon members I thought: If
only we had never had the legacy of apartheid, we would not be talking
about land reform in the manner in which we do. At least we would be
talking about land reform given whatever special planning and changes as a
result of particular choices. This is one reality we cannot avoid, that we
need to change and redress what was wrong. The Congolese proverb is a very
good one: Change is pain; it is like childbirth. The person who comes out
is neither an oppressor nor one of the oppressed. I think that one day,
through this change, we will build a South African nation that, when it
looks back, will say: never again will we go back to what was. Our children
will look forward to a future where they will appreciate the strength in
their diversity as a people.

It may not be necessary to deal with each and every issue that all of us
here have raised. I thought it may be necessary just to categorise some of
the issues which I thought members in the debate raised eloquently. The
fundamental issues that were raised were issues of equity, issues of
access, issues of poverty and issues of economic growth.

If one looks at the challenges that we face in order to deal with some of
these programmes, clearly the issue of food security cannot be
overestimated. As a department our view is that issues of food security
should take into consideration the issues of equity, affordability and
availability. I would like to say that while some of the provinces may be
in a relatively better position in terms of their production, actually
being able to go into new areas such as higher value crops and
technological advancement, we should not forget that among our communities
the majority are still poor.

So there are certain interventions that we need to undertake. One of those
within the Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs, in both national
and provincial governments, as we heard some of the MECs indicating, is to
actually undertake a food security strategy which on the one hand will deal
with the issues of household food security. Therefore kubaba uMapholoba
ngithi [to the hon Mapholoba I say that] there is room for programmes such
as Xoshindlala.

There is room for urban gardens, because, in a very limited way, they deal
with those who are marginalised and vulnerable. At the same time it is
important that we do not just treat urban gardens in a trivial way as if
they are merely about gardening. They can offer an opportunity for job
creation at a very local level. They also give an opportunity of putting
fresh food on the tables of our consumers at a lower cost. I think we also
need to create a balance. There is a space at that level of intervention,
but clearly there is a need for graduation. Regarding the hon Mrs Vilakazi
and the hon Mapholoba, I thought it is also necessary to indicate that
Xoshindlala is a provincial initiative.

Ngithi kumama uVilakazi angizukwazi-ke ukusho ukuthi ngabe imali abanye
abayitholanga kanjani kwathi abanye bayithola kanjani. Mhlawumbe uma
sesikhuluma ngeVoti lesifundazwe, singakwazi ukubuza kuMnu Singh ukuthi
ngabe lolu hlelo lwemali lwabiwa kanjani.

Thina, singundlunkulu, sikwazile ukuhlala phansi nezinye izifundazwe
sabonisana ngokuthi mhlawumbe lezi zinhlelo ezifana noXoshindlala
singazenza kanjani ukuthi zithithe izidingo zabantu njengemfanelo,
nangokuthi bangaba baningi kangakanani abantu abangaluthola lolo xhaso.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows)

[I would not be able to explain to Mrs Vilakazi why some got the money
while others did not. Perhaps when we talk about the provincial vote, we
should ask Mr Singh how this system went.

As a national Government, we were able to sit down and talk with provincial
legislatures regarding the formation of programmes like Xoshindlala. We
talked about how they should be appealing to people and how many people
will be able to receive this assistance.]

It is also necessary to acknowledge that the issue of food security raises
particular critical questions. Some of those questions, as I say, raise the
issues of production support and of food safety and quality. While there
are many debates on the fact that in food security we should not
underestimate the role that imports can play, it is also important that
when such debates and dialogues are undertaken, we understand that there
are issues of food safety that we need to take into consideration.

We also have to understand that it is important to protect our productive
base locally around issues of economic growth, which I think a number of
people touched on. That is precisely why both the national department and
the provinces agreed that one of the priorities is the farmer settlement
programme, because our intention is to build farmers who can operate at a
smallholder level, on a medium and large scale. The critical question which
we have to again deal with as a matter of balance is: How does one make it
possible for those who were previously disadvantaged to get into this
enterprise, given the challenges of our past that we all know about?

That is why, as Government, we have said that issues of infrastructure,
training, research, production support, quality control, financing
mechanisms, business management, policy and regulation are important. So
there is a package. We are not saying siyobabeka nje ababelima sibashiye
[we will dump them].

We would have to. That is why this is a joint programme between Agriculture
and Land Affairs, so that, indeed, as we give access to land, we can also
give support so that those people can be successful.

But these issues also clearly create room for interrelationships amongst
departments. Some of the hon members raised the issue of market
opportunities and some the issue of marketing information. How do we enable
those farmers so that they can see opportunities for marketing at a local
level, in the region, nationally and internationally? What type of
incentives do we need to put in place?

There are also other issues that are very critical - issues of
competitiveness. While I appreciate the statement that was made by the hon
Mr Durr, I think it is important for him to say that this department - and
I am sure he is following our debate - has  analysed the problem correctly.
That is why we have always said that there is a balance to support our
established commercial sector, as well as those who are new entrants,
because it is not our intention, as this Government, to destroy that
economic sector, but we want it to become competitive.

Understanding what the hon member Mrs Versveld raised about the challenges
around which our farmers produce, it is true that these are the issues that
we need to look at together. That is why co-operative governance, as
opposed to a go-alone approach, is necessary.  When we undertake, in
particular, lucerne research, as she indicates, which is agricultural
development, we must do so understanding what the national impact will be.
My colleague Mary Metcalfe may, for example, decide on a very wonderful
strategy. She may be sitting on a water catchment and decide to dam the
whole Vaal River and leave all of us in the Free State and KwaZulu-Natal
without water. While she may have solved the problems of the Free State,
she would adversely affect other provinces. I think it is in this spirit
that we say it is important to dialogue and work together on these matters.

There is another matter around issues of competitiveness which was raised
by my colleague Mr Van Rensburg, and which deals with how to position
ourselves as a country in the international environment. I think the debate
within the EU-South Africa agreement posed this challenge very well. Some
of us who are very young - I will not tell hon members what my age is -
grew up knowing the port and sherry as South African products, but all of a
sudden we were told by the EU that the name ``port'' originated in a
country in the European region. While we thought we had tried to compromise
on that one, the list just became longer and longer with ouzo and grappa,
you know. In dealing with those issues we must find a better mechanism for
us in order to compete effectively and capture these markets where we have
been.

There is an interesting concept that the Western Cape is looking at, namely
products of origin and the issue of geographic indications or traditional
expression. It sounds very interesting to MEC Metcalfe and Dirk du Toit and
the officials who looked at the presentation of this strategy to Minmec. It
looks very good. It starts to characterise South African products and
produce. But it raises a very interesting issue which my colleagues felt it
necessary that we debate, not only as the Departments of Agriculture and
Land Affairs, but also with the Department of Trade and Industry. How does
one start to package a boerewors and call it "Magalieswors"? The argument
would be that Magaliesberg is known for its beef production, and has
prestige. But who, then, holds that patent? Who, then, becomes the
custodian? Is it the Western Cape that might have come up with this bright
idea? Is it the North West? Is it Botswana or Gauteng?

I see Mrs Versveld is shaking her head, but during the debate the Western
Cape economists understood the issues I was raising. The issue of the
origin of South African products would raise particular cultural debates.
When one says "mala mogodu", who is the custodian of that name? Is it the
Sesotho or Setswana-speaking people of this country? Is it the Basotho or
Batswana? I think the complexity of South African society is that we share
these things at a regional level. Mrs Versveld must therefore note that it
is important that when we deal with these issues we do so with an
understanding of the challenges we are undertaking. One does not want an
attack in which we are taken on by one of our neighbouring countries of the
World Trade Organisation Trips agreement.

It is a reality. My mother is a Swazi, from Mankayane in Swaziland. She
speaks the same language as the people in Mpumalanga, particularly those in
Nkomati and Nelspruit. Before they had their colonial borders, they were
the same people. So when one starts talking tintfo takaNgwane, ngubani-ke
lotaba wakaNgwane emkhatsini weNelspruit neMankayane? [things that belong
to Ngwane, who is then going to be belonging to Nelspruit or to Mankayane?]
It raises a debate. I am happy to say that between ourselves and the
Western Cape we have agreed to set up a task team so that we can dialogue
on this matter together with the Department of Trade and Industry and adopt
a similar strategy so that we agree on what will be the fundamentals and
how we also benefit all South Africans. Some of us who might have the
ability and the technology could move away and further entrench the
divisions and the benefits our society. It may not be a nice debate, but it
is a reality.

The other matter which I thought it necessary to deal with is around what
forms of production support we have identified as critical at this stage
which we can put from our national department's budget. Clearly, the issue
of animal health has been identified as one of those key areas. One of the
hon members asked why dipping services and particular medicine were no
longer provided, and said they were told the decision came from above.

Ngithi kumalungu u``above'' lo mningi ngoba obasi kwezolimo bayi-11
ngePhini likaNgqongoshe. Kukhona obasi abaphezulu, abakuleli zinga elifana
nelami nje, bese kuba khona nabanye obasi bami abafana no-Mary Metcalfe, o-
Van Rensburg no-Aaron Motswaledi. Manje-ke angazi ukuthi uma bethi
``ngaphezulu'' basuke besho ngaphezulu kuphi. Kodwa-ke sonke sesivumelene
ngokuthi noma ngabe luqhamuka ngaphezulu ezifundazweni noma ngaphezulu
phezulu, lolu daba kufuneka siludingide. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)
[I would like to tell hon members that this "above" is enough because we
have 11 bosses, including the Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Land
Affairs. There are bosses who are at the same level as mine. There are also
my bosses, such as Mary Metcalfe, Van Rensburg and Aaron Motswaledi. Now I
do not know to whom they are referring when they say "above". However, we
have all agreed that even if it this "above" means provinces or "far
above", it must be corrected.]

We have agreed that in this budget we are going to revive all dipping
services in the country, starting with communal areas. [Applause.] We have
agreed that, as Government, we will provide support, ensuring that while we
rehabilitate the infrastructure, starting with those areas that were
affected by foot-and-mouth disease, we actually provide, working with
provinces, some financial resources to improve support for medicine in
particular. But, clearly, we have said that we want to ensure that we set
up a primary animal health system at local level. We have also said that in
order for Government to give this support, as we are doing with the diesel
rebate, it is important to know how many farmers we have in South Africa.
Khona manje sonkhe sitsi 60 000, labanye batsi 50 000, nami-ke angisati
kutsi kahle hle bangaki labalimi labakhona. [Currently, we are all saying
60 000, others are saying 50 000, and I actually do not know how many
farmers there are.] So we have decided that we are going to set up a farm
register, and I am happy to say that Agri -SA and the National African
Farmers' Union have agreed with us, because this will help eliminate
duplication.

Sometimes when one hears about figures one must note that a farmer could be
a member of Agri SA and also of Grain SA in a commodity group, so when the
figures are added up, one gets these inflated numbers, and yet one is
counting Thoko Msane many times. We want to deal with those issues. That
will also assist us when we argue about the national Budget with the
Treasury and say that these are the people for whom we are asking for
support.

I must say that the issue raised around land reform is, indeed, a very
serious one. It raises the question of access and the question of equity
and redress. We will continue, as we have committed ourselves, to
accelerate the issue of restitution, because it is an important matter of
social justice. All of us here who knew, saw and experienced land
dispossession, particularly around forced removals, know the emotiveness of
the issue. We want to ensure that we settle it, and clearly one must thank
the commissioners for the way in which they have worked.

I want to assure Kgosi Mokoena that the provincial commissioners of
Mpumalanga and Northern Province are going to be based in the provinces. I
have delivered even before leaving this House. We are doing this because we
understand that the closer the service is to the people, the better for all
of us.

I also want to indicate that we have committed ourselves to addressing the
issue of redistribution, and this is where, in our view, we will have to
deal with the issues which I think Comrade Mary Metcalfe and other members
raised.

Last year members of the National Assembly - and I know the committees in
the provinces as well - visited a number of areas. I think it is a reality
that we still have not found a better mechanism for dealing with evictions.
There is legislation, which is a mechanism that is supposed to enable all
of us to deal with this problem. Clearly we have to finally address the
issue of security of tenure for labour tenants and farmworkers. We have
made a decision that in this year's budget we are going to target some of
these areas and ensure that we acquire land so that at last these people,
for the first time, can say: This is mine.

Working with the provinces, we will be able to identify key pilot areas,
such as Wakkerstroom, Ermelo in Mpumalanga, some areas of Gauteng, the
North West and KwaZulu-Natal, particularly areas such as Newcastle and
Vryheid, in which the rate of evictions has been very high in the past
year. We hope that we will be able to get support, particularly from the
landowners, so that, when we negotiate the acquisition of property for our
vulnerable communities, we can find each other and meet each other halfway.

It is also necessary to end with the issue of farm violence. I heard one
hon member say: ``Minister, we are not hearing you, you are not being vocal
on this matter.'' It may be true, it may also not be true. In my
understanding it does not help to be vocal continuously when no action can
be taken. I think this sometimes confuses issues, because the next question
hon members will ask me when I keep on raising the matter will be: What are
you going to do? and I will then repeat what I said last week and the
previous weeks. I said I would raise the matter with the security
Ministers, but does that help? It does not. One will end up saying: No,
this Minister is playing games with us. But this is where collaboration and
co-ordination within government become critical.

I want to say to hon members that it may have been a quiet strategy, but we
have been able to achieve something. I am sure hon members have seen, after
we made announcements following the presidential working group, that we
have actually moved as Government on this matter. Farmers met with me and
the Minister of Safety and Security and we agreed on a common strategy in
dealing with farm violence and, more particularly, rural violence. One of
those strategies is to ensure that we increase surveillance in those areas
and increase patrols and police personnel in the rural safety plan.

The Ministry of Safety and Security have in this budget - and I am sure
they will indicate it - actually put aside money to purchase two
helicopters that will help ensure a quicker response and surveillance, so
we cannot say that nothing has been done.

A training programme has also been formulated to ensure that we improve the
level of capacity of farmworkers so that they become an integral part of
the protection plan. It does not help to say we will have commandos and we
do nothing about farmworkers, so that they become spectators, because they
are part of the plan. But, more importantly, we have agreed with farmers'
organisations that it is critical to build relationships, so that we can
become the defenders of each other.

One of the important things for which I must commend the farmers of this
country is that when one farmer decided to poison his farmworkers, Agri SA,
even before the Government made a comment, made a statement and condemned
that action.

I must say that this is a good example, because it is an indication that
not everybody in our society is bad, but that their are just a few bad
apples.

I think that if, as MmaChabaku dealt with the matter, we could all as South
Africans say we will weed out those elements, be they among farmers, be
they within our communities, or farmworkers, we will be able to hold each
other's hands. This is my appeal, and we will indeed continue to work in
this manner.

More importantly, the issue of labour conditions among farmworkers has also
been attended to. The Ministry of Labour and SA have been meeting to find a
way in which they can actually improve the working conditions of
farmworkers.

As I speak today, there will be a national consultative forum that will
come up with a consensus document and protocol that will actually govern
the way in which there must be coexistence, particularly around labour
issues in farming areas.

Mrs A M VERSVELD: And in fishing areas.

The MINISTER: And what?

Mrs A M VERSFELD: And in fishing areas.

The MINISTER: And in fishing areas. We will try to ensure that we bring the
Ministry of Environmental Affairs and Tourism into that discussion.

I must say that some of the fears that have been expressed around the issue
of the subdivision of agricultural land have been taken care of in the
drafting process. I want to assure the hon Mr Durr that this Minister and
Deputy Minister are the last people who would want to erode agricultural
land, because we understand the value of agriculture not only to our
economy, but also to our society.

Therefore, the way in which we want to deal with land use is to ensure that
we protect agricultural land, while being conscious to the needs of other
users of land for industrial and other settlement purposes. Time and again,
our role will be to ensure that there is a fair balance.

I think that when the President in his speech highlighted Government's
decision on making agriculture one of the economic drivers, it was an
affirmation of the importance of this sector our economy.

We do understand it when other people say this is a very minute sector and
that it has very little to contribute to the economy. But let's face it:
all of us here are so beautiful and lively because we have had food.
[Interjections.] I think it is foolhardy for us, as a country, to say that
we do not want any productive base because we can buy, especially with the
property that we still have. With the unemployment challenges that we still
face as a country, how can we afford to purchase?

That is why it is necessary, in the midst of all these challenges and the
climatic conditions of the country, to keep our capacity to produce for
ourselves.

I am sure I can count on hon members to support us in these endeavours.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 17:52.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           WEDNESDAY, 4 APRIL 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The Minister of Trade and Industry on 22 March 2001 submitted drafts
     and memorandums explaining the objects of the following proposed Bills,
     to the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The drafts have been
     referred by the Chairperson to the Select Committee on Economic Affairs
     in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2):


         (i)     Counterfeit Goods Amendment Bill, 2001
         (ii)    Trade Practices Amendment Bill, 2001
         (iii)   Patents Amendment Bill, 2001
         (iv)    Merchandise Marks Amendment Bill, 2001
         (v)     Consumer Affairs (Unfair Business Practices) Amendment
                  Bill, 2001
         (vi)    Performers' Protection Amendment Bill, 2001
         (vii)   Companies Amendment Bill, 2001
         (viii)  Close Corporations Amendment Bill, 2001
         (ix)    Copyright Amendment Bill, 2001
         (x)     Export Credit and Foreign Investment Reinsurance Amendment
                  Bill, 2001
         (xi)    Industrial Development Amendment Bill, 2001
TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report and Decisions of the 5th Extraordinary Session of the Assembly
     of Heads of State and Government of the OAU/AEC, held in Sirte, Libya
     from 1 to 2 March 2001. Paragraphs 1.2 and 2.4 reflect that the draft
     Protocol on the Pan-African Parliament had been adopted with amendments
     to Articles 4 and 25:


CREDA INSERT REPORT

                           THURSDAY, 5 APRIL 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
     77), that was introduced by the Minister of Finance on 5 April 2001,
     has been referred to the Joint Committee on Taxation Laws Amendment
     Bill in accordance with resolutions adopted by the Assembly and by the
     Council on 20 March 2001.



National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     (1)    Bill, as amended, passed by National Assembly on 5 April 2001
         and transmitted for consideration of Assembly's amendments:


         (i)     Housing Amendment Bill [B 7D - 2001] (National Council of
              Provinces - sec 76(2)).


    (2)     The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Public
         Services of the National Council of Provinces.


     (3)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 5 April 2001 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     South African Sports Commission Amendment Bill [B 2B -
              2001] (National Assembly - sec 75).


         (ii)    South African Boxing Bill [B 13B - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75).


    (4)     The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 5 April 2001: To
          be submitted to President of the Republic for assent:


          (i)     Advisory Board on Social Development Bill [B 43B - 2000]
               (National Assembly - sec 75) (introduced as Developmental
               Welfare Governance Bill [B 43 - 2000]).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill, 2001
          [WP 1-2001].


    (2)     Government Notice No R.231 published in the Government Gazette
          No 22139 dated 8 March 2001, Cancellation of appointment of
          authorised dealers in foreign exchange.


    (3)     Government Notice No R.238 published in the Government Gazette
          No 22141 dated 9 March 2001, Draft Treasury Regulations published
          for comment in terms of section 78 of the Public Finance
          Management Act, 1999 [Act 1 of 1999].

