---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 May 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-05-16
---

WEDNESDAY, 16 MAY 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                   INTERNATIONAL CANDLELIGHT MEMORIAL DAY

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members will notice that, as we did last year, we
have a candle in the Chamber to recognise International Aids Candlelight
Memorial Day, which falls on Sunday, 20 May, when we honour the memory of
those lost to Aids and show support for those living with HIV/Aids, to
raise awareness of the disease and to mobilise communities in the fight
against HIV/Aids.

Members will recall that last week the House held a special debate on the
need to accord the fight against poverty and HIV/Aids urgent national
priority. This year's theme for the Candlelight Memorial - one voice many
faces united for life - embraces the different facets of the pandemic. The
candle burning in the House today serves to remind us all, as public
representatives, of the need for the nation to join hands in the fight
against HIV/Aids and the need for public representatives to be in the
forefront of that fight.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Nkszn B P SONJICA: Mhlalingaphambili, ndiza kwenza isiphakamiso egameni le
ANC:


  Sokuba le Ndlu -


  (1) iqwalasele inkcazo yoMphathiswa wezoLimo neMicimbi yeMihlaba emalunga
       nokunikezelwa komhlaba omninzi kaRhulumente kubalimi abasakhasayo;


  (2) yamkele ukuba eli nyathelo libonisa ukuzimisela kukaRhulumente
       ekupheliseni ubuhlanga nocalu-calulo phakathi kwabanini-mhlaba kweli
       lizwe lookhokho bethu;


  (3) ikhuthaze imidaka yeli lizwe ukuba iphakame izibandakanye kulimo
       oluphuhlileyo, yenze negalelo elibonakalayo kwimo yezoqoqosho
       yelizwe;


  (4) ibulele kuMphathiswa nakuRhulumente we-ANC ngokuthabatha eli nyathelo
       lizalisekisa imibono kaMongameli uThabo Mbeki, yokuphelisa ubuhlwempu
       nendlala eMzantsi Afrika; nokuba


  (5) yenze isimemelelo kubo bonke abantu abamnyama nabahlelelekileyo ukuba
       balamkele ngezandla zozibini eli thuba.

[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa notice of motion follows.)
[Ms B P SONJICA: Mr Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the explanation that the Minister for Agriculture and Land
       Affairs gave about redistributing Government land to emerging
       farmers;


  (2) acknowledges that this step shows the Government's commitment to
       ending racism and apartheid between land owners in this country of
       our forefathers;


  (3) encourages the black people of our country to participate in
       development agriculture and make an appropriate contribution towards
       the economy of the country;


  (4) appreciates the steps taken by the Minister and the ANC-led
       Government towards fulfilling the visions of the President, Mr Thabo
       Mbeki, of alleviating poverty and starvation in South Africa; and


  (5) calls on all the black people and the poor to welcome this
       opportunity with both hands.

[Applause.]]

Mr R J HEINE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on behalf
of the DP:


  That the House notes -


  (1) with alarm the spate of attacks and raids on businesses and foreign
       nationals in neighbouring Zimbabwe, in the light of the following:


       (a)  that businesses in Zimbabwe find it impossible to operate where
           there is no rule of law, and are therefore preparing to close
           their doors because of the latest violence and intimidation;


       (b)  that this has directly led to a drop in the business confidence
           index of the SA economy;


       (c)  that the EU are considering imposing sanctions against Zimbabwe;
           and
       (d)  that these events further lead to the relegation of Southern
           Africa as an investment destination and stand to derail the
           privatisation process in SA; and


  (2) that the DP urges the SA Government to condemn these events in
       Zimbabwe in the strongest possible terms, as South Africa can ill
       afford to be pulled into an economic abyss along with Zimbabwe.

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) accepts with humility the accolades given by the IMF to South
       Africa's approach in managing the economy which saw 3,1% growth in
       2000, which was preceded by 1,9% growth in 1999;


  (2) further notes that according to the IMF, South Africa's policies on a
       competitive exchange rate, strengthened tax administration, spending
       controls and an anti-inflation monetary approach are financially
       sound;


  (3) hopes that these achievements will not only help in raising South
       Africa's profile abroad but will also assist in reducing the levels
       of unemployment facing the population; and


  (4) also takes on board the cautionary comments of the IMF regarding the
       far-reaching economic consequences that the HIV/Aids pandemic may
       have, as well as their concern about low savings and that investment
       and growth would have to rise significantly to fight unemployment.

Mr J J KGARIMETSA: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the national Government gazetted about R15 billion
       yesterday to be paid to 284 newly demarcated national authorities in
       the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework over the next three years;
  (2) recognises that the new formula will promote better planning and
       development strategies in line with the ANC Government's commitment
       to urban renewal and the Integrated Rural Development Strategy; and


  (3) commends the ANC Government for its progress in the introduction of
       sound financial practices and systems of accountability in all
       spheres of government, promoting more effective and productive use of
       taxpayers' money.

[Applause.]

Mnr J J NIEMANN: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag van die Huis sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met verontwaardiging kennis neem van die ongedissiplineerde optrede
       van leerders van die Mogomotsi Hoërskool, Warrenton, wat onder meer
       gelei het tot die beskadiging van voertuie op die N12-hoofweg;


  (2) van mening is dat dié soort ongedissiplineerde optrede wat onderrig
       by die skool sedert Maartmaand vanjaar ernstig ontwrig, nie langer
       geduld kan word nie en dat die belhamels summier geskors moet word;
       en


  (3) glo dat dit by die leerders ingeskerp moet word dat persoonlike regte
       en vryhede nie mag inbreuk maak op die regte en vryhede van iemand
       anders nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J J NIEMANN: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with indignation the undisciplined behaviour of learners of the
       Mogomotsi High School, Warrenton, which, inter alia, led to the
       damaging of vehicles on the N12 highway;


  (2) is of the opinion that this kind of undisciplined behaviour, which
       has seriously disrupted tuition at the school since March of this
       year, can no longer be tolerated and that the ringleaders must be
       summarily suspended; and


  (3) believes that it should be impressed upon the learners that personal
       rights and liberties may not violate the rights and liberties of
       others.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock and trepidation the bale-out package of R300 million
       granted by the central Government to the Mpumalanga provincial
       government;


  (2) is concerned that the central Government's continuous string of high
       profile bale-outs of the provincial governments indeed raises a red
       flag on what the Government portrays as the now stable landscape of
       provincial finances;


  (3) is further concerned that financial mismanagement and corruption
       continue to flourish in Mpumalanga, and thus further acknowledges a
       remark by a magistrate of the Nelspruit court who referred to a
       deputy director-general of the Mpumalanga government, during a trial
       on financial mismanagement and fraud, as ``a blatant and pathetic
       liar'', which is a direct indictment of the ANC provincial
       government's ineptitude and a manifestation of incompetence; and


  (4) calls on the Government to take over the administration of Mpumalanga
       with immediate effect instead of imposing a number of conditions for
       improvement at the taxpayers expense.

[Interjections.]

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the private sector health summit that took place recently;


  (2) notes the victory in court which makes drugs affordable and
       accessible;


  (3) recognises that there is a softening of attitudes within the
       pharmaceutical industry;


  (4) further recognises that the frontiers of access to health care must
       be extended; and


  (5) calls upon the Conference of Family Practitioners to pledge to make
       health care accessible even in private practices in order to extend
       accessibility to all, including people living with HIV/Aids.

[Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move on behalf of
the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the land on which the Bakopa had lived since the 17th century
           was forceably taken from them on 25 June 1962 because it was
           declared a white area, and the Bakopa left their land and many
           graves which are still visible today;


       (b)  this removal was painful, insensitive and, to this day, highly
           emotionally charged; and


       (c)  the Government kindly agreed that a veteran fighter for the
           return of their tribal land, Jan Letebele Matsepe, could be
           buried there on Sunday, 13 May 2001, according to his wishes,
           even though the application for the return of this land had not
           been completed; and


  (2) calls for the speedy handling of this land claim, which will bring
       unity to the tribe, and joy and enormous goodwill to all.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes -


       (a)  the allegations that sport in South Africa is engulfed in a
           cloud of controversy surrounding allegations of financial
           mismanagement and corruption; and


       (b)  as intimated in the media, that ASA management has failed to
           account for an estimated amount of R9 million donated to the
           sporting body;


  (2) is of the opinion that, for the sake of sport, it would be advisable
       for the Minister to get to the bottom of these allegations as they
       are damaging the image of South Africa internationally; and


  (3) urges the Minister of Sport and Recreation to institute a formal
       enquiry to establish the truth as far as the allegations are
       concerned.

Mr J P CRONIN: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that the Banking Council has warned that banks may increase
       charges in response to new requirements by the Reserve Bank;


  (2) believes that -


       (a)  banking charges are increasing rapidly while the level of
           service, particularly to low-income clients, is decreasing, and
           that high banking charges are a barrier to disadvantaged
           citizens and communities; and


       (b)  the new regulations are being used as an excuse for increasing
           charges still further at the expense of the most vulnerable; and


  (3) calls on the Government, the banking industry, and civil society to
       tackle the issue of banking charges to ensure that the banking sector
       plays a productive role in the transformation of our economy and
       society.

[Applause.]

Mr N J CLELLAND: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Director Henry Manzi, the newly appointed head of the Durban
           Metro Police, is alleged to have interfered with the
           administration of justice in order to release his own uncle;


       (b)  after receiving a phone call from his uncle - who had been
           arrested for a traffic violation and attempting to bribe a
           police officer - Director Manzi personally went to the Point
           Road police station and insisted that the junior officer under
           his command release and not charge his uncle; and


       (c)  Mr Manzi is an ANC political appointment and that the ANC went
           to extraordinary lengths to have Mr Manzi appointed as Director
           of the Durban Metro Police; and
  (2) condemns this illegal, arrogant and despicable behaviour and calls on
       the ANC-led Durban Metro to discipline Mr Manzi.

Prince N E ZULU: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) regrets the recent unbecoming event in which a Chatsworth man doused
       his house and his two children with petrol and held the children and
       his ex-wife hostage;


  (2) applauds the police for having succeeded in pacifying the assailant;
       and


  (3) hopes that conjugal harmony is restored in our communities to ensure
       a peaceful environment, especially for the sake of children.

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Chairperson, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  resolutions of the internal Conference of Family Practitioners
           held in our country urging governments to take action against
           access to and availability of tobacco to children and adult
           smokers; and


       (b)  that the resolutions of this conference support and confirm our
           legislation to regulate access to tobacco; and


  (2) supports the call by the conference for the introduction of even
       tougher measures to limit access to and availability of tobacco to
       all people.

Adv A H GAUM: Chairperson, I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the ANC's decision not to call National Police Commissioner,
           Jackie Selebi, to explain to the Portfolio Committe on Safety
           and Security his extraordinary personal involvement in the
           investigation into the alleged plot to overthrow President Thabo
           Mbeki, and his recording of conversations between James Nkambule
           and alleged suspects;


       (b)  Minister Tshwete's sudden withdrawal from a debate of urgent
           national importance on his plot allegations;


       (c)  that this amounts to an undermining of Parliament's oversight
           role, the principles of openness and transparency and the
           public's right to know; and


       (d)  that Minister Tshwete is unable to come up with concrete
           evidence against the three persons he has implicated; and


  (2) resolves that the ANC should stop its endeavours to kill this scandal
       with silence and to cover up a politically motivated police
       investigation and that Minister Tshwete should either deliver
       evidence or resign.

[Interjections.]

Mr M T GONIWE: Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon Gaum's motion
includes factually incorrect statements, where he claims that ...
[Interjections.] Shut up, man!

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Continue, hon member.

Mr M T GONIWE: He claims that Minister Tshwete refused a debate. That is
not factually true. Minister Tshwete was not available for that debate. It
is factually incorrect.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That is not a point of order, but if any
member doubts that a motion read in this House is correct, the Speaker can
actually look into that motion and decide whether it is acceptable or not.
We can therefore raise it in the appropriate structure.

  APPEAL TO THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO ASSIST IN THE RESOLUTION OF THE
                            MIDDLE EAST CONFLICT
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with profound sadness and shock the ever escalating violence in
       the Middle East, resulting in a tragic loss of life and wanton
       destruction of property;


  (2) believes that this deepening crisis poses a serious threat to world
       peace;


  (3) deplores this continuing bloodletting;


  (4) urges all role-players to come back to the negotiating table; and


  (5) calls on the international community to provide the necessary support
       and assistance to bring about a lasting resolution to this conflict
       that has lasted for decades.
Agreed to.

                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Ms B A HOGAN: Mr Chairperson, our committee spent over 14 meetings
deliberating on the capital gains tax. We heard many heated arguments for
and against it. At the end of the day, we had to make a decision. I must
say that, as chair of this committee, after hearing the arguments that were
placed before us, I am absolutely clear in my mind that the introduction of
a capital gains tax is absolutely justifiable in this country.

Yes, it is a new tax. Yes, it will bring administrative complexities. It
will add to the burden on the SA Revenue Service and, to a certain extent,
taxpayers. But there are very compelling reasons why we need a tax of this
kind. I would ask those people who are opposing this tax to take time to go
through those reasons and to think through those reasons very carefully,
given that we are living in a society that is torn apart by income
disparities and that we need to address the differences in income and way
of life of our people, if we are going to meet our goals of true
reconciliation.

Briefly, what is this tax about? This tax is very simple. If one owns a
company, one earns - hopefully - profits on that company and pays taxes on
those profits. There is no problem in that situation. If one, as an
individual, owns a house and rents it out, one pays tax on the rental that
one receives on that house. There is no problem in that situation. However,
if one owns a company and sells it at a profit, one does not pay tax in the
present dispensation. In the same light, if one owns a house and sells it
at a great profit, one does not pay tax on that house.

Bearing in mind that the majority of our people do not even own a house or
a company, the only income which they receive is a salary. They pay tax on
that salary. If they are able to save - most of our poorer people, who are
the majority of our population, save in saving accounts - they pay tax on
the interest which they earn on those savings accounts. However, if one is
a wealthy person and can buy shares, if one sells those shares one does not
pay tax on the profit that one makes when one sells those shares.
[Interjections.] There is a difference between trading and selling. I think
that members should understand that.

There is an injustice that does cry out to be seen, heard and met. It is
simply unfair to expect poorer people in our society to contribute to the
payment of taxes while others who are more fortunate - that includes a lot
of us here - have the ability to invest in investments on which they do not
pay tax when they sell those investments. That is blatantly unfair. We need
to address that issue urgently in our society. No matter what the
complexities of the tax are, we cannot overlook the need for the
equalisation of the way that we treat our tax.

This is not going to be a tax which simply knocks the ordinary person in
the street. The tax has been very carefully crafted so that the ordinary
person in the street is not badly affected. Firstly, no one will pay tax on
their house that they own, if it is a primary residence. If what they gain
when they sell that house is less than R1 million profit, they will not pay
tax on the sale of that primary house.

Secondly, when life policies and endowment policies are paid out, they will
not pay CGT. Thirdly, the tax that will be levied, if one does make a
capital gain that has to be taxed, will only be at 25% on the capital gain
that one makes. One is not being taxed on the full capital gain, one is
only being taxed at 25%. Fourthly, the first R10 000 of any capital gain
that one has to pay will be excluded from the amount that one has to
calculate into taxation.

If one dies, one will pay capital gains tax, but the first R50 000 of what
one has to pay on that capital gains tax will be excluded. Winnings from
gambling, lotteries, etc are also excluded from capital gains tax, as is
any disposal on one's personal assets. If one sells any of one's personal
assets, that is a car, computer, jewellery or whatever, that is not subject
to capital gains.

Capital gains tax, I repeat, is not going to affect the ordinary person in
the street. Capital gains tax will affect, as it does in other parts of the
world, the wealthy in our society. In fact, in the United States, for
instance, the people at the top income level made 61,9% of all capital
gains and contributed 62,4% of all tax on capital gains collected. We are
talking about a wealthy stratum of people who are now going to be taxed.

It is not correct to believe, as has often been put across, that capital
gains is a discredited tax in the world. In fact -and I will not go through
the details - capital gains exists in most countries in the world. In the
Americas - North and South America - there are only two countries that do
not have capital gains tax. In Europe virtually every country has capital
gains tax. I can go through the whole gamut of countries in the world, but
capital gains tax prevails in a majority of countries in this world. It is
not a punitive tax which is being imposed in this country because we have a
wish to tax the wealthy sector, which, in quotes, is referred to as the
``wealthy whites''.

Another reason we have to impose a capital gains tax and why we are
persuaded that it is a justifiable tax is that, in the absence of capital
gains tax, there is a tendency for people to convert their revenue into
capital so they can avoid paying tax. We have a huge amount of tax evasion
and a lot of the SA Revenue Service's time is spent on trying to work out
whether something is revenue or capital because we have this gap in our
capital gains tax legislation.

This tax is therefore useful for purposes of increasing our ability to meet
the problems of tax evasion, and we feel very strongly that capital gains
tax is an important component in the whole array of taxes. It simply helps
us to avoid tax evasion and avoidance. No doubt there are going to be tax
administration complications. Ordinary taxpayers are going to have to fill
in forms, and they are going to have to track through some of the assets
which will be taxable. The SA Revenue Service is going to be faced with a
rather stiff programme of implementing capital gains tax.

However, at our committee hearings we were given a very comprehensive
report from the SA Revenue Service as to how they plan to implement this
tax. It was a very credible presentation, and we have also just recently
held our budget hearings on the SA Revenue Service and there is no doubt in
anyone's mind that the SA Revenue Service is leaping ahead in its ability
to meet its obligations. We have seen that already in the extra money that
they have been able to get for the state in revenue.
Finally, I want to say thank you to four very special people, Franz
Tomasek, Keith Engel, Martin Grote and, above all, Kosie Louw, revenue
officials from both the SA Revenue Service and the Treasury. They played a
remarkable role in hearing what everybody had to say; listening, giving
considered responses, literally, to every issue raised by every person.
They mediated and we asked them time and time again to meet with people.
They met again, they met yet again, and they met yet again, with a number
of constituencies.

They have performed a remarkable task in consultation. I must say that it
is unique to many of our committee's processes that officials are so
responsive to the concerns of people who have come before our committee. I
really would like to commend them on their approach. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Chairperson, I would like to associate myself with the hon
Ms Hogan's thanks to the officials who went out of their way to be of
assistance to the committee. I also believe that the chairperson herself
should be congratulated on spearheading an extremely thorough examination
of the Bill by the portfolio committee. I regret to say that those are
probably the last two things I would agree on with the hon Ms Hogan.

The main economic challenge facing South Africa is to achieve growth rates
of 6% or more so that we can reduce unemployment and poverty on a
sustainable basis. The key problems are a shortage of domestic and foreign
fixed investment and low, jobless growth.

All our policies and programmes should be measured against their likely
effects on economic growth, poverty eradication and job creation. Capital
gains tax is no exception. We can debate the theoretical merits of a
capital gains tax, but the key question is whether it is appropriate for
South Africa at this time. The DA is convinced that it is not.

We should all know that South Africa desperately needs more savings and
investment. We should also know, even communists like the hon Dr Davis,
that if one wants less of something, one taxes it, which is part of
Government's rationale for high taxes on tobacco products. They want less
of them, so they tax them more highly.

In its comments on this year's Budget, Nedcor's economists had this to say:


  The introduction of capital gains tax remains a concern. It is difficult
  to imagine that the introduction of a tax on savings and investment will
  boost long-term growth prospects. The administrative burden it will place
  on the tax authorities, but more importantly on the private sector,
  certainly places a question mark on its usefulness. Alan Greenspan, the
  chairman of the US Federal Reserve, is on record for saying that the
  appropriate rate for such a tax is probably zero if tax revenue is the
  main consideration (suggesting that higher revenues from other taxes
  resulting from better growth would compensate for loss of CGT revenue).
  The only justifiable reason for CGT is the equity argument, and even here
  the impact that it will have is likely to be very negligible.

South Africa needs every competitive advantage that it can get to obtain
foreign direct investment in competition with many other countries. We
should be doing everything possible to retain and increase our competitive
advantages. We suffer competitive disadvantages such as crime, labour
market rigidity, Afro-pessimism, and so on. We should therefore be clinging
to every competitive advantage we have, such as having no capital gains
tax.

South Africa is also desperately short of skilled people and we need to use
them all to maximum advantage. Capital gains tax is a very complex tax and
will consume thousands of hours of highly skilled professionals' time as
they help their clients deal with another new and complicated tax - time
which could, and should, be spent on other more productive activities.

One of the issues of concern is that Government has done no serious cost-
benefit analysis of the impact of CGT on the private sector. Is it all
worth it? International experience shows capital gains tax to be an
inefficient and low-yielding tax. Government estimates that CGT will yield
less than 1% of their revenues. The hon chairperson, Ms Hogan, said we are
a society with large income disparities which have to be addressed, and she
is quite right. But it was interesting that she said that we should have
this tax no matter what the complexities. I say, if we want to reduce those
income disparities, let us look at the most efficient way of doing it, and
not simply say: This is the way - let us do it, come hell or high water.

Government argues that capital gains tax will reduce tax avoidance and so
increase its yield on other taxes. This is unconvincing as it is based on
the premise that taxpayers will involve themselves in schemes to save
paying 42% in tax, but will not do so to save 31,5% in tax.

The Minister and other proponents attempt to discount the low revenue yield
from capital gains tax by claiming that it will flush out a lot of other
tax. This claim is never proved nor is it quantified. It is rather like
politicians who claim to speak for the silent majority and who can be
neither proved nor disproved.

It is, however, instructive to look at the experience of other countries.
Five years after capital gains tax was introduced in the United Kingdom,
and thousands of additional civil servants were employed, the expense of
administering the tax was still greater than the income derived from it. In
recent years the United Kingdom, like many other countries, has been
relaxing its capital gains tax regime year after year.
One needs to ask: Does the Bill only tax real capital gains? The answer is
a resounding no. Government has said that only real capital gains should be
subject to CGT, not illusory gains which merely reflect inflation. In the
next breath, however, we are advised that and I quote, ``indexation is
complex and administratively burdensome'', so we will not be having it.
Instead, we have reduced CGT inclusion rates which remain constant,
irrespective of the period over which the capital gain is made and
irrespective of the level of inflation. Surely this is untenable on any
logical grounds.

The portfolio committee was told that it was only ``after careful
consideration'' that the National Treasury, and I quote, ``reluctantly
decided not to tax capital gains at ordinary rates despite the existence of
strong arguments to the contrary''. A senior official described this as an
unhappy compromise and a ``first important step''. We should not fool
ourselves and we should not be surprised, therefore, if the inclusion rate
increases before too long. We should not forget that the GST, general sales
tax, started at 4%, and its successor, VAT, is now 14%.

Furthermore, we have a rather extraordinary situation in which Government
will collect more CGT the worse it performs. Capital gains will be deemed
to have arisen on investments made in foreign denominated currencies even
if the only changes in value are as a result of the depreciation of the
rand! And, of course, the higher the inflation rate, the more Government
will collect in CGT from taxpayers.

Inflation could have a devastating effect on home owners if the R1 million
exclusion on capital gains made on primary residences is not increased
regularly. The portfolio committee was given a specific and unequivocal
assurance that there would be a clear undertaking in the explanatory
memorandum which would commit the National Treasury to increasing the R1
million exclusion on a regular basis to take into account inflationary
effects.

I have not been able to find such an undertaking in the explanatory
memorandum. I hope it is there, and I would like the Minister to indicate
in his response where it is. If it is not there, all I can say is that the
portfolio committee has been deliberately misled and lied to.

South Africa should be simplifying, not complicating, its tax system. We
should be scrapping low-yielding taxes that devour scarce resources such as
estate duty and donations tax. The SA Revenue Service should be
concentrating on catching tax evaders, rooting out corruption and improving
its efficiency. It should not be trying to deal with another complex new
tax when many of its offices are still struggling to get to grips with the
NITS system and residence-based taxation.

Savers should be encouraged by being given tax incentives so that they do
not receive negative real returns on their interest income. We need rapid
privatisation to bring in foreign capital and skills to increase our
foreign reserves and to reduce debt-servicing costs.

These steps will help us get our priorities straight and give us the
economic growth and jobs that will start reducing those income
discrepancies. They would encourage savings and investment and lead to
faster growth, job creation and poverty eradication. Capital gains tax will
do the opposite. The DA will not be supporting this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M M S LEKGORO: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the imperative
of providing basic public services and goods to the people poses major
revenue challenges for modern governments. These challenges are complicated
by the desire to strike a harmonious balance between the different basic
principles of taxation. This complication is further aggravated by the
desire to minimise, as much as we possibly can, what must be extracted from
the taxpayers, but maximise the quality and quantity of the public goods
and services. The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill now before the House is also
caught up in this illogicality.

The South African tax system has serious weaknesses. It is extremely
inequitable and has significant tax arbitrage opportunities. These tax
avoidance opportunities further worsen the tax inequalities in the system,
in that they are mainly exploited by the sophisticated and wealthier
citizens who have money to pay tax consultants.

Taxes on income and profits account for 60% of total revenue, of which 41%
is taxation from individuals. This shows the extent to which our tax system
is dependent on individual taxes. This is an unacceptable state of affairs,
and it needs to be corrected. The tax burden must be spread to all
different categories of taxpayers.

The tax reform programme of Government must respond to some of these
weaknesses to protect the morality and ensure the equity of the tax system.
The introduction of capital gains tax is an effort in this direction.

It also needs to be clarified that capital gains is not a tax on wealth,
but on income derived from the sale of one's assets. The capital gain or
loss is triggered by the disposal of an asset. It is taxation on income and
functions on the same principles as any tax on income. Accordingly, the
debate on capital gains is not whether capital should be taxed, but whether
income derived from the sale of assets should be included as taxable
income.

This is the issue at the core of the debate on CGT, and it is actually a
very unnecessary debate. If there is nothing wrong in taxing income derived
from salaries, wages and profits, then what is the discussion all about?
The bottom line is that income should be taxed. How that income is
generated is actually irrelevant. If a sum of R3 000 per month earned by an
employee is taxable, it makes sense that any sum of R3 000 earned through
any other method should also be taxed.

If this basic common sense does not apply, then what we are left with is a
preferential treatment of income. This kind of preferential treatment of
income will mostly benefit the wealthier, in that they are the only group
of people that own  assets over and above the houses they live in, the cars
they use as their daily transport and other personal use assets.

This situation is uncalled for, because the South African tax system is
already skewed to the disadvantage of the ordinary working people whose
income is solely derived from wages and salaries. The preferential
treatment of income that predominantly accrues to the economically well-
heeled stands against the equity principle of a good tax system. In one of
the submissions received from the representatives of the workers, it is
argued that it is unjustified and prejudicial to workers, that a rand of
income earned through capital should be taxed any less than a rand earned
through human labour, because any rand earned confers the same economic
power.

I could not agree more. The wisdom of this is on the surface; one does not
need to dig any deeper. The most important principle of social justice is
equity, that people in equal circumstances should be treated the same. This
same principle applies in taxation. Individuals in the same economic
situation should pay similar taxes and taxpayers with a greater ability to
pay should pay more and share the greater burden of taxation.

The absence of capital gains tax in our tax system is inequitable and
cannot be defended by any intelligible taxation principle. Government has
undertaken to carry out the most extensive tax reform process. Some of the
key issues that need to be addressed in this regard are bringing about
equity in the South African tax system and broadening the base so that we
can reduce tax rates.

The introduction of capital gains tax is a move in the right direction.
There is sufficient evidence to demonstrate that capital gains tax has the
potential to address some of our tax objectives simultaneously, albeit to
different degrees. The fact that capital gains accrues disproportionately
to higher-income individuals is enough to show its ability to contribute
effectively to a reduction in the regressive nature of the South African
tax system.

This is particularly important for a country like ours where income gaps
are very great. Capital gains tax is not a revenue-raising tax as such. The
revenue it will yield is not significant, but it is also not the type of
revenue one would rather do without. It is estimated that it will raise
something in the region of R1 billion to R2 billion. In fact, to look at
the benefits of capital gains tax from a bare revenue point of view would
be to miss the point. It has been said over and over again that capital
gains tax will give rise to many tax benefits such as preventing tax
avoidance schemes and reducing rates.

The National Treasury has decided to impose CGT at the lower rate. This has
been done despite the fact that such a move is going to undermine the
progress of our tax system. The low rates at which CGT is being introduced
are not satisfactory, but are better compared to a situation in which there
is no CGT at all. The introduction of CGT will go a long way towards
bringing about equity in our tax system.

It should also be noted that lower rates are an international practice and
for South Africa to remain competitive it has to follow that international
trend. The ANC supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Mr Chairperson, the IFP in general supports the Taxation
Laws Amendment Bill. The majority of these amendments have a bearing on the
Budget which the IFP endorsed and, therefore, despite some reservations, we
will vote for the legislation. The Bill contains many clauses or amendments
and, understandably, it will not be possible to be in agreement with each
of these amendments. But in assessing the legislation as a whole, the
weighting is positive.

In balancing the Budget, the Minister has gone a long way towards
maximising income or revenue, particularly with more effective control by
Sars and the plugging of some loopholes. The latest software monitoring
system by Sars that can identify suspect companies and, at a later stage,
also individuals, is welcome. Tax evasion by culprits causes an additional
burden on those honest taxpayers that are paying more than they would have
been required to had the tax dodgers paid their dues.
The IFP would, however, like to caution that one can get to a situation of
overtaxation, particularly by introducing new forms of taxation without
compensating by lowering existing taxation. The commitment of the Minister
of Finance in demonstrating a tendency to lower company tax and tax on
individuals is therefore welcome. This has clearly been demonstrated and a
positive effect could be seen on production and investment. We know that
the Minister has given the undertaking that this will continue in future.

Australia, at the time of the Sydney Olympics, introduced general sales
tax, which is a hybrid of our value-added tax. Despite the assurances of
their authorities that company taxes and personal taxes would eventually be
lower, the Australian economy has nose-dived, and the building industry in
particular went into a recession.

The Australian authorities now admit that the introduction of GST, to a
great extent, caused the negative sentiments. So bad is the situation that
first-time home owners, in addition to the existing subsidy of almost R30
000 which they receive, will now receive an additional R30 000 subsidy on
newly constructed homes. The official Australian figures for these are, of
course, Aus$7 000 and Aus$7 000 respectively.

Resulting from the introduction of GST in Australia, we will probably see
the defeat of the Australian government and their replacement by the
present opposition. These can be the ultimate repercussions of only
introducing without compensating. I reflect on this merely to caution
Government about the saturation levels of taxation and the repercussions of
the so-called ``gatvol'' factor that may arise.

Capital gains tax, if not set off by other forms of tax relief, could be
one of these dangerous factors in South Africa. The IFP therefore welcomes
the more lenient approach which later appeared in the allowing, as a
transitional arrangement, of the submission of a sworn valuation of the
property until 30 September 2001. This valuation can now be done by a
registered appraiser or an estate agent.

I would like to thank the hon the Minister for committing South Africa to
the gradual reduction of personal taxation and company tax. Individual
taxation, and particularly personal tax on the higher income brackets, is
extremely high and relief is urgently required.

Could the hon the Minister consider the following and add the cumulative
effects of taxation? We have personal tax with marginal rates of more than
40% and even 42%; VAT of 14% on most consumables and capital goods;
indirect taxation on various items; rates and taxes on properties in local
authority areas; and now capital gains tax. Should one die, estate duty
will take care of the rest. We also have levies and charges to institutions
which, we all know, are simply being passed on to consumers. The question
is whether, at the end, this is not also a form of taxation on the
consumer.

Then there is tax on petrol, tollgates and a myriad of other forms of
duties, levies, customs and excise. Have we ever done an exercise to
determine what South Africans are paying for security and safety to
insurance companies by way of excessive premiums? Similarly, think of the
high cost of security barriers and alarm systems, as well as payments to
private security companies. These are enormous amounts being forked out by
the embattled taxpayer. Only when we have determined the real take-home pay
left after all these costs have been calculated, will we be able to
understand the plight of the embattled citizens.

In South Africa we must identify the true enemies of the state. Those, to
my mind, are the top tax-dodgers and evaders, including those who can
afford to pay tax, but pretend to be ignorant or plead poverty. Crime,
particularly violent crime, is the greatest deterrent to investment in
South Africa, as are sabotage and vandalism of all forms of property,
corruption in the state and in the private sector, poverty, disease, high
interest rates, inflation and the devaluation of the rand. Therefore we are
grateful that inflation is being controlled and that the control systems in
place are subject to inflation targeting.

On average and on balance, the IFP will still vote for the legislation, but
our cautionary remarks should be considered.

Mr M S BOOI: Chairperson, Minister and hon members at large, I just want to
start by thanking the Minister for the way he has approached the capital
administered and for the role he is playing in Government at this
particular moment.

Specifically, I would like to quote from the speech made by the Minister on
23 February 2000, when he told this House (Hansard 2000, col 923):


  Our history implores us to use our freedoms to light the path to a more
  humane, more caring society. It demands that we lift our sights far into
  the horizon, that we use our voices to proclaim our freedoms. Our history
  teaches us courage and resilience, that we embrace the challenges, that
  we be strong, that we be confident, that we be humble, and that we be
  patient. It demands that we overcome fear and embrace the power of
  transformation, that we grasp the complexity of each other and the world
  we live in, that we see beyond the illusions and the truths we often
  create for ourselves. If we see only the beauty of the yellow and gold
  fish and the fierce jaws of the shark, we will not believe that they swim
  in the same waters, but they can and they do and they thrive. We need to
  accept that reality to understand why.

It is in that context that I am going to approach capital gains tax,
because, as members have already said, it is not easy, it is quite complex.
As we have said, it is not here in the manner in which it was done during
December last year, when it was presented as a tax to hit at the white
community or the wealthier people. It is not presented with that type of
approach, but we are more informed about what is happening exactly.

I will pull out quite a number of examples to show that what Ken Andrew has
missed here is to listen properly to some of the submissions that have been
presented to us as the portfolio committee. Sars has promised us and has
provided us with quite a lot of information to show that they are quite
prepared for the acceptance of capital gains tax.

In simple terms, capital gains tax aims to collect more tax from those who
can afford to pay, and also to improve our collection of tax, to do so in
more efficient and effective ways. It is a very progressive tax. It will
reduce opportunities for those who are wealthier to run away from paying
taxes, and tax avoidance.

I want to demonstrate the few areas and the few loopholes that exist in our
tax structure at this particular moment that the wealthy people are able to
exploit: the tax status of uncertainty, trader versus dealer or investor,
in respect of numerous transactions; share dealings; sales of businesses by
traders; the confusion and uncertainty around source as the basis of
taxation; the true tax status of one profit-making organisation that often
has a sizeable property and financial investment; South Africa as a tax
haven for nonresidents; capital expenditure; writes-off against revenue, eg
farmers and game farmers; and the capitalisation of interest in the sale of
businesses. These are some of the issues I wanted to highlight.

But what is more disturbing, and what Ken Andrew has not been able to come
to terms with, is that while he is crying for job creation and employment,
the question he has not been able to answer is what one does when somebody
comes to South Africa as a nonresident, buys property and stays in South
Africa without creating employment. Does one have to allow that person to
continue staying on that property, enjoying the sunshine of the Western
Cape and South Africa without paying tax? Those are the questions that I
think Mr Ken Andrew has not been able to deal with or find answers to.

Let me deal with a few questions. One of the things that Ken Andrew knows,
and that has been presented to the committee by the capital gains tax
people, concerns the individual farmer and the executive. After staying on
that farm, and then selling it, the money that the farmer is able to make,
which has not been received by South Africans, is more than R5 million.
With the recouping by the CGT itself, we think that out of the R8 million
that he has been able to make, we would be able to recoup R5 million!

What does a nonresident, who owns a farm in private capacity, which he also
uses as a residence when he is in South Africa, do? The farm, on 1 April,
would have cost R10 million. When he disposes of the farm itself, its
value, in two years' time, would create about R15 million! And the farm is
far larger than two hectares. What would be taxable? South Africa does not
receive anything in tax. Now, what capital profit does he make? He makes R5
million.

When we introduce the CGT, that will level the playing field so that South
Africa does not just remain a tax haven for those nonresidents. With that
R15 million the original cost that is being argued about today would take
about R10 million. If there have been improvements, we will not do
anything. What we will be able to get out of it is that R5 million, which
we are not able to talk about.

We are saying, as the ANC, that the capital gains tax is going to be able
to make a contribution towards helping our own people, because it is going
to help us to improve matters and find all those who are avoiding paying
tax, and making them pay. It is not good for them to keep running away. If
they keep visiting South Africa and yet do not pay tax, it will cost us
quite a lot. They put demands on us to fight crime and to improve the
particular localities where they have put up their houses.

What we are saying, as the ANC, is that it is not so that, as they are
saying, there will be excessive administrative costs and that it will hit
the white people more. It does not only hit the wealthier people, but the
wealthier people are making it impossible for us to gain something from
them. We say that they must take that responsibility, as South Africans,
because it is their responsibility also to assist those who are poor.
Without assisting the poor, they would definitely be turning against
democracy.

It is not in our interests to be seen to be lambasting only the wealthy,
but the wealthy people have a role to play. Out of all the wealth they have
made over all these years, let them make it possible for all to gain
something out of it. Following Mr Trevor Manuel's words, the only way we
can be confident and able to build patience is when we make sure that we do
find the balance between the taxpayers. That is what we are looking for.
[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairman, hon Minister and hon members, this Bill
introduces capital gains tax, from 1 October 2001. This is a very lengthy
and very intricate Bill, and it is extremely controversial, especially for
a developing country such as South Africa.

The proponents of this Bill furnish a number of theoretical reasons why
this Bill should be implemented. It is my view that this piece of
legislation is too expensive to administer, and would discourage foreign
and domestic direct investments, a prerequisite for future economic growth,
and the reduction of our currently untenably high rate of unemployment.

South Africa is part and parcel of a global economic order. We have to
compete in all trade spheres. The significance of an investor-friendly tax
system cannot be negated. The South African economy, at present, is
experiencing an acute skills shortage, our economic growth is still less
than 3% of the GDP and our official unemployment figure has reached the
alarming rate of 31,7%. The unemployment figure, however, is unfortunately
considerably higher in some of our rural areas.

A number of drastic changes were recently implemented in the South African
tax system. A fundamental change was that a residence-based norm of tax was
imposed, replacing the former source-based system. Another fundamental
change is the new capital gains tax that is to be implemented on 1 October.
With the introduction of the capital gains tax, our economy is losing one
of our competitive advantages which must be seen within the present
unacceptable degree of violence, crime and Afropessimism within business
and investor circles.

Capital gains tax is based on a very complex and inefficient revenue
collection mechanism. Simplicity is an important criterion for an equitable
tax system. The majority of taxpayers, not a handful of tax professionals,
should readily understand and be able to apply this particular tax. I agree
with the chairperson, Ms Hogan, that capital gains tax is a worldwide
practice. However, it must be stated that the current trend is to reassess
capital gains tax because of the effect it has on savings and foreign
investments.

The question that Government should ask themselves is whether the wellbeing
of the underlying economy is more important than the short-term benefits of
generating more revenue. In simple terms, the more tax the taxpayer pays,
the less he can invest to pay tax on again.

To administer this tax will create another bureaucracy. I asked the hon the
Minister a question in February 2001. The following written reply was
received, and I quote:


  The cost of developing CGT infrastructure in the financial year ending 31
  March is estimated to be R16 million. Additional funds have been
  transferred to Sars to cover this expenditure. A similar amount will be
  expended in the financial year ending 31 March 2002 and operational costs
  to administer CGT are estimated at R100 million per annum.

This is a substantial amount of money. South Africa is experiencing a
shortage of capital, a vital ingredient for future economic development.
Our present domestic savings rate, which is in the vicinity of 15%, is a
matter of serious concern. I am of the opinion that our low savings rate
will be further aggravated by the implementation of capital gains tax.

A responsible fiscal approach is to lower Government expenditure and taxes
in real terms and leave more resources in the hands of the private sector.
Capital gains tax and the taxation relating to pension funds have a close
bearing on each other. Allow me to mention that the present tax rate on
pension funds is 25%. Sars will collect an additional R500 million in the
present tax year from pension funds, from R5,8 billion to R6,3 billion. It
is generally accepted that since the inception of taxes relating to pension
funds in 1996, the lower income categories of taxpayers have been adversely
affected because their potential assets have been eroded by taxes.

Capital gains tax will be imposed after a moratorium of three years on
pension funds. The result of taxes and pension funds creates a reluctance
to invest in institutions that provide for retirement. The end result of
this perception is that a greater monetary responsibility is placed upon
the Government to provide for lower categories of taxpayers - for that
matter, for all taxpayers.

We are aware that the sources of revenue of Government must be managed in a
responsible manner. One sector of the economy should not be favoured at the
expense of another category. It is also accepted that the high-income
categories of taxpayers pay proportionally more than the lower-income
categories. This is a universal phenomenon.

The Receiver of Revenue has made commendable progress regarding tax
evasion, but I must mention that the tax rate of pension funds has
increased from 17% in 1997 to 25%. It is calculated that this may decrease
the yield of pension funds at the date of retirement by 1 to 1,4 percentage
points. The proposed implementation of capital gains tax may further
diminish the yield by a further 0,4 to 0,5 percentage points.

The UK, once the most strike-crippled, overtaxed, overregulated economy in
Europe, has become one of Europe's most sought-after financial
destinations. The reasons why foreign investors choose the UK are low
taxation, flexible labour markets and high productivity. The UK has capital
gains tax, but whether to retain or to abolish it completely is being
discussed.

Dit is duidelik dat die kool die sous nie werd is nie met hierdie vorm van
belasting. Die hoë administratiewe koste met die instelling van 'n nuwe
vorm van belasting, die bykomende las op belastingbetalers, die sielkundige
weerstand teen bykomende vorme van belasting, die prysgee van 'n
mededingende voordeel van 'n land sonder kapitaalwinsbelasting en die
moontlike uitwerking daarvan op pensioenfondse, is skadelik vir hierdie
land se ekonomie. Die DA gaan nie hierdie wetsontwerp steun nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is quite clear that this new form of taxation is not worth the effort.
The high administrative costs in respect of the implementation of this new
form of taxation, the added burden on taxpayers, the psychological
resistance to additional forms of taxation, the sacrifice of a competitive
advantage of a country without capital gains tax and the possible effect of
this on pension funds, are detrimental to this country's economy. The DA
will not support this Bill.]

Mrs R R JOEMAT: Chairperson, hon members, the fruits of liberty cannot be
sweet for everybody. There is a verse in the Bible that says: ``Give to
Caesar what belongs to Caesar.'' Who is our Caesar today? None other than
the commissioner of Sars, Mr Pravin Gordhan. Give unto the Receiver of
Revenue what belongs to the Receiver of Revenue.

In his Budget Speech the Minister already announced that the capital gains
tax would be introduced. Since then public submissions were received and
intensive discussion was held with various institutions and individuals at
the hearings. The outcome of these discussions varied, some being
dissatisfied, while others understood and supported the implementation of
capital gains tax. This process was successful and consideration was given
to these submissions. Adjustments were made to the original Bill.

The aim of the introduction of capital gains tax is to broaden the tax base
and bring equity and efficiency to our tax structure. Capital gains are
merely earnings in a different form. People with different forms of
earnings should be taxed equally. A rand earned through the sale of capital
assets holds the same value or economic power as a rand gained through
employment and should therefore be taxed equally. The absence of CGT skews
the burden of taxation onto salary income individuals.

The proposed legislation will move towards a more equitable tax structure.
However, since only a portion of the capital gains are subject to tax,
those fortunate enough to enjoy capital gains continue to benefit from
preferential tax treatment. Upholding the equity principle, the Income Tax
Act is based on a tax system that progresses according to earnings: That
is, taxpayers with greater earnings should be subjected to a progressively
higher tax. In simple terms it just means: The more you earn, the more tax
you pay. Failure to tax capital gains undermines the morale of the salaried
workers.

Let us look at where the income source is for the majority of the people of
our country. Previous research suggests that poor South African households
obtain 40% of their income from wages and a further 5% from self-
employment. Nonpoor households, on the other hand, obtain 72% of their
income from wages and 6% from self-employment. Personal tax constitutes 40%
of the total revenue of our country. Therefore it is fair to say that if
there are other sources of income, then they must be subject to tax as
well. The majority of people will not be affected by this tax.

With effect from 1 October 2001 it is proposed that residents will be
subject to CGT on gains realised on the disposal of their worldwide assets
of whatever nature. Nonresidents will be taxed only on gains realised on
the disposal of certain assets in South Africa, an example of which is
immovable property. Death or emigration will also be events which trigger
CGT. Donation of assets will also be a CGT event. For this reason there
will be a simultaneous reduction in the rates of estate duty and donations
tax.
There will be certain exemptions, for example, the first R1 million of a
gain realised on the sale of a primary residence. The majority of people do
not own a house that holds a value of R1 million. The majority of people do
not own their own homes and certain of them are still homeless. When a
person retires from his or her small business, as defined in the Bill, the
first R0,5 million of the gain made on the sale of the business will not be
subject to CGT. The majority of people do not have investments overseas
that generate an income for them. Therefore the majority of people in our
country will not be affected by CGT. The majority of people do not sell
their personal assets and enjoy gains of R10 000 per year.

We, the ANC, support this Bill because it means more revenue to improve the
lives of many, which is the vision spelt out by our President in his state-
of-the-nation address in February this year, and I quote:


  The objectives we seek to achieve are moving the economy onto a higher-
  growth path, increasing its competitiveness and efficiency, raising
  employment levels and reducing poverty and persistent inequalities.

It is estimated that the revenue yield will be approximately R1 billion to
R2 billion once the system is fully phased in.

During the local elections the DA displayed posters on which was written
``We stand for all the people.'' But when they vote in this House, they
only vote for the interests of some of the people.

Dit noem ek tweestertjakkalse. [Gelag.] [That is what I call being two-
faced. [Laughter.]]

The Bill forms part of the ANC's commitment to the principle of equity, and
supports our goal of a better life for all. The ANC supports this Bill.
[Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson and hon members, Sir Winston Churchill once
said that the only two certainties in life are death and taxes. It is a
pity that they do not happen in that order. There is, however, another
certainty, and that is that South Africa will get another tax on 1 October
2001.

The Portfolio Committee on Finance received numerous written submissions on
the Bill and also conducted extensive public hearings. Seldom has this
committee heard so many concerns raised about a Bill, ranging from outright
rejection to substantial reservation, to identifying administrative
deficiencies contained in the Bill. I want to congratulate the officials
and consultants from the national Treasury and Sars -they are all in the
House - on their time-consuming efforts to address issues raised by
stakeholders. It was, however, clear from the start that the introduction
of capital gains tax in South Africa was politically driven, and that no
submission or argument would prevent the Government from introducing and
implementing this political tax.

Allow me briefly to highlight what are, in our view, the three major
deficiencies of this Bill. Firstly, CGT is a very complicated tax, and a
difficult tax to administrate. This is due to its volatile base. Not only
will the beneficiaries of capital gains vary from year to year, but also
the capital gains amounts will vary. Sars will experience an increased
difficulty in policing this tax, which will result in massive policing
costs for them. There will, furthermore, be additional compliance costs to
taxpayers, in particular for less sophisticated taxpayers, who will now
have to utilise the professional advice of tax advisers, all at additional
cost to taxpayers.

Secondly, to introduce a capital gains tax in its current form, and at this
point in time in South Africa, amounts to unfairness. A leading economist
in South Africa, Mr Nick Barnardt, stated more than a year ago, when the
intention to introduce a capital gains tax was announced in Budget 2000-
2001, that it amounted to whites having been allowed to accumulate big
untaxed capital gains over the last century, but blacks being taxed as they
accumulate theirs over the next century.

A fairer tax would have been a low-rate net wealth tax of a quarter percent
or a half percent per year. The benefits of such a tax include the
following: Firstly, it is easier to administer; secondly, it has a much
more stable base from year to year; thirdly, it is less discouraging of new
wealth creation and creates less of a disillusionment for taxpayers; and
fourthly, it treats newly and previously accumulated wealth relatively
equitably.

Thirdly, there is uncertainty about what effect this tax will have on the
land tenure system, including tribal land and trust land. To my knowledge,
no consultation has taken place with, for example, traditional leaders,
about the possible effect of this CGT on them and their land disposals. It
would be grossly unfair to impose a tax on persons who do not have security
of tenure. A possibility would have been to exclude tribal land disposals
from this tax net, as is the case with retirement benefits. There is just
too much uncertainty about this aspect in the current Bill. As a country,
we first need to introduce a system that secures private property
ownership, especially for people in the extralegal sector, before we
introduce a complicated First-World tax system.

In conclusion, for these reasons, the UDM will not support the Taxation
Laws Amendment Bill, and calls on the Minister of Finance and the
Government to reconsider the implementation of this Bill and replace it
with a low-rate net wealth tax. [Time expired.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Minister and members, the Taxation Laws
Amendment Bill imposes a comprehensive burden on certain individuals, and
especially on small business entrepreneurs. The disincentive created by
this Bill is that small businesses may be discouraged from expanding too
much. The exemption of CGT up to the first R500 000 for a small business is
not enough. Small business needs the scope, capacity and incentive from
Government to assist it to grow. This will not be achieved by a CGT
exemption up to R500 000, as the cost of running a small business is
sometimes much higher than actual returns on investment.

The ACDP is pleased that the lump sum benefits from retirement funds are
not to be included within the CGT system. The Minister has mentioned that
this is not total exclusion, but further consideration is planned once the
tax system on retirement funds is finalised.

The average taxpayer pays a lot of direct and indirect taxes into
Government coffers during his or her working years. It is the desire of
these people to ultimately retire with the knowledge that they have
generally paid their dues to society. Retirement must therefore be a time
to look forward to, allowing one to enjoy the fruits of one's labour in the
final years of one's life. The ACDP suggests that benefits from the
retirement funds should not to be considered for inclusion in the CGT
system in the future.

Government seems to put its faith in the overall benefit of capital gains
tax. The country needs investment-boosting incentives, and we do not know
conclusively how foreign investors may eventually respond to the CGT
system. The possible downside of the CGT system for South Africa, at this
stage of its development, is that potential new investors will take a wait-
and-see attitude on how the CGT system may impact on existing foreign
investors. The ACDP therefore cannot support this Bill.

Mr T R MOFOKENG: Mr Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, the Minister
of Finance is present in this House today to present us with the Taxation
Laws Amendment Bill in order to accommodate capital gains tax, which is
long overdue. We appreciate the goodwill of the hon the Minister. We hope
the CGT that he has brought to us is going to bring us goodwill.

Bringing capital gains tax into income tax will rectify a deep weakness of
the South African tax system. It will reduce the opportunities for avoiding
tax, which are considerable at present, by converting certain forms of
income to capital gains, and it will bring greater fairness to society.

Since 1994, the South African authorities have successfully addressed a
number of microeconomic imbalances, achieving significant reductions in
inflation and in the fiscal deficit. Accompanying microeconomic stability,
rates of growth in GDP and investment have improved in the last six years.
Real GDP growth averaged 2,3% per year from 1995 to 1999, compared to 0,2%
from 1990 to 1994.

For the future, the fundamental policy challenge remains that of raising
growth potential even higher in order to achieve substantive progress in
reducing unemployment and poverty. This will require further increases in
investment and savings rates, and the continued implementation of key
structural reforms.

Budgetary restraint is evidenced by a reduction in the national Government
fiscal deficit from the equivalent of 5% of GDP in 1994-95 to 2% in 1999-
2000, well under the original budget target of 2,8% of GDP. This
performance is due, in part, to impressive tax collection efforts,
underpinned by significant improvements in tax policies and the good
administration of Sars.

Reform has involved, for instance, reductions in the standard company tax
rate from 40% to 30%, and to 15% for small business. For personal tax, the
number of tax brackets has been reduced and rates lowered.

National Government revenue totalled R204 billion in 1999-2000, just under
25% of GDP. Taxes on income and profit continued to be about 60% of the
total, with the individual income tax of R117 billion constituting the
major component, equivalent to 42% of the total revenue. Indirect taxes
made up 38% of the total revenue dominated by value- added tax and excise.
A number of taxes on property, including taxes on gifts, estates, real
estate and marketable securities transactions, make up R3,1 billion, which
is a modest but important part of revenue.

In the classic Haig-Simons approach to taxation, the ideal tax base is
comprehensive income, usually the sum, over the tax period, of increases in
purchasing power from all sources. Those sources include capital gains that
arise in the period, which should therefore be taxed in the same way as all
other forms of income.

The argument has been raised in the South African context, however, that
capital gains tax is unsuitable for developing countries and, moreover,
that it is vanishing in developed countries. Neither is true. Capital gains
tax is enforced in a range of countries, not only in the Organisation of
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries, but also in some
middle-income countries. More fundamentally, the force of the equity, anti-
avoidance and efficiency cases for taxing capital gains depends not on the
average level of real income, but on the degree of inequality that the tax
system seeks to address, and the sophistication of the financial markets
that the rich and well-advised can use to avoid taxation. Both
considerations point to the potential importance of taxing capital gains.
In South Africa, inequality remains high by international standards and
financial markets are well developed. The Johannesburg Stock Exchange is on
average the 18th largest in the world.

In conclusion, I have full confidence in the SA Revenue Service's ability
to manage to administer CGT very well. In the past financial year, the SA
Revenue Service surpassed its revised collection target of R215,5 billion
by R4,1 billion. For four successive years, the SA Revenue Service has
exceeded the progressively high targets set by the national Treasury. Yet
its administration costs amounted to less than 1% of total revenue
collected, which is very low by international standards.

Without any fear of contradiction from any party in this House, the ANC
supports the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill with acclamation. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson and Ministers, the MF welcomes the Taxation
Laws Amendment Bill as it makes provision for the amendment of various tax-
related Acts. It also intends to give effect to the proposals relating to
the introduction of capital gains tax.

The MF is in agreement with the annual exclusion from capital gains tax of
the amount of R10 000 for natural persons, as this is aimed at keeping
small gains out of the CGT system. However, this does not take into account
the criteria which determine a primary residence for people in polygamous
marriages, which is a problem more prevalent among the people in KwaZulu-
Natal.

One of the challenges facing South Africa is to seek ways to correct
excessive inequalities in the distribution of income and wealth. Supporters
of capital gains tax argue that such a tax would assist in that regard. The
MF agrees with the Minister of Finance's justification that the proposed
introduction of capital gains tax in South Africa will bring the country
more into line with the taxation practices of other countries.

However, South Africa is akin to the developing countries of the world and
copying the specific taxes levied by the industrialised countries is not
necessarily to be recommended. It is therefore hoped that the introduction
of CGT in South Africa will bring the country's tax dispensation in line
with the system of South Africa's trading partners.

The MF believes there is still a need to introduce provisions that will
prevent the tendency to inflate the basic cost of assets during the period
from the announcement of the introduction of CGT to the valuation date. It
is therefore recommended that education in this type of new system be
introduced. The MF supports the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, the hon Joemat started her speech with a Bible
text. I want to do the same today, but I want to put that text in a little
frame and I will give it to the Minister so that he can hang it behind his
desk, so that he can read it when he comes into his office.

Daardie teksvers is Jesaja 1 vers 5, waar daar staan: ``Waar wil julle nog
geslaan word?''[Tussenwerpsels.] Ons het 'n paar probleme met hierdie
belasting. [That Bible text is Isaiah 1 verse 5, which says: ``Why should
you be stricken again?'' [Interjections.] We have a number of problems with
this tax.]

In the first instance, we think it is investor-unfriendly. For stable
economic growth to occur, people must be encouraged to invest in assets
with a growth potential.

Hierdie belasting sal lei tot onverantwoordelike rentmeesterskap en die
versoeking sal wees dat mens eerder jou geld opgebruik: Laat ons eet en
drink en vrolik wees, want môre kom Jan Taks. Dit gaan ook negatief inwerk
op sekere sektore, veral die eiendomsmark. Mense gaan nou hulle besparing
konsentreer op nie-belasbare bates.

Daar word beweer dat hierdie belasting nie die armes sal raak nie. Ons glo
dit gaan inflasie opstoot, dat kapitaal om bestaande besighede te koop,
hoër gaan word. Dit gaan oorgedra word op die verbruiker en ons is terug by
die wet van Transvaal. Daar is ook reeds hier verwys na die administratiewe
uitvoerbaarheid van die wet. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This taxation will lead to irresponsible stewardship and one will be
tempted rather to spend one's money: Let us eat and drink and be merry,
because tomorrow the tax man will come. This will also has a negative
impact on certain sectors, especially the property market. People will now
concentrate their savings on non-taxable assets.

It is being alleged that this taxation will not affect the poor. We believe
that this will raise inflation, and that capital to buy existing businesses
will be higher. This will be transferred to the consumer and we will be
back to the law of the Transvaal. Reference has already been made to the
administrative feasibility of this legislation.]

Because of administrative problems, other countries have introduced what
they - call ``capital gains withholding tax", that is 10% of the selling
price at every transfer of property is held back and then the calculations
are made. Can the Minister give us the assurance that this will not happen
here?

Wat boedels betref ... [As far as deceased estates are concerned ...]

... Ms Hogan said, and I quote: ``If a person dies, he must pay tax.'' She
will first have to consult the Pope to find out to which address the
assessment must be sent. [Laughter.]

Daar sal oneindige kontantvloeiprobleme wees met boedels, boedelbelasting
en nog hierdie belasting ook, wat boedels in die  gedrang kan bring.
Plaashuise is nog nie uitgesonder nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Tyd verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[There will be endless cash-flow problems with deceased estates, estate
duty and this tax on top of it all, that could jeopardise deceased estates.
Farmhouses have not yet been exempted. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, when debating the
introduction of capital gains tax, the key question before us must surely
be that of desirability and equally that of the need for legal certainty.
The South African economy stands before the ongoing challenge of attracting
foreign direct investment and ensuring that a substantial turnaround is
effected in the abysmal level of fixed capital formation in the economy. On
both these counts, capital gains tax will add to the problems and not to
the process of seeking the missing ingredient that could catapult the
economy onto a higher growth path.

Our country does have social needs that could require infinite Government
resources. However, we have a collective pool of finite resources and our
country requires creative incentives that will attract foreign direct
investment, not measures which would make us a less attractive destination,
which is exactly what capital gains tax will do. We therefore need a
healthy balance between measures that will maximise revenue gains for
Government and measures that will further the needs of a vibrant growing
economy that attracts investors. This will always be a very complex balance
to strike. Unfortunately, the clear undesirability of capital gains tax
tilts this balance in the wrong direction.

There is a key adage that applies to our discussions around capital gains
tax today. Legal uncertainties are always bad for business, and it is in
this respect that the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill is still riddled with
many problems and key issues are left for regulations to be issued or for a
broader legislative review. The most fundamental of these is that not
enough has been said about the possible negative impact that capital gains
tax will have on corporate restructuring.

Corporate restructuring, mergers and acquisitions and reorganisations are
frequently key arenas that attract foreign direct investment. Indeed, as
Price Waterhouse Coopers and the Banking Council have pointed out in their
submissions, many multinationals grow businesses through strategic mergers
and acquisitions. Such transactions, were they to be brought within the tax
net, would represent a significant drain on a company's ability to grow.

These activities are fundamental to any vibrant economy, and to encourage
efficiency in the corporate sector most jurisdictions provide an exemption
from capital transfer taxes for these activities. The proposed Bill
provides no relief. We propose a general exemption from capital gains tax
for these activities, according to the Banking Council.

Thus we have to entertain the question whether the introduction of capital
gains tax will have a negative impact on what ought to be a vibrant area of
economic activity as our economy becomes ever more integrated in the
globalised economy - mergers and acquisitions and corporate restructuring.
These matters affect our parastatals as much as they affect the
restructuring that is taking place in the private sector as our previously
inward-looking economy becomes more outward-looking and competitive.

Ironically, some of the first possible key test cases of capital gains tax
and the difficulties and legal uncertainties around corporate restructuring
will include a parastatal, Eskom. If the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill is
passed in this Assembly, Eskom will lose its tax exemption status. The
Eskom Conversion Bill that is currently before Parliament will corporatise
Eskom and pave the way for it to be split into different business units -
generation, transmission and distribution.

As a taxable entity, Eskom's new business units could be liable for CGT in
the legal uncertainties that still dominate in this arena. While the
Treasury is promising a comprehensive review of all related legislation,
this legal uncertainty must simply be remedied immediately to ensure that
we do not create unintended consequences in the realm of corporate
restructuring as our economy moves forward.

The same legal uncertainty applies in the realm of valuations in which the
legal uncertainty will wreak havoc. While there is a degree of clarity as
to what assets will fall into the new CGT net, there is very little
certainty on the modalities of valuations. All these uncertainties need
clear-cut solutions and clear-cut legal certainty in the interests of
business. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mnu N M NENE: Sihlalo, bengithi ngizokhuluma ngesiZulu ngase ngedlula kumfo
kaKotwal ngithi ngifuna ukuzwa ukuthi kuthiwa yini i-capital gains tax
ngesiZulu, wathi akazi. Ngibe sengibona ukuthi kuzoba nzima-ke ukukhuluma
ngento engingayazi kahle. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, I was planning to present my speech in Zulu, but
when I asked Mr Kotwal what capital gains tax is called in Zulu, he said he
did not know. I then realised that it would be difficult for me to talk
about something that I did not understand.]

As has already been stated, this Bill is an attempt to address the
distortions that have actually overstayed their welcome on the Statute Book
of this country. The absence of capital gains tax fitted perfectly in the
apartheid system, which, by its nature, was unfair in that it protected the
interests of the rich minority at the expense of the poor majority.

An HON MEMBER: You represent the rich majority.

Mr N M NENE: That is not true.

The only opposition we hear to this Bill comes from those who have always
opposed the strides we have made towards the realisation of a better life
for all and those who have benefited from the inequitable distribution of
wealth in the past. [Interjections.] It just goes to show that it is very
difficult for them to accept the fact that they benefited from this in the
past. One can hear it by the way the hon Leon responds. [Interjections.]

Having listened to all the arguments for and against capital gains tax,
both in this House and in the committee, I am left with only one
conclusion, namely that this is not an additional tax but an adjustment
that allows every taxpayer the opportunity to contribute what he or she can
afford to pay. [Interjections.]

Arguments against capital gains tax include the fact that the SA Revenue
Service is not ready to implement this tax. The SA Revenue Service has
presented a comprehensive implementation programme to the committee, as all
the members have stated here. We are convinced that this institution will
rise to the occasion, as it has done before with regard to all other taxes
which had to be implemented.

Income tax returns have already been changed to make provision for capital
gains tax. The systems have been appraised, changes have been made to the
existing functionality, and functional specifications have been drawn up.

The training of personnel and the restructuring of the entire institution
is already at an advanced stage. Most of the inclusion rates and the
exclusions have been touched on, so I will not waste the time of the House
on them. But it appears that the only reason the hon Ken Andrew and the DP
are opposed to this is that it is not high enough to be able to curb ...

Mr M J ELLIS: You did not understand one word that was spoken.

Mr N M NENE: Therefore, in order for him to endorse the Bill, we would have
to increase the inclusion rate. [Interjections.] The hon Hennie Bekker
spoke about taxing without compensation. We just want to remind him about
the lowering of donation tax, estate duty and the recent tax cuts in excess
of R8 billion that were given to the poor.

We also heard about the SMMEs. The hon Green talked about small businesses.
I do not know whether we understand small business in the same way. When he
talks about small business, he is referring to a business that generates
more than R500 000.

The argument that capital gains tax will adversely affect small businesses
is just not true. The truth is that small businesses have not benefited
from the absence of CGT. How, then, do people explain that the introduction
of this tax will affect them if they have never benefited from it before?
Their businesses only consist of their own labour and skills and those of
their few employees.

The other argument is that capital gains tax will discourage
entrepreneurship and risk-taking. It is ironic that those who are opposed
to CGT concede that tax policy considerations alone would suggest that
capital gains should not be given preferential tax treatment, but then go
on to argue that such a tax preference is necessary in order to
deliberately channel savings into risky investments that yield capital
gains. They argue that the economy will not have the optimal number of
smaller, riskier businesses or start-ups and high-technology businesses if
capital gains are taxed.

Risk-taking is one of the traditional justification, for the existence of
capital. Why then should investors risking their financial capital be
subsidised and not the wage earners who risk their human capital? Taxes are
not a major determinant of foreign direct investment. Even if they were,
the tax on capital would be the wrong tax to be reduced in order to attract
foreign direct investment. Nonresidents almost never pay their host
countries for capital gains, except, in our case, on fixed property, as has
already been explained.

We hear about the nondesirability of this kind of taxation. Then the
question remains: When is it going to be desirable, because they say it is
not desirable at the moment? When will it ever be desirable? When will
transformation ever be desirable to the people who benefited under the
apartheid regime? They talk about indexation, but they concede that this
would complicate the administration of CGT and would not be in line with
the general practice in all the other countries.

In supporting this Bill, I wish to take this opportunity to commend the
national Treasury, the Ministry of Finance and the SA Revenue Service for
the transparent and accommodative spirit in which this Bill has been
crafted. The ANC supports the Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson and hon members, often people say they
are taxed to death. This Bill, I think, has been talked to death. As the
chairperson, Barbara Hogan, advised, there were 14 meetings of the
committee on this Bill, and we have already spent 100 minutes this
afternoon on the Bill!

Let us deal with some of the contradictions that have arisen. The hon Ken
Andrew presented a very balanced picture here this afternoon. He was
equally disingenuous and pathetic. The problem that he has stems from the
pettiness and silliness of his leader. [Laughter.] He cannot understand
that if one wants world-class business, one must have world-class tax
systems.

What we have seen and what he must admit to is that in the United Kingdom
the cost of raising capital gains tax in the year ending March 2000 was
1,49 pence per pound collected, as against 1,23 pence per pound of income
tax collected. To suggest that they are scaling it down because of this is
to be as disingenuous as I said he was. To suggest that we have not done
the cost-benefit analysis is plain dishonest. We said that capital gains
tax would cost about R100 million and would bring in between R1 billion and
R2 billion.

The cost-benefit analysis has been done. We know what it will cost us. We
are not fools, and because we are not fools, we have demonstrated year
after year that we know what is going on in the SA Revenue Service and we
will continue to improve in spite of what they say. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

I also want to say that at no point was a commitment made to include
increases in the value of property sold in the memorandum, and so to ask
that it be included today is to ask us to style our tax policy in a very
different way. We have mentioned, and we will commit ourselves to, periodic
reviews to ensure that that element of it will keep pace with inflation.
But we made no commitment and therefore there is nothing included in the
memorandum on the Bill. In respect ...
Mr K M ANDREW: You are reneging on a promise.

The MINISTER: I have never reneged on a promise on tax policy. Ken Andrew
must take that back.

Mr K M ANDREW: I will not take it back. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER: In respect of what the hon Bekker said, this Government is
hardly likely to fall on the introduction of capital gains tax.

An HON MEMBER: It may fall on something else.

The MINISTER: Well, that is always possible, but not on the introduction of
capital gains tax.

Let us turn to the hon Dr Rabie. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER: There are contradictions in what he was saying. Firstly, he
said that one sector of taxpayers should not be favoured and then proceeded
to argue that one sector of taxpayers should be favoured and that sector
should be the very rich. I just want to correct something that he said, and
that was that there would be capital gains tax on pension funds. We want to
confirm here this afternoon that pension funds will be spared capital gains
tax.

In respect of what the hon Dr Koornhof raised in arguing against the Bill,
it is important to ask: Who raised the questions against the introduction
of capital gains tax? Nick Barnardt is perfectly correct: The wealthy, the
privileged, those who benefited over the years obviously are opposed to it.
[Applause.] If one wants equity, one has to take the decisions. [Applause.]
If one wants an omelette, one sometimes has to break an egg; one just has
no choice about that. [Interjections.]

In respect of the issue of tribal land, which the hon Dr Koornhof raised as
well, we are in constant contact with the Minister for Agriculture and Land
Affairs, who has the responsibility for this administrative task, and we
will monitor the situation and report to Parliament on an annual basis.
The hon Ms Taljaard is also very confused. Mergers and acquisitions are not
growth. They are an element of growth, but they are not growth and so she
should not equate them with growth, because then she will be making a very,
very big mistake. She will fail to understand what the stimuli for growth
are.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the parties that support this Bill. A
lot of work has gone into it, as we have demonstrated in the course of
this. We announced the intention in February last year. We tabled the Bill
in December last year.  It has been discussed quite extensively by the
committee. A number of views have been heard. We have taken account of
them, and amended the provisions as far as possible, but on the principle
of an equitable tax system, the ANC will never surrender. [Interjections.]
For that reason, we are introducing capital gains tax. I thank this House
for its support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a first time.
Division demanded.
The House divided:


  AYES - 219: Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N;
  Baloyi, M R; Bekker, H J; Belot, S T; Benjamin, J; Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B
  P; Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Buthelezi, M G; Buthelezi, M N;
  Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chikane, M M; Cindi, N
  V; Cronin, J P; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T;
  Dithebe, S L; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C; Duma, N M;
  Ebrahim, E I; Fankomo, F C; Fazzie, M H; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T;
  Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Gandhi, E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N;
  Gillwald, C E; Gogotya, N J; Goniwe, M T; Goosen, A D; Gumede, D M;
  Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C;
  Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H;
  Joemat, R R; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R;
  Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T;
  Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lekota, M G P; Lishivha, T E; Lobe, M C;
  Lockey, D; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Luthuli, A N; Lyle, A G; Magashule, E
  S; Magubane, N E; Mahlangu, G L; Mahlangu, M J; Mahlawe, N; Mahomed, F;
  Maimane, D S; Makasi, X C; Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L;
  Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A;
  Maphoto, L I; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Masala, M M;
  Masithela, N H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M;
  Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M
  S; Mfundisi, I S; Mgidi, J S; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mnandi, P N;
  Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng,
  T R; Mogale, E P; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J; Mohlala, R J B; Mokoena, D A;
  Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
  Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K;
  Motubatse, S D; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mtsweni, N S;
  Mufamadi, F S; Mutsila, I; Mzizi, M A; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J
  H; Ncinane, I Z; Ncube, N B; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A
  C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu,
  L V; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M
  A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M; Nqakula, C; Nqodi, S B; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M
  B; Ntuli, S B; Oliphant, G G; Omar, A M; Oosthuizen, G C; Pahad, E G;
  Phala, M J; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T;
  Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C M P;
  Rasmeni, S M; Ripinga, S S; Routledge, N C; Saloojee, E; Schneeman, G D;
  Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, R K; Serote, M W;
  Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R;
  Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo,
  B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E;
  Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshivhase, T J; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van
  den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Woods, G
  G; Xingwana, L M T; Yengeni, T S; Zita, L; Zondi, K M; Zondo, R P.


  NOES - 72: Abrahams, T; Abram, S; Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bell, B G;
  Beukman, F; Blaas, A; Blanché, J P I; Borman, G M; Bruce, N S; Camerer, S
  M; Clelland, N J; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Delport, J
  T; Dowry, J J; Durand, J; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Frolick, C T; Gaum, A
  H; Geldenhuys, B L; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Green, L M; Grobler, G A J;
  Heine, R J; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; Koornhof, G W; Le Roux, J W;
  Lee, T D; Leon, A J; Mabeta, M E; Maseka, J T; Mbadi, L M; McIntosh, G B
  D; Mkono, G D; Moorcroft, E K; Morkel, C M; Mothiba, L C; Mzimela, S E;
  Nel, A H; Niemann, J J; Ntuli, R S; Odendaal, W A; Olckers, M E;
  Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Ramodike, M N;
  Schalkwyk, P J; Schippers, J; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
  Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smit, H A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Swart, S N;
  Taljaard, R; Van der Merwe, A S; Van Deventer, F J; Van Jaarsveld, A Z A;
  Van Niekerk, A I; Van Wyk, A (Anna); Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Waters, M.

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a first time.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I have a ruling
to make and I would like you to give attention to this ruling.

Mr J H MOMBERG: What about the Second Reading?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Yes, hon member, I am coming
to that.

On Wednesday, 4 April 2001, while a member was speaking on the Report of
the Ad hoc Committee on Filling of Vacancies on the Commission for Gender
Equality, the hon the Minister of Home Affairs rose on a point of order and
asked whether it was permissible for the hon Ken Andrews to remark, ``You
are selling out at a low price''.

I ruled that the remark was permissible as it reflected on a political
party and not on an individual member. At the request of the hon S Seaton,
I then undertook to consider my ruling. I now wish to rule further on this
matter.

Firstly, while references to parties are normally allowed, because they do
not necessarily and specifically refer to members of this honourable House,
in this instance reference was clearly and unambiguously being made to a
decision of the parliamentary party, and thus to individuals who are
members of this honourable House. [Interjections.] Order!

Secondly, concerning the expression used - that is, that certain members
were selling out at a low price - the expression ``selling out'' reflects
on the integrity of those members by suggesting a betrayal of principle.
This is unparliamentary. I require that the hon Ken Andrews withdraw those
words.
Mr K M ANDREW: Chairperson, as far as I am aware, there is no Ken Andrews
in the House. If you are referring to me, I withdraw.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Ken Andrew, thank you very much.
I apologise.

                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Party, New National Party, United
Democratic Movement, African Christian Democratic Party, Federal Alliance
and Afrikaner Eenheidsbeweging dissenting).

The House adjourned at 19:06.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         Vote No 11 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 1999-2000 and a
         Performance Audit of the Management of Marine Resources [RP 120-
         2000].


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
         Board for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 1999-2000.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


       Report of the South African Law Commission for 2000 [RP 19-2001].

