---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 27 February 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2001-02-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2001
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                            WELCOMING OF MEMBERS

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! This is our
first sitting since we adjourned last year, and I therefore wish to take
this opportunity to welcome all members back to Cape Town. I hope they had
a very good rest and are bringing their revitalised energy to this House
and their work for this House.

                                 NEW MEMBER
                               (Announcement)

The Deputy Chairperson announced that the vacancy caused by the resignation
of Mr P G Qokweni had been filled by the appointment of Mr H T Sogoni with
effect from 19 December 2000.

The member had made and subscribed the oath in the office of the
Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Welcome to
this House, Mr Sogoni. I hope you will enjoy your membership of this House.
[Applause.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek by die volgende sitting
sal voorstel:


  Dat die Raad by wyse van onderhandeling met Salga die Unistad-
  burgemeesters van Suid-Afrika by 'n spesiale debat of andersins sal laat
  optree en rede voer.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day I
shall move:


  That the Council, through negotiation with Salga, will allow the Unicity
  mayors of South Africa to take part and speak in a special debate or in
  something similar.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move on the next
sitting day:


  That the Council, in the light of the further relaxation of exchange
  control as announced in the Budget Speech, and given South Africa's
  history, calls upon the Minister of Finance to introduce an amnesty on
  South Africans holding undisclosed assets abroad, provided that -


  (1) the disclosure is made to the SARS within two years and that any
       income derived therefrom will become subject to normal standard tax
       treatment in South Africa in subsequent tax years;


  (2) any disclosure would be made to the SARS and would be confidential
       and guaranteed free of any prosecution whatsoever;
  (3) the persons, companies and professional advisers concerned would also
       be free of any retribution or prosecution; and


  (4) any amounts disclosed would not become subject to back taxes,
       uncollected in the past, and that the taxpayers' assets would be
       reinstated de novo without fear of any legal retribution, now or in
       the future.

Moruti M CHABAKU: Monnasetilo, ke itsise gore kwa kopanong e e latelang ya
Ntlo eno ke tlaa tshikinya gore:


  Khansele e tlotlomatse Puso ya Aforika Borwa go bo e amogetse
  Khuduthamaga ya nama-o-tshwere ya Dingaka tsa Setso, eo e tsileng go nna
  le maemo a a tshwanang le a khuduthamaga ya Khansele ya Diporofesene tsa
  Boitekanelo kgotsa Health Professions Council.
(Translation of Sotho notice of motion follows.)

[Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the Council commends the South African Government for recognising
  the interim Council of Traditional Healers, which will have the same
  status as the Health Professions Council.]

                        ATTACK ON HOUSE OF DA MEMBER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) met misnoeë kennis neem van 'n aanval met bottels en ander voorwerpe
       gisteraand op die huis van die DA-raadslid in Wyk 21, beter bekend as
       Bellville-Suid;


  (2) 'n beroep doen op intimideerders en aanvallers om politieke
       verdraagsaamheid en verantwoordelikheid aan die dag te lê; en


  (3) 'n beroep op die polisie doen om sulke voorvalle van politieke
       intimidasie dringend te ondersoek en verdagtes aan die kaak te stel.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)
[Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with dissatisfaction the attack last night with bottles and
       other objects on the house of the DA councillor in Ward 21, better
       known as Bellville South;


  (2) calls on the intimidators and attackers to display political
       tolerance and responsibility; and


  (3) calls on the police to investigate as a matter of urgency such
       incidents of political intimidation and to expose the suspects.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr M V MOOSA: Yes, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! There is an
objection, and therefore the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion
without notice will now become notice of a motion.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                        (The late Sir Donald Bradman)

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with sadness the untimely death of Sir Donald Bradman, who died
       in his sleep on Sunday morning after suffering from pneumonia for a
       short time;


  (2) notes that the passing away of Donald Bradman marked the loss of not
       only Australia's most revered sporting figure,  but also the greatest
       batsman in test cricket history;


  (3) recognises his spirit of fair play, which was even noted by our
       former President, Mr Nelson Mandela; and


  (4) offers its heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Don and
       reassures them that not only Australia has lost, but the whole world.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   CONGRATULATIONS TO MINISTER OF FINANCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) salutes the efforts taken by our Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel,
       in his Budget Speech that bring hope to the poor and the jobless;


  (2) recognises that the Minister has given billions of rands to the poor
       and to middle-income earners in his ambitious Budget, designed to
       kickstart the rural economy and create much-needed jobs;


  (3) takes note of the fact that the Minister has thoroughly applied his
       mind to his work, which resulted in the economy growing by 3%, which
       is the fastest rate of growth since 1996; and


  (4) recognises the fact that our country needs people such as Comrade
       Trevor to take our country forward.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr C ACKERMANN: Yes, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Because of the
objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become notice of a motion.

 EXCLUSION OF RHODA KADALIE FROM CANDIDATES' LIST FOR COMMISSION FOR GENDER
                                  EQUALITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms C S BOTHA: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) deplores the deletion of the name of Ms Rhoda Kadalie from the
       candidates' list during the shortlisting of names for the Commission
       for Gender Equality, in the light of her remarkable and unblemished
       record as activist in the field of gender and human rights;


  (2) considers this deletion reason to place a huge question mark over the
       constitutional insight and purpose expressed by those members of the
       Ad Hoc Committee on Filling Vacancies in the Commission for Gender
       Equality who voted against her inclusion; and


  (3) moreover considers this to be a backward step in our purported
       commitment to furthering women's rights, which are, after all, human
       rights, and in the end should neither be subject, nor subservient, to
       narrow political interests.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion? I want somebody to speak. I do not only want to
see hands.

Mr T S SETONA: I object, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! There is an
objection to the motion. In the light of the objection, the motion may not
be proceeded with and the motion without notice will now become notice of a
motion.

                 LEADERSHIP STYLE OF DEMOCRATIC PARTY LEADER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with shock and dismay -


       (a)  the allegations confronting the official Opposition party
           leader, Tony Leon, which refer to him as an autocratic leader of
           the DP;


       (b)  that even the Chief Whip, Douglas Gibson, is supportive of Tony
           Leon, who treats veteran MPs like children;
       (c)  that, contradictory as its seems to the party's policies,
           although Mr Tony Leon claims to be a democrat and is critical of
           other leaders whom he deems to be autocratic, he is unable to
           practise what he preaches within his party;


       (d)  that this absurd situation clearly shows the South African
           people the cunning jackal in a sheepskin; and


  (2) calls upon the leader of the DP to come clean with his intentions,
       namely that he is not satisfied with the present situation and would
       like to return to the past with his fight-back strategies.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr J L THERON: Yes, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! There is an
objection to the motion, and because of that, the motion may not be
proceeded with. It will now become notice of a motion.
                 ATTACK ON BAGHDAD BY US AND BRITISH PLANES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the shocking and terrible loss of lives of civilians in Iraq as
       a result of attacks by US and British planes in Baghdad;


  (2) further notes that the attacks happened between 8 km and 32 km from
       Baghdad, and were aimed at removing the threat to planes patrolling
       the no-fly zone set up after the 1991 Gulf War; and


  (3) expresses its deepest sympathy with the Iraqi people and all others
       who have lost loved ones and family because of this callous deed.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr K D S DURR: Yes, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! There is an
objection to the motion and the motion will now become notice of a motion.

                            FLOODS IN MOZAMBIQUE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D M KGWARE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with great concern the floods in Mozambique which have already
       affected about 400 000 people since they began early this year;


  (2) notes that Mozambique is still recovering from last year's
       devastating floods in which more than 700 people were killed and the
       infrastructure was destroyed;


  (3) thankfully and appreciatively notes the commendable role played by
       the South African Government in providing R10,5 million worth of
       aircraft, food and medication; and


  (4) recognises the invaluable contribution of our defence force and of
       emergency flood aid in bringing the situation under control.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

           HUMANITARIAN AID TO IRAQ, THE WEST BANK AND MOZAMBIQUE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, my motion is very similar to the previous
motion. With the hon member's permission, I was going to include countries
such as Iraq and the West Bank, to which we also send humanitarian support.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Regrettably,
the motion has already been agreed to. You should move your own motion
instead.
Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) endorses and supports the issue of humanitarian aid to the residents
       of Iraq, the West Bank and Mozambique; and


  (2) remembers the support that these people gave us during our times of
       strife, even when their own struggles and resources were very bleak.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr K D S DURR: Yes, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! There is an
objection to the motion and therefore the motion without notice will become
notice of a motion.

                 PERSECUTION OF PEOPLE OF THE SOUTHERN SUDAN

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council, because of the continuing persecution and oppression
  being practised by the government of the Sudan over the past 40 years
  against the people of the southern Sudan, and in particular the targeting
  of Christian churches, schools and clinics -


  (1) calls upon the Minister of Foreign Affairs to use her influence to
       bring peace and stability to the region by promoting and initiating a
       process of real dialogue between the warring parties and working to
       structure genuine multiparty constitutional forums;


  (2) notes with appreciation speeches made to date by Minister Zuma and
       encourages the Government to help the Sudanese parties move forward
       to the negotiating table and to work for the ending of the bombing
       and violence being perpetrated against the people of the southern
       Sudan; and


  (3) notes that over the Christmas period alone, from 25 December 2000 to
       7 January 2001, 127 bombs were dropped on civilian targets in
       Moruland, Western Equatoria, including on churches, in those two
       weeks.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr M I MAKOELA: Yes, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! There is an
objection to the motion, and therefore the motion without notice will now
become notice of a motion.

   CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AFFAIRS -
                      CONSTITUTIVE ACT OF AFRICAN UNION

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, it is indeed a privilege to speak in the first
debate of the year 2001 and to be the first speaker - indeed, the only
speaker - in this special plenary that has been convened specifically so
that I may speak. [Laughter.]

On a more serious note, this is indeed a special plenary. I do not think
that many South Africans, or Africans throughout the continent, understand
what a significant event will be taking place in March this year, when
African heads of state meet in order to consider the Constitutive Act of
the African Union.

Allow me to take members of the House quickly through some of the
background to this. As we all know, the Organisation of African Unity, the
OAU, has for a long time been trying to unite countries on the African
continent with regard to common policies, principles and so forth. But in
our changing world, globalisation has become a factor that nobody can
ignore, and economic issues are inextricably linked with political and
other socioeconomic processes. The African continent has had to organise
itself in order to compete and develop in the context of a globalised
world.

In 1999 a declaration was adopted in Sirte, Libya. Known as the Sirte
Declaration, it set in motion a series of processes, some of whose results
we have already seen. One of the important outcomes of the Sirte
Declaration was the recognition that the countries and regions of Africa
should begin looking at developing common economic and political
communities like those created by the European Union. We in Africa need to
organise ourselves in blocs for engagement in international political
issues, and also to help one another within the community in furthering the
cause of development.

At the Sirte summit, which was a very special summit - an extraordinary
summit, in fact - a few things were decided, for example that we would
create an African parliament. As hon members know, this process has already
begun with some meetings that took place right here in our own country in
December 2000.

Amongst other things, some more context and meaning were given to the Abuja
Treaty, which spoke about creating socioeconomic, political and a whole
range of other levels of co-operation between African countries, and which
will even, we hope, create a common currency on the African continent in
about 25 years' time.

In the year 2000, the OAU and the African Economic Community heads of state
and government met again, this time in Lomé, Togo. The highlight of that
conference was the adoption of the very Act that we are about to give
effect to today, the Constitutive Act of the African Union. Our own
President, President Thabo Mbeki, signed the Constitutive Act of the
African Union on 8 September 2000 in New York.

It is important for us to know these things, because our Government and
diplomatic community have been forging ahead with the objective of making
us an integral part of the process of uplifting the continent of Africa
after the problems that it has faced over the past couple of hundred years.

With the signature that President Thabo Mbeki put to the constitutive Act,
a number of processes began. Apart from the Pan African Parliament, the Act
also provides for the establishment of a common court of justice and a
common central bank for the whole of Africa, an African monetary fund, an
African investment bank and several specialised technical committees in
areas such as rural economy and agriculture; monetary and financial
affairs; trade, customs and immigration; industry, science and technology,
energy, natural resources and environment; transport, communications and
tourism; health, labour and social affairs; and education, culture and
human resources. As hon members can see, this is undoubtedly extensive and
far-reaching.

Our President will lead a delegation again to another extraordinary summit
to take place in Sirte, which will be known as the African Union Summit. At
this summit, to take place next month, in March of the year 2001, the
countries that have formally adopted this Act will launch it and begin the
process of actually knitting the whole mechanism together.

Our President needs to be empowered by the ratification of Parliament, so
that when he acts there, he acts with the full mandate of our country and
the representatives of our people. Today's sitting was arranged in order to
give him that mandate. [Applause.]

There are complex issues that we need to look at as a country, particularly
because South Africa is one of the more developed countries on the African
continent. We need to understand some of the issues around the Constitutive
Act of the African Union, particularly policy matters. What impact will it
have on our legislative frameworks and on the way in which we in this
country organise our industries, our government and various other sectors?
It will have an impact on the way in which we work in the SADC region and
engage with the countries of the Southern African Customs Union.

The NCOP and National Assembly committees have highlighted the fact that
there are many things that need to be investigated further and many issues
that need to be better understood, but we must see this ratification as the
beginning of a process. We, as Parliament, are ratifying the Act and giving
our delegations a mandate regarding the constitutive Act and the launch of
the African Union. This does not mean, however, that we do not have lots of
hard work and engagement to do to unpack the processes that need to go into
the creation of the African Union so that it is a meaningful organisation
and does not suffer the pitfalls that the Organisation of African Unity has
experienced over the years.

Of course the African Union, after its launch, would regard the conflicts
on the continent of Africa, such as the DRC conflict, as key areas that
need to be addressed.

With those few words, I wish to ask the House to support the ratification
of this constitutive Act creating the African Union. I also ask all members
of the House, in whichever committees they participate, to begin studying
this thing and checking the processes that evolve out of it so that we as a
country can make a meaningful contribution to the process.

We have no doubt that two thirds of the countries of Africa will have
ratified and supported the launch of the African Union by March, and we are
quite sure that in March the African Union will become a reality.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 14:32.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         THURSDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 16
         November 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Local Government: Municipal Structures Second Amendment
              Bill [B 71 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio
              Committee on Provincial and Local Government - National
              Assembly).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Pursuant to an appeal having been received against the outcome
         of a disciplinary hearing which resulted in the dismissal of the
         former Head: Institutional Support Division in the Administration
         of Parliament, the Speaker and the Chairperson have appointed a
         committee to consider the appeal and make a recommendation thereon
         to both Houses, the committee to make its recommendation by 20
         November 2000.


     (2)    The committee consists of:


         National Assembly: National Council of Provinces:


         Cassim, M F Surty, E
         Doidge, G Q M
         Selfe, J
         September, C C

                          FRIDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The announcement on 16 November 2000 that the Local Government:
     Municipal Structures Second Amendment Bill  [B 71 - 2000] (National
     Assembly - sec 76) had been introduced in the National Assembly was
     incorrect: The Bill could not be introduced as section 154 of the
     Constitution had not been complied with in respect of the Bill.

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill [B 27B - 2000] - Act No
        32 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 14 November
        2000); and


         Construction Industry Development Board Bill [B 59B - 2000] - Act
        No 38 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 13 November
        2000).

3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Summary of Statements of
         Moneys kept in Trust in the Guardians' Funds for 1998-99 [RP 162-
         2000].


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Health and the Select Committee on
         Social Services for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Health Donations Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 164-2000].


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Education and the Select Committee
         on Education and Recreation for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Council on Higher Education for 1999-2000 [RP 165-2000].


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration and the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration:


         (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission on Career
              Management in the Public Service [RP 152-2000].


         (b)     Report of the Public Service Commission on Management of
              Probationary Appointments within Public Service Departments at
              National Level [RP 153-2000].


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration and the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration. It is also referred to the
         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Women and the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement
         of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled
         Persons:


         Report of the Public Service Commission on the State of
         Representativeness in the Public Service [RP 154-2000].


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance:


         Government Notice No R.1025 published in Government Gazette No
         21671 dated 27 October 2000, Amendment of Regulation 5 of the
         Regulations under the Associated Institutions Pension Fund Act,
         1963, made in terms of section 2 of the Associated Institutions
         Pension Fund Act, 1963 (Act No 41 of 1963).
     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs and the Select Committee on Social Services. The
         report of the Auditor-General contained in the following paper is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration and report.


         Reports and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication Board
         for 1998-99 and 1999-2000,     including the Reports of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 1998-99 and 1999-
         2000.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:


Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Members of African Parliaments at a meeting in Pretoria, from 7 to 10
     November 2000, agreed on a Draft Protocol to the African Economic
     Community (AEC) Treaty relating to the Pan-African Parliament.


     The Protocol will be submitted to the Council of Ministers and
     thereafter to the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) Heads of States
     for adoption in 2001.


     DRAFT PROTOCOL TO THE TREATY ESTABLISHING THE AFRICAN ECONOMIC
     COMMUNITY RELATING TO THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT


     PREAMBLE


     The Member States of the Organization of African Unity State Parties to
     the Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community:


     Bearing in mind the Sirte Declaration adopted at the Fourth
     Extraordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
     held in the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on 9.9.99
     establishing the African Union and calling for the speedy establishment
     of the institutions provided for in the Treaty establishing the African
     Economic Community signed in Abuja, Nigeria, on 3 June, 1991 and the
     establishment of the Pan-African Parliament by the year 2000;


     Noting, in particular, the adoption by the Assembly of Heads of State
     and Government meeting in its 36th Ordinary Session in Lome, Togo, from
     10 to 12 July, 2000, of the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
     thereby giving concrete expression to the common vision of a united,
     integrated and strong Africa;


     Further noting that the establishment of the Pan-African Parliament is
     informed by a vision to provide a common platform for African peoples
     and their grass-roots organisations to be more involved in discussions
     and decision-making on the problems and challenges facing the
     Continent.


     Conscious of the imperative and urgent need to further consolidate the
     aspiration of the African peoples for greater unity, solidarity and
     cohesion in a larger community transcending cultural, ideological,
     ethnic, religious and national differences;


     Considering the principles and objectives stated in the Charter of the
     Organization of African Unity;


     Further considering that Articles 7 and 14 of the Treaty establishing
     the African Economic Community provide for a Pan-African Parliament of
     the Community, whose composition, functions, powers and organisation
     shall be defined in a related Protocol;


     Recalling the Cairo Agenda for Action which was endorsed by the Thirty-
     first Ordinary Session of the Assembly held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
     from 26 to 28 June 1995 (AHG/Res. 236 (XXXI)), and which recommended
     the speeding up of the rationalisation of the institutional framework
     in order to achieve economic integration at the regional level;


     Recalling further the Declaration on the Political and Socio-Economic
     Situation in Africa and the Fundamental Changes Taking Place in the
     World, which was adopted by the Twenty-sixth Ordinary Session of the
     Assembly in Addis Ababa, Ethopia, on 11 July 1990;


     Considering that by the Algiers Declaration (AHG/Decl.1 (XXXV)) of 14
     July 1999 the Assembly reaffirmed its faith in the African Economic
     Community;


     Determined to promote democratic principles and popular participation,
     to consolidate democratic institutions and culture and to ensure good
     governance;


     Further determined to promote and protect human and peoples' rights in
     accordance with the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and
     other relevant human rights instruments;


     Conscious of the obligations and legal implications for Member States
     of the need to establish the Pan-African Parliament;


     Firmly convinced that the establishment of the Pan-African Parliament
     will ensure effectively the full participation of the African peoples
     in the economic development and integration of the continent;


     HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOWS:


                                  Article 1
                                 Definitions


     In this Protocol the following expressions shall have the meanings
     assigned to them hereunder:


         "Assembly" means the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
         the Community;


         "Bureau" means the office-bearers of the Pan-African Parliament as
         provided for in Article 12(6) of this Protocol;


         "Community" means the African Economic Community;


         "Council" means the Council of Ministers of the Community;


         "Court of Justice" means the Court of the Community;


         "General Secretariat" means the General Secretariat of the
         Community";


         "Member of Pan-African Parliament" or "Pan-African
         Parliamentarian" means a representative elected or designated in
         accordance with Article 5 of this Protocol;


         "Member State" or "Member States", unless the context otherwise
         prescribes, means Member State or Member States of the Community;


         "OAU" means the Organization of African Unity;


         "President" means the Member of the Pan-African Parliament elected
         to conduct the business of Parliament in accordance with Article
         12(2) of this Protocol;


         "Region of Africa" shall have the meaning assigned to it in
         Article 1 of the Treaty establishing the African Economic
         Community;


         "Secretary-General" means the Secretary-General of the Community;


         "Treaty" means the Treaty establishing the African Economic
         Community.

                                  Article 2
                 Establishment of the Pan-African Parliament


          Member States hereby establish a Pan-African Parliament the
         composition, functions, powers and organisation of which shall be
         governed by the present Protocol.


        The Pan-African Parliamentarians shall represent all the peoples of
         Africa.


        The ultimate aim of the Pan-African Parliament shall be to evolve
         into an institution with full legislative powers, whose members
         are elected by universal adult suffrage. However, until such time
         as the Member States decide otherwise by an amendment to this
         Protocol:


         (i)     The Pan-African Parliament shall have consultative and
                  advisory powers only; and


         (ii)    The Members of the Pan-African Parliament shall be
                  appointed as provided for in Article 4 of this Protocol.

                                  Article 3
                                 Objectives


     The objectives of the Pan-African Parliament shall be to:


        facilitate the effective implementation of the policies and
         objectives of the OAU/AEC and, ultimately, of the African Union;


        promote the principles of human rights and democracy in Africa;


        encourage good governance, transparency and accountability in
         Member States;


        familiarise the peoples of Africa with the objectives and policies
         aimed at integrating the African Continent within the framework of
         the establishment of the African Union;
          promote peace, security and stability;


          contribute to a more prosperous future for the peoples of Africa
         by promoting collective self-reliance and economic recovery;


        facilitate cooperation and development in Africa;


        strengthen Continental solidarity and build a sense of common
         destiny among the peoples of Africa; promote the principles of
         human rights and democracy in Africa;


        facilitate cooperation among Regional Economic Communities and
         their Parliamentary fora.

                                  Article 4
                                 Composition


        Member States shall be represented in the Pan-African Parliament by
         an equal number of Parliamentarians;


        Each Member State shall be represented in the Pan-African
         Parliament by five (5) members, at least one of whom must be a
         woman;


        The representation of each Member State must reflect the diversity
         of political opinions in each National Parliament.

                                  Article 5
                       Election, Tenure and Vacancies


        The Pan-African Parliamentarians shall be elected or designated by
         the respective National Parliaments or any other deliberative
         organ of the Member States, from among their members.


        The Assembly shall determine the beginning of the first term of
         office of the Pan-African Parliament at its session immediately
         following the entry into force of this Protocol.


        The term of a Member of the Pan-African Parliament shall run
         concurrently with his or her term in the National Parliament
         concerned.
          The seat of a Member of the Pan-African Parliament shall become
         vacant if he or she:


         (a)     dies;
         (b)     resigns in writing to the President;
         (c)     is unable to perform his or her functions for reasons of
              physical or mental incapacity;
         (d)     is removed on grounds of misconduct;
         (e)     ceases to be a Member of the National Parliament
              concerned;
         (f)     is recalled by the National Parliament; or
         (g)     ceases to be a Pan-African Parliamentarian in terms of
              Article 19 of this Protocol.

                                  Article 6
                                    Vote


     The Pan-African Parliamentarians shall vote in their personal and
     independent capacity.


                                  Article 7
                               Incompatibility


     Membership of the Pan-African Parliament shall not be compatible with
     the exercise of executive or judicial functions in a Member State.


                                  Article 8
          Privileges and Immunities of Pan-African Parliamentarians


        The Pan-African Parliamentarians, while exercising their functions,
         shall enjoy in the territory of each Member State the immunities
         and privileges extended to representatives of Member States under
         the General Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the OAU
         and the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.


          Without prejudice to Paragraph (1) of this Article, the Pan-
         African Parliament shall have the power to waive the immunity of a
         member in accordance with its Rules of Procedure.


                                  Article 9
                          Parliamentary Immunities


        The Pan-African Parliamentarians shall enjoy parliamentary immunity
         in each Member State. Accordingly, a member of the Pan-African
         Parliament shall not be liable to civil or criminal proceedings,
         arrest, imprisonment or damages for what is said or done by him or
         her within or outside the Pan-African Parliament in his or her
         capacity as a member of Parliament in the discharge of his or her
         duties.


          Without prejudice to Paragraph (1) of this Article, the Pan-
         African Parliament shall have the power to waive the immunity of a
         member in accordance with its Rules of Procedure.

                                 Article 10
                                  Allowance


     The Pan-African Parliamentarians shall be paid an allowance to meet
     expenses in the discharge of their duties.


                                 Article 11
                            Functions and Powers
     The Pan-African Parliament shall be vested with legislative powers to
     be defined by the Assembly. However, during the first term of its
     existence, the Pan-African Parliament shall exercise advisory and
     consultative powers only. In this regard, it may:


        Examine, discuss or express an opinion on any matter, either on its
         own initiative or at the request of the Assembly or other policy
         organs and make any recommendations it may deem fit relating to,
         inter alia, matters pertaining to respect of human rights, the
         consolidation of democratic institutions and the culture of
         democracy, as well as the promotion of good governance and the
         rule of law.


        Discuss its budget and the budget of the Community and make
         recommendations thereon prior to its approval by the Assembly.


        Work towards the harmonisation or coordination of the laws of
         Member States.


        Make recommendations aimed at contribution to the attainment of the
         objectives of the OAU/AEC and draw attention to the challenges
         facing the integration process in Africa as well as the strategies
         for dealing with them.


        Request officials of the OAU/AEC to attend its sessions, produce
         documents or assist in the discharge of its duties.


        Promote the programmes and objectives of the OAU/AEC, in the
         constituencies of the Member States.


        Promote the coordination and harmonization of policies, measures,
         programmes and activities of the Regional Economic Communities and
         the parliamentary fora of Africa.


        Adopts its Rules of Procedure, elect its own President and propose
         to the Council and the Assembly the size and nature of the support
         staff of the Pan-African Parliament.


        Perform such other functions as it deems appropriate to achieve the
         objectives set out in Article 3 of this Protocol.

                                 Article 12
      Rules of Procedure and Organisation of the Pan-African Parliament


        The Pan-African Parliament shall adopt its own Rules of Procedure
         on the basis of a two-thirds majority of all its members.


        The Pan-African Parliament shall elect, at its first sitting
         following its election, by secret ballot, from among its members
         and in accordance with its Rules of Procedure, a President and
         four (4) Vice-Presidents representing the Regions of Africa as
         determined by the OAU. The election shall, in each case, be by
         simple majority of the members present and voting.


        The terms of office of the President and the Vice-Presidents shall
         run with the National Parliament or the deliberative organ which
         elects or designates them.


        The Vice-Presidents shall be ranked in the order of first, second,
         third and fourth initially, in accordance with the result of the
         vote and subsequently by rotation.


        The President and the Vice-Presidents shall be the Officers of the
         Pan-African Parliament. The officers, under the control and
         direction of the President and subject to such directives as may
         be issued by the Pan-African Parliament, shall be responsible for
         the management and administration of the affairs and facilities of
         the Pan-African Parliament and its organs. In the discharge of
         their duties, the Officers shall be assisted by the Clerk and the
         two Deputy Clerks.


        The Pan-African Parliament shall appoint a Clerk, two Deputy Clerks
         and such other staff and functionaries as it may deem necessary
         for the proper discharge of its functions and may by regulations
         provide for their terms and conditions of office in accordance
         with the relevant OAU practice as appropriate.


        The President shall preside over all parliamentary proceedings
         except those held in committee and, in his or her absence, the
         Vice-Presidents shall act in rotation, in accordance with the
         Rules of Procedure which shall also deal with the powers of the
         person presiding over Parliamentary proceedings.


        The Office of the President or Vice-President shall become vacant
         if he or she:


         (a)     dies;
         (b)     resigns in writing;
         (c)     is unable to perform his or her functions for reasons of
              physical or mental incapacity;
         (d)     is removed on grounds of misconduct;
         (e)     ceases to be a Member of the National Parliament or the
              deliberative organ concerned;
         (f)     is recalled by the National Parliament; or
         (g)     ceases to be a Pan-African Parliamentarian in terms of
              Article 19 of this Protocol.
        Removal on the grounds stipulated in 8(c) or (d) above shall be on
         a motion to be decided on by secret ballot and supported at the
         end of debate by two-thirds majority of all the Pan-African
         Parliamentarians. In the case of removal under the ground
         stipulated in 8(c), the motion shall, in addition, be supported by
         a medical report.


        A vacancy in the Office of the President or Vice-President shall be
         filled at the sitting of the Pan-African Parliament immediately
         following its occurrence.


        The quorum for a meeting of the Pan-African Parliament shall be
         constituted by a simple majority.


        Each Pan-African Parliamentarian shall have one vote. Decisions
         shall be made by consensus or, failing which, by a two-thirds
         majority of all the Members present and voting. However,
         procedural matters, including the question of whether a matter is
         one of the procedure or not, shall be decided by a simple majority
         of those present and voting, unless otherwise stipulated in the
         Rules of Procedure. In the event of an equal number of votes, the
         person presiding shall have a casting vote.


        The Pan-African Parliament may establish such committees, as it
         deems fit, for the proper discharge of its functions and in
         accordane with its Rules of Procedure.


        Until the Pan-African Parliament appoints its staff, the General
         Secretariat of the OAU shall act as its Secretariat.


                                 Article 13
                               Oath of Office


     At its first sitting, after the election and before proceeding with any
     other matter, the Pan-African Parliamentarians shall take an oath or
     make a solemn declaration which shall be set out as an Addendum to this
     Protocol.


                                 Article 14
                                  Sessions


        The inaugural session shall be presided over by the Chairperson of
         the OAU/AEC until the election of the President of the Pan-African
         Parliament who shall thereafter preside.


        The Pan-African Parliament shall meet in ordinary session at least
         twice a year, within a period to be determined in the Rules of
         Procedure. Each ordinary session may last up to one month.


        Two-thirds of the Pan-African Parliamentarians, the Assembly or the
         Council, through the Chairperson of the OAU, may, by written
         notification addressed to the President, request an Extraordinary
         session. The request shall provide a motivation for and details of
         the matters to be discussed at the proposed Extraodinary session.
         The President shall convene such a session which shall discuss
         only the matters stipulated in the request. The session shall end
         upon exhaustion of the agenda.


        The proceedings of the Pan-African Parliament shall be open to the
         public, unless otherwise directed by the Bureau.


                                 Article 15
                                   Budget


        The annual budget of the Pan-African Parliament shall constitute an
         integral part of the regular budget of the OAU/AEC.


        The budget shall be drawn up by the Pan-African Parliament in
         accordance with the Financial Rules and Regulations of the OAU/AEC
         and shall be approved by the Assembly until such time as the Pan-
         African Parliament shall start to exercise legislative powers.


                                 Article 16
                     Seat of the Pan-African Parliament


     The seat of the Pan-African Parliament shall be determined by the
     Assembly and shall be located in the territory of a State Party to this
     Protocol. However, the Pan-African Parliament may convene in the
     territory of any Member State at the invitation of that Member State.


                                 Article 17
                              Working Languages


     The working languages of the Pan-African Parliament shall be, if
     possible, African languages, Arabic, English, French and Portuguese.


                                 Article 18
   The Relationship between the Pan-African Parliament and the Parliaments
         of Regional Economic Communities and National Parliaments.


     The Pan-African Parliament shall work in close co-operation with the
     Parliaments of the Regional Economic Communities and the National
     Parliaments of Member States. To this effect, the Pan-African
     Parliament may, in accordance with its Rules of Procedure, convene
     annual consultative fora with the Parliaments of the Regional Economic
     Communities and the National Parliaments to discuss matters of common
     interest.
                                 Article 19
                                 Withdrawal


     The Pan-African Parliamentarians from a Member State which withdraws
     from the Community shall automatically cease to be Pan-African
     Parliamentarians.


                                 Article 20
                               Interpretation


     The Court of Justice shall be seized with all matters of interpretation
     emanating from this Protocol. Pending its establishment, such matters
     shall be submitted to the Assembly which shall decide by a two-thirds
     majority.


                                 Article 21
                         Signature and Ratification


        This Protocol shall be signed and ratified by the Member States in
         accordance with their respective Constitutional procedures.


        The instruments of ratification or accession shall be deposited
         with the Secretary-General of the OAU.


                                 Article 22
                              Entry into Force


     The Protocol shall enter into force thirty (30) days after the deposit
     of the instruments of ratification by a simple majority of the Member
     States.


                                 Article 23
                                  Accession


        Any Member State may notify the Secretary-General of its intention
         to accede to this Protocol after its entry into force. The
         Secretary-General shall, upon receipt of such notification,
         transmit copies thereof to all Member States.


        For any Member State acceding to this Protocol, the Protocol shall
         come into force on the date of the deposit of its instrument of
         accession.


                                 Article 24
                    Amendment or Revision of the Protocol


        This Protocol may be amended or revised by the decision of a two-
         thirds majority of the Assembly.


        Any Member State party to this Protocol or the Pan-African
         Parliament may propose, in writing to the Secretary-General, any
         amendment or revision of the Protocol.


        The Secretary-General shall notify the proposal to all Member
         States at least thirty (30) days before the meeting of the
         Assembly, which is to consider the proposal.


        The Secretary-General shall request the opinion of the Pan-African
         Parliament on the proposal and shall transmit the opinion, if any,
         to the Assembly, which may adopt the proposal, taking into account
         the opinion of the Pan-African Parliament.


        The amendment or revision shall enter into force thirty (30) days
         after the deposit of the instruments of ratification with the
         Secretary-General by two-thirds of Member States.


                                 Article 25
                           Review of the Protocol


        Five years after the entry into force of this Protocol, a
         Conference of the States parties to this Protocol shall be held to
         review the operation and effectiveness of this Protocol, with a
         view to ensuring that the objectives and purposes of this
         Protocol, as well as the vision underlying the Protocol, are being
         realised and that the Protocol meets with the evolving needs of
         the African Continent.


        At intervals of ten years thereafter, further Review Conferences of
         States Parties to this Protocol may be convened with the same
         objective as stated in Paragraph 1 above. Such Conferences may be
         convened at an interval of less than ten years, if so decided by
         the Pan-African Parliament.

2.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the United States of America regarding
         mutual assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
         Agency for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 1999-2000.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
         for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 1999-2000.

                          TUESDAY, 21 NOVEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (i)     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 48B - 2000] - Act No 53
                  of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 17
                  November 2000); and


         (ii)    Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 55B - 2000] - Act No 54
                  of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 17
                  November 2000).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs.
         The reports of the Auditor-General contained in the following
         papers are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Ntsika Enterprise
              Promotion Agency for 1999-2000, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 1999-2000.


         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Competition
              Commission for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 1999-2000.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance:


         (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the United States of America
              regarding mutual assistance between their Customs
              Administrations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.
         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
     Corporation of South Africa Limited for 1999-2000.

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Government Notice No R.1129 published in Government Gazette No 21736
     dated 17 November 2000, Amendment of Regulations, made in terms of
     section 77 of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of
     1998).

3.    The Minister of Safety and Security:


     Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate for 1999-2000 [RP 176-
     2000].


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and the
     Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

                         THURSDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Decision taken by the meeting convened in terms of Joint Rule 62
     (Policy matters requiring decision during recess)


     The Speaker and the Chairperson of the Council convened a meeting in
     terms of Joint Rule 62 on Monday, 20 November 2000, to consider the -


     (1)    pending closure of Acacia Park Primary School; and
     (2)    report of the committee to consider the appeal by former Head:
         Institutional Support Division in the Administration of
         Parliament.


     The pending closure of Acacia Primary School:


         Mr G Q M Doidge reported to the meeting that the Gauteng
         Department of Education was no longer prepared to fund the Acacia
         Park Primary School which was used by children of members of
         Parliament who during session time reside at Acacia Park
         Parliamentary Village. The school would therefore have to be
         closed with effect from 1 January 2001, unless Parliament was
         prepared immediately to take over responsibility for its
         operation. After discussion the meeting decided that -


         (i)     in principle the Acacia Park Primary School should remain
                 open;


         (ii)    the Presiding Officers, assisted by management of
                 Parliament, explore the funding aspects, including
                 subsidisation by Western Cape Education Department; and
         (iii)   in conjunction with the existing governing body of the
                 school, a report on all relevant implications be drawn up
                 for circulation to members by the middle of January 2001.


     Report of the committee to consider the appeal by former Head:
     Institutional Support Division in the Administration of Parliament:


         The meeting, having considered the report of the committee,
         reports that the appeal has been denied.




     F Ginwala    G N M Pandor
     Speaker of the    Chairperson of the
     National Assembly National Council of Provinces

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
         Corporation of South Africa Limited for 1999-2000.


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism and to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs:


         Government Notice No R.1129 published in the Government Gazette No
         21736 dated 17 November 2000, Amendment of Regulations, made in
         terms of section 77 of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act
         No 18 of 1998).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:
1.    The Minister of Housing:


     Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
     Corporation Limited for 1999-2000.

                          TUESDAY, 28 NOVEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Housing:


     Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
     Corporation Limited for 1999-2000.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing and to the Select
     Committee on Public Services.

                           FRIDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (i)     Council for the Built Environment Bill [B 16B - 2000] -
                  Act No 43 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on
                  26 November 2000);


         (ii)    Architectural Profession Bill [B 17B - 2000] - Act No 44
                  of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 26
                  November 2000);


         (iii)   Landscape Architectural Profession Bill [B 18B - 2000] -
                  Act No 45 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on
                  26 November 2000);


         (iv)    Engineering Profession Bill [B 19B - 2000] - Act No 46 of
                  2000 (assented to and signed by President on 26 November
                  2000);
         (v)     Property Valuers Profession Bill [B 20B - 2000] - Act No
                  47 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 26
                  November 2000);


         (vi)    Project and Construction Management Professions Bill [B
                  21B - 2000] - Act No 48 of 2000 (assented to and signed
                  by President on 26 November 2000);


         (vii)   Quantity Surveying Profession Bill [B 22B - 2000] - Act No
                  49 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 26
                  November 2000);


         (viii)  Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
                  Professions Second Amendment Bill [B 66B - 2000] - Act No
                  50 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 26
                  November 2000);


         (1x)    African Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund
                  Bill [B 65D - 2000] - Act No 51 of 2000 (assented to and
                  signed by President on 21 November 2000);


         (x)           Second Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 67 - 2000]
                  - Act No 55 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President
                  on 26 November 2000);


         (xi)    Bills of Exchange Amendment Bill [B 47B - 2000] - Act No
                  56 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 29
                  November 2000);


         (xii)   South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 62 - 2000] -
                  Act No 57 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on
                  29 November 2000);


         (xiii)  Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 70 - 2000] - Act No 59 of
                  2000 (assented to and signed by President on 29 November
                  2000);


         (xiv)   Marine Living Resources Amendment Bill [B 68B - 2000] -
                  Act No 68 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on
                  29 November 2000); and


         (xv)    Redetermination of the Boundaries of Cross-boundary
                  Municipalities Bill [B 69 - 2000] - Act No 69 of 2000
                  (assented to and signed by President on 21 November
                  2000).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Bills:

1.    The Minister for Intelligence:


     (1) Algemene Wysigingswetsontwerp op Intelligensie [W 36 - 2000].


         The General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill [B 36 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75) was introduced by the Minister for
         Intelligence on 24 May 2000.
                          THURSDAY, 7 DECEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (a)     National Health Laboratory Services Bill [B 52B - 2000] -
              Act No 37 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 5
              December 2000);


         (b)     Competition Second Amendment Bill [B 41D - 2000] - Act No
              39 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 5 December
              2000);


         (c)     Adult Basic Education and Training Bill [B 42D - 2000] -
              Act No 52 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 5
              December 2000);


         (d)     Council for Medical Schemes Levies Bill [B 61 - 2000] -
              Act No 58 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 5
              December 2000);


         (e)     National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B 39B -
              2000] - Act No 61 of 2000 (assented to and signed by
              President on 5 December 2000);
         (f)     Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 63B - 2000] - Act No 62
              of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 5 December
              2000);


         (g)     Sea Transport Documents Bill [B 28B - 2000] - Act No 65 of
              2000 (assented to and signed by President on 5 December
              2000);


         (h)     Abolition of Lebowa Mineral Trust Bill [B 49B - 2000] -
              Act No 67 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 5
              December 2000); and


         (i)     Tourism Amendment Bill [B 50F - 99] - Act No 70 of 2000
              (assented to and signed by President on 5 December 2000).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs,
     dated 21 November 2000:


         The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
         considered the shortlist of candidates nominated to be appointed
         to the National Agricultural Marketing Council, hereby recommends
         to the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, in terms of
         section 4(4)(e) of the Marketing of Agricultural Products Act,
         that the following candidates be considered for appointment to the
         Council:


         Category A:   Mr D P Dall
                                  Mr W A Fourie
                                  Mr M C Heyns


         Category B:   Mr M E J Bezuidenhout
                                  Mr S Luthuli
                                  Ms D Ndaba
         Category C:   Mr P Govender
                                  Prof J F Kirsten
                                  Mr M G Rathogwa


         Category D:   Mr B Maketha
            Ms S E Moolman
            Ms M G Njoni
         Category E:   Dr C Buthelezi
            Mr M W Mvabaza
            Mr M A Tanda

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on Study
     Tour to India and Malaysia , dated 10 November 2000:


     A.     Introduction


         A multi-party delegation of the Select Committee on Education and
         Recreation (the Committee) embarked on a study tour to India and
         Malaysia from 26 June to 8 July 2000. In addition, chairpersons of
         the relevant committees in the provincial legislatures were
         invited to join the delegation on this fact-finding mission.


         The Committee members were Mr D M Kgware (Chairperson), Ms C
         Nkuna, Mr P G Qokweni and Mrs J Witbooi.


         The following members of the provincial legislatures joined the
         Committee:
         Western Cape  Mr Y Gabru
            Mr E Isaacs
         Free State    Mr I Segalo
         Northern Cape Mr R Stadhouer
         Mpumalanga    Mr J M Mthembu
         North West    Mrs M M Bopalamo


     B.     Objectives


         The objectives of the study tour was to investigate matters
         relevant to the three clusters of the Committee, namely Education,
         Arts, Culture, Science and Technology, and Sport and Recreation.
         On educational matters, the delegation studied conceptualisation,
         policy, curriculum development, development of learning and
         teaching material, and teacher training and assessment. In
         addition, student financial assistance, education and training in
         higher education as well as the use of information technology in
         education were also investigated.


         The Promotion of South African Indigenous Knowledge Bill, aimed at
         the protection and promotion of indigenous knowledge systems, will
         be referred to the Committee soon, and thus the delegation also
         investigated programmes of development of the indigenous people of
         India and Malaysia as well as the issue of Indigenous Knowledge
         Systems (IKS). In this regard the delegation, amongst other
         issues, investigated the progress of these countries on ethno-
         medicine and ethno-pharmacy.


         In addition, the delegation also investigated sport and
         development programmes, in particular rural development in these
         countries.


     C.     Meetings in India


         1. National Council of Educational Research and Training


              The National Council of Educational Research and Training
              (NCERT) is an autonomous body, fully financed by the
              government of India. It assists and advises the Ministry of
              Human Resources Development on issues pertaining to the
              formulation and implementation of policies and programmes in
              respect of school education.


              (1) The NCERT concentrates on three aspects:


                  (a)  Research and development.


                  (b)  Training.


                  (c)  Extension.


                  It functions in a federal system where school education
                  is primarily a state competency. However, the NCERT has
                  acquired nation-wide acceptability for its programmes,
                  and constantly interacts with states to identify
                  educational needs.


              (2) NCERT Programmes


                  NCERT programmes include teacher training, curriculum
                  development and pedagogical research and development.
                  State textbooks are periodically reviewed to detect
                  references which hinder national integration, show bias
                  against women, etc.


                  The NCERT is at the centre of ensuring the use of
                  computer technology for updating school education and
                  providing basic learning facilities. It also provides
                  academic expertise in designing, implementing and
                  evaluating centrally sponsored school improvement
                  schemes.


              (3) Policy formulation


                  The NCERT strives for an educational system that is
                  rooted in culture and complements progress. There are 18
                  official languages entrenched in the Constitution, and
                  emphasis is placed on scholars being educated in their
                  mother tongue. A three-language formula is adopted, which
                  ensures that scholars can speak three languages (their
                  mother tongue, English and another Indian language). An
                  integrated approach is followed, where scholars with
                  minor disabilities are integrated and taught in ordinary
                  schools. However, special schools are set aside for those
                  with severe disabilities.


              (4) Examination system


                  Assessment of scholars are confined to their cognitive
                  capacities, and the rule is that whatever is taught in
                  class, should be tested. Universities now conduct
                  entrance examinations. Special projects are under way to
                  identify and nurture gifted children. In addition, in
                  1986 the government launched a scheme which focused on
                  the identification and nurturing of talented rural
                  children. These students are fully subsidised by the
                  government for a period of seven years.


              (5) Curriculum development


                  Compulsory learning of science and mathematics is
                  required up to class 10. In classes 11 and 12, specified
                  areas of science are identified, and students can choose
                  between an A or a B course in science, depending on the
                  course they intend to follow when leaving school.


                  At the moment education in India is receiving 3,4% of the
                  GDP, although the target set for education is 6% of the
                  GDP. The budget is of great concern, as in some states
                  95% of the budget goes to the salaries of teachers.


         2. Ministry of Science and Technology


              The Ministry of Science and Technology is divided into three
              sectors: Science and Technology; Biological Technology; and
              Scientific Research.


              (1) Objectives


                  This Department, through the Science and Engineering
                  Research Council (SERC), promotes research and
                  development programmes (R & D programmes) in newly
                  emerging and frontline areas of science and engineering.
                  It also promotes general research capabilities in areas
                  of science and technology, taking into account the
                  capabilities of the host institutions. It further
                  encourages young scientists to take up challenging R & D
                  activities.


              (2) Activities


                  (a)  It grants support to scientists and technologists in
                       challenging areas of research.
                  (b)  It sets up training programmes for young scientists.


                  (c)  It grants fellowships and grants.


                  (d)  It sets up research support facilities and the
                       organisation of "Summer/Winter Schools".


                  Students who receives grants/fellowships to study abroad,
                  has to enter into an agreement with the university
                  concerned that they will return to work in India after
                  completing their studies. This way, a "braindrain" is
                  prevented. A National Science and Technology
                  Entrepreneurship Development Board (NSTEDB) was
                  established by the government in 1982 as an institutional
                  mechanism to promote gainful self-employment and to
                  develop entrepreneurship through the use of science and
                  technology. It also facilitates and conducts various
                  informal services relating to entrepreneurship
                  development through the use of science and technology.


              (3) Several programmes have been created to promote awareness
                  amongst science and technology persons to take
                  entrepreneurship as a career:


                  (a)  Skills Development Training Programme


                       Under this programme, scientifically designed skills
                       development programmes are organised, mainly for
                       unemployed, educated youths in rural and semi-urban
                       identified areas with immediate potential for self-
                       employment, by creating skills through the
                       application of science and technology. The objective
                       is to harness the available resources of the science
                       and technology infrastructure in the country for the
                       generation of wealth. The duration of the training
                       normally varies between four and eight weeks,
                       depending on the trade. In implementing this
                       programme, a survey of opportunities in specific
                       trades for creating jobs should be done.
                       Identification of trainers, experts and craftsmen and
                       providing them with suitable orientation training is
                       necessary. Preparation of lecture material in
                       vernacular languages, wherever such material is not
                       available, and the selection of trainees through
                       aptitude tests are also done. A quarterly review of
                       progress is done through district level monitoring
                       committees and the submission of quarterly progress
                       reports to the NSTEDB. There are more than 100
                       agencies all over India, and basic tools/materials
                       are provided to successful trainees free of charge.


                  (b)  Open Learning Programme in Entrepreneurship (OLPE)


                       In order to spread the message of entrepreneurship at
                       a faster rate and to cover a large number of
                       beneficiaries, this programme enables potential
                       entrepreneurs to be provided with study material and
                       guidance by resource persons in contact sessions in
                       different parts of the country. These persons are
                       trained through the Faculty Development Programme of
                       the NSTEDB. The duration of these courses is 11
                       months.


                       The Technology Development Board provides financial
                       assistance to research and development institutions
                       as well as to the industry. In addition, it
                       facilitates interaction between industry and R & D
                       Institutions and fosters co-operative research
                       between the industry and institutions. The Board also
                       creates ventures and new job opportunities, and
                       assists partnerships with financial schemes. To date,
                       35% of participants in these programmes have already
                       set up enterprises.


         3. Jawayhar Novodaya Vidyalayas (New Dawn Schools)


              The objective of the Novodaya Vidyalaya Scheme is to create
              centres of academic excellence for talented children,
              predominantly from rural areas, and to be pacesetters for the
              improvement of quality education in educational institutions
              of the district where the Vidyalayas are located.


              (1) Admission policy


                  Admissions take place on the basis of a test designed and
                  conducted by the NCERT in 20 of the languages of India.
                  The test is non-verbal, class-neutral and designed to
                  ensure that the children are able to compete without
                  facing any disadvantages. Successful candidates are
                  educated free of charge, the expense for their studies
                  being paid by the government.


              (2) Enrolment


                  At present, there are 127 000 talented children and 14
                  000 staff members in these schools. The programme
                  concentrates on the enrolment of 75% of rural children
                  and 25% of urban children.


              (3) Pace-setting activities


                  An important feature is the "pace-setting" activities of
                  these schools, which results in interaction between local
                  schools and Navoday Vidyalayas schools, so that benefits,
                  facilities and experiences can be transferred to local
                  schools. Teachers and staff live with these children in
                  hostels, and emphasis is placed on personality building.


              (4) Curriculum
                  These children follow the same curriculum as ordinary
                  children, and no accelerated curriculum is undertaken. In
                  view of the fact that most students were earlier taught
                  in their mother tongue, instruction is provided through
                  the same medium up to class 8, after which intense
                  teaching in Hindi and English takes place. Thus, a three-
                  language formula is followed - a regional language, Hindi
                  and English. Agreements for the introduction and
                  implementation of a Computer Education Programme in 320
                  of these schools have been signed, and computer literacy
                  has been made compulsory for all students.


              (5) Student Exchange Programme


                  Another feature of this programme is a scheme of exchange
                  of students from one Novodaya Vidyalayas in a particular
                  linguistic region to another in a different linguistic
                  region. This promotes understanding of diversity and
                  cultures of the people of India.


              (6) Teacher Assessment


                  A graduate from this reputable school is highly accepted.
                  Teachers are selected by regional offices and must obtain
                  a 50% pass rate at university and also obtain a teacher
                  training diploma. This year, because of the influx of
                  applicants, a written test is required before interviews
                  are conducted. The teacher-student ratio is 25 to 1.


                  Political support has been given to this scheme and the
                  Constitution has been amended to give local authorities
                  autonomy over these schools. This scheme is considered to
                  be a small effort to improve state education in rural
                  areas.


         4. Meeting with Sports Authority of India (SAI)


              The government is trying to promote sports development through
              a number of schemes implemented by the SAI.


              (1) SAI schemes


                  (a)  National Sports Talent Contest Scheme (NSTC)


                       In order to tap the rural youth, this body scouts for
                       talented children and supports them with regard to
                       their diet and school expenses.


                  (b)  Special Area Games (SAG) Scheme


                       This scheme is implemented to scout and nurture
                       natural talent for competitive sports from tribal and
                       rural areas of the country where genetically gifted
                       individuals are located.


                  (c)  SAI Training Centres (STC) Scheme


                       These centres select individuals based on a battery
                       of tests and on merit, where they undergo in-house
                       training with modern facilities and qualified
                       coaches.


                  (d)  Centre for Excellence


                       This is an extension of the STC Scheme, and it
                       attracts and trains meritorious sportspersons with
                       the potential for achieving international excellence.


              (2) Schemes of Ministry


                  (a)  Infrastructure Schemes


                       Through these schemes, the Ministry provides grants
                       for the creation of sports infrastructure, for rural
                       schools to purchase sports equipment and to develop
                       playgrounds, as well as for the construction of sport
                       facilities at universities and colleges.


                  (b)  National Sports Federations (NSFs)


                       Financial assistance is also provided to NSFs for
                       training their teams and arranging tournaments.


                  (c)  Sports Scholarship Scheme


                       This scheme was launched with a view to assisting
                       talented individuals as a result of their outstanding
                       performances in sport. There is also a special
                       scholarship for women who excel in sport.


                  (d)  National Sports Development Fund


                       This fund was set up with the view to mobilising the
                       government, the private sector and individuals for
                       the development of sports in the country.
                  (e)  Rural Sports Programmes


                       The objective of this scheme is to create general
                       consciousness and support mass participation in
                       sports in rural areas in order to strengthen sport at
                       grass roots level and to provide opportunities to the
                       rural youth. Rural sports tournaments for selected
                       disciplines such as archery, tug of war,etc, are
                       organised by the state from its own resources.


                  (f)  Recreation Sports Programmes


                       The aim is to promote and develop general sports
                       disciplines identified by the government (like go-
                       carting, bowling, ice skating). Co-operation with the
                       private sector is important to ensure that facilities
                       are built.


                  The delegation also paid a courtesy visit to the Minister
                  of State and Youth Sports, the Hon Mr Shahnawaz. He
                  emphasised that the mere fact that the Department of
                  Sport had been upgraded to a Ministry, showed the state's
                  interest and the value attached to the promotion of
                  sport.


         5. National Innovation Foundation (NIF)


              (1) Philosophy


                  The NIF was established 11 years ago due to the fact that
                  the respect for Indigenous Knowledge Systems (IKS) was
                  dying. It recognises that modern medicine is of great
                  value, yet at the same time it is important to preserve
                  indigenous knowledge and shows the determination of the
                  Indian government to make India a global leader in
                  grassroots technology.


              (2) Objectives


                  (a)  To help India become a global leader in sustainable
                       technologies.
                  (b)  To ensure evolution and diffusion of grassroots
                       innovations so as to meet the socio-economic and
                       environmental needs of the society.


                  (c)  To provide support and to ensure self-reliance
                       through competitive innovation-based enterprises.


                  (d)  To evolve strategies and conduct and support
                       research.


                  (e)  To build links between excellence in formal
                       scientific systems and informal knowledge systems.


                  (f)  To promote wider social awareness through the
                       educational curriculum, development policies and
                       programmes.


              (3) Methods used


                  Two kinds of IKS have been recognised: Traditional
                  knowledge and contemporary innovations. The promotion of
                  IKS is encouraged. The following methods are used:


                  (a)  Scouting and dissemination.


                  (b)  Coverting innovation into products.


                  (c)  Reward and compensation.


                  (d)  Greater knowledge network.


              (4) Honey Bee Project


                  This is a knowledge centre/network, pooling solutions
                  developed by people from different sectors throughout the
                  country and the world and creating links between informal
                  and formal science. This project has collected over 10
                  000 examples of contemporary innovations in addition to
                  the examples of the use of traditional local knowledge in
                  the sustainable management of natural and other
                  resources. These innovations are shared with local
                  communities and individuals and in other countries
                  through the Honey Bee newsletter, which is published in
                  eight different languages. This network has also created
                  new standards of accountability and ethics in dealing
                  with grassroots innovations. The formal sector is not
                  allowed to use this indigenous knowledge without
                  acknowledgement, citation and prior consent of the
                  individuals involved. Similarly, the documentation and
                  dissemination of these innovations must take place in
                  local languages and without exhausting the intellectual
                  property rights of innovative communities and
                  individuals.


              (5) Society for Research and Initiatives for Sustainable
                  Technologies and Institutions (SRISTI)


                  SRISTI was established in 1993 to essentially sustain the
                  Honey Bee newsletter and associated research and action
                  activities.
              (6) Grass Innovation Augmentation Network (GIAN)


                  A need exist to link IKS with modern medicine, although
                  at the moment there are not sufficient funds to do this.
                  The government, for the purpose of raising funds for IKS-
                  related programmes, has established the GIAN. GIAN
                  attempts to establish links between grassroots
                  innovators, entrepreneurs and investors to scale up
                  potential green innovations through commercial and non-
                  commercial channels.


              (7) Recommendations to South Africa


                  To ensure that the development and promotion of IKS
                  becomes a reality, Prof Anil Gupta made the following
                  recommendations:


                  (a)  Set up a National Research Foundation and promote
                       the following ideals: Ethics, environment,
                       excellence, equity, efficiency and education.


                  (b)  Organise competitions and mobilise students to scout
                       on a national campaign.


                  (c)  Use the media to achieve these aims.


                  (d)  build upon sustainability.


                  (e)  Make use of a micro-venture fund, which will convert
                       small products into huge ones.


         6. Discussion on education and curriculum development


              Due to the fact that primary education is a State competency,
              many new models in education are being tested by different
              states. Many states have accepted that education cannot
              prosper without the involvement of the community. Thus, there
              is a move in some states towards this approach. Village
              education committees are being formed, parents being
              encouraged to get involved in the education of their children.


              One major problem is teacher representation. The teacher-
              student ratio ranges from 1 to 40 in some cases to 1 to 100 in
              others. In many instances, teachers can be teaching up to six
              classes at one time. A system of students teaching other
              students has been introduced to make up for the lack of
              teachers in some areas. In 1970, teachers also started a
              process of teaching in shifts in order to combat the problem
              of the lack of teachers. In addition, use was made of
              unemployed graduates (not necessarily with teacher
              qualifications) who were given a training programme and paid a
              third of a teacher's salary, with no benefits. The government
              has not been too successful in cracking down on absenteeism of
              teachers, as the unions representing these teachers are
              regarded as very powerful. Both parents and students are
              interviewed before students are accepted at any school. This
              ensures that any problems and concerns are ironed out and also
              inculcates a culture of learning by ensuring that parental
              involvement in the student's education is ongoing.


              (1) Funding


                  Scholarships are available to any student who is able to
                  qualify for higher education. In the state of Gujaraat,
                  education is free for women up to college level. The
                  government practices affirmative action policies, as
                  22,5% of the seats to the top educational institutions
                  are reserved for socio-economically disadvantaged
                  students.


                  Absenteeism was combatted in many schools by introducing
                  a system of providing free meals to students, especially
                  in rural areas. School attendance increased from 35% to
                  90%.


                  National literacy campaigns were conducted and
                  recommendations was made that the education system needed
                  to change in order to make students interested in
                  reading. In addition, it was recommended that one
                  vocational subject e.g. woodwork, art etc. should be
                  compulsory, the curriculum should be developed to
                  accommodate local knowledge and custom e.g. story telling
                  etc. and that non-formal education should compliment
                  formal education.


         7. Interactive session with Unesco


              The main objective of Unesco is to contribute to world peace
              and security by promoting collaboration among nations through
              education, science, culture and communication.


              The New Delhi office of Unesco was established in 1948, its
              main objective being to achieve basic literacy and education
              for all in India.


              Programmes
              (1) Primary Education Project


                  This programme provides child-friendly education to
                  underprivileged children, especially girls, and focuses
                  on improving their attendance and performance at school.
                  The programme strives to enhance community participation
                  in education and to ensure that the community take
                  responsibility for the quality of school education. The
                  goal is to improve the motivation, self-esteem and
                  performance of primary school teachers and develop
                  interactive methods of teaching. Social factors affecting
                  the performance and attendance of students are also
                  addressed.


              (2) Special Education Programme


                  This programme tries to bring culture to the forefront
                  and to ensure that the creative potential of individuals
                  are developed in order for them to sustain themselves.
                  Special projects are developed to train rural women to
                  use simple technics to improve the quality of their life.


              (3) Special Needs Education Programme


                  The education of children with disabilities is of great
                  concern at both national and district level. All
                  educational institutions are charged with the
                  responsibility of taking care of children with
                  disabilities. Residential camps have been arranged, where
                  teachers and parents receive training on how to deal with
                  these children. Most children gained enormously in self-
                  confidence, whilst the community, in turn, was sensitised
                  to treat these children with dignity.


              (4) Teacher Education


                  Programmes have been implemented to improve the quality
                  of teaching by providing training for teachers in,
                  amongst other things, information technology, management
                  issues, etc. Unesco has identified a need to transform
                  teacher education by involving the use of technology.


              (5) Distance Education Programme


                  The aim of this programme is to improve the education
                  system in respect of higher and distance education by
                  making use of satellite-based education programmes. In
                  addition, an Interactive Television (ITV) Pilot Project,
                  aimed at training and upgrading teaching skills of
                  primary school teachers, has been launched in Gujarat.


              (6) HIV/AIDS


                  In India, 3,5 million people have been diagnosed with
                  HIV/AIDS. An educational approach is followed in order to
                  create awareness in respect of this illness and
                  destigmatise the disease in the eyes of the public.
                  Projects have been launched in collaboration with NGOs to
                  interact with teachers and students with the objective to
                  raise awareness among young people on HIV/AIDS and to
                  promote safer sex practices.


              (7) Street Children Project


                  Under this project, street children are being targeted
                  with the aim to enrol them in schools and thereby lower
                  the dropout rate, which vary from state to state and
                  range from 40% to 45% nationally. In addition, these
                  children are taught life skills in order to take care of
                  themselves later. India has the largest number of child
                  labour, and Unesco has highlighted the areas of concern,
                  and is trying to eliminate this practice with joint
                  programmes and activities with the relevant role-players.
                  In addition, children who were formerly working and are
                  now in school, will be coached and counselled to ensure
                  that they continue their education.


     D.     Meetings in Malaysia


         1. Courtesy call to Deputy Speaker: Parliament House


              The Deputy Speaker welcomed members of the delegation and gave
              a brief overview of the history of Malaysia and the functions
              of its Parliament.


         2. Ministry of Education


              The vision of the government for the year 2020 is to develop a
              well-balanced student (emotionally, intellectually,
              spiritually as well as physically strong individuals) in order
              to ensure a world-class quality education system.


              The literacy rate in Malaysia is 93,7%. Education is the
              responsibility of the federal government, and the national
              education system encompasses education from pre-school to
              higher education. Primary and secondary education is free but
              not compulsory.


              A training institute for principals attached to the University
              of Malaysia has been implemented. The experienced or
              "excellent principals" are sent to schools identified as
              problem areas in order to improve their performance. These
              principals are rewarded by way of salary increments and
              promotions. Due to the big schools, sessions are held both in
              the morning and in the afternoon. A prefect system and parent-
              teacher associations are in place to ensure that students and
              parents play a role in the administration of the school.


              The Curriculum Development Centre has the task to come up with
              guidelines for one common curriculum for the country, to which
              all schools should adhere. The aim of the government is to
              engage 60% of the students of the country in the science and
              technology field, whilst 40% will study the social sciences.
         3. Smart School Concept


              A "Smart School Concept" was implemented in conjunction with
              the private sector, where use is made of technology to teach
              students. This was a move to transform a culture of memory-
              based, examination-orientated learning to a thinking, creative
              and problem-solving culture. Greater emphasis is placed on
              student-directed learning and flexibility on target-learning
              activities to the specific needs and abilities of individual
              students. Teachers merely facilitate education and do not
              "teach" in the conventional sense. Assessment is geared to
              enable students to be assessed when they are ready, thus
              enabling them to graduate from school at a younger age.


         4. Funding


              The government funds education, although a political party
              could also fund it. The government has also set up a National
              Higher Education Fund to provide loans and scholarships for
              deserving students.


         5. Initiatives


              In rural areas food programmes are implemented to ensure that
              children remain in school. Students are also given free
              textbooks for as long as their parents keep them in school.
              There is also a great demand for pre-schools to be opened in
              primary schools, especially in rural areas. The government has
              also initiated programmes of distance learning as well as
              adult education to facilitate the development in education,
              especially in rural areas.


         6. Meeting with multimedia development corporation (MDC)


              MDC provides a consultancy and an advisory service to
              companies to help them to become world-class competitors in
              technology. Legislation has been passed in Malaysia to ensure
              that technology remains the primary concern of the country. An
              Internal Advisory Panel (IAP) sits annually and determines
              directions for these companies.


              MDC has implemented a strategy to create an ideal multimedia
              environment to attract world-class competitors.


         7. Vision


              (1) To successfully create a multimedia super-corridor.


              (2) To link MDC and other cyber cities internationally.


              (3) To transform Malaysia into a knowledge society.


         8. A company would have to meet the following criteria in order to
              have participation status:


              (1) Prove that it is a provider or heavy user of multimedia
                  products and services.
              (2) Employ a substantial number of knowledged workers (15%)
                  with five years' working experience.


              (3) Possess a strong value basis and specify how its
                  operations will contribute to the development of the MSC
                  and Malaysia.


              (4) Establish a separate legal entity.
              (5) Latch on to an MSC designated Cybercity.


              (6) Comply with environmental guidelines.


              The MDC plays a major role in the development and
              implementation of the "Smart School Concept" by introducing IT
              programmes in schools. The Minister of Education has piloted
              190 Smart Schools, and has encouraged private sector and
              community participation in this project. An improvement of an
              average of 40% in the results of students has been observed
              due to the introduction of technology into the school
              curriculum.
         9. Meeting with Multimedia University


              This private university was established in March 1997 by
              Telekom Malaysia and approved by the Cabinet to spearhead two
              areas: Private higher education and multimedia education.


              (1) Objective


                  The objective of this University is to create an
                  environment in which multimedia education can be
                  conducted in its widest sense and provides a spectrum of
                  teaching and research in multimedia and IT systems.


              (2) Vision


                  The vision of the University is to ensure that every
                  policy implemented has to be economically viable and that
                  it attains world-class status without delay.


              (3) Features


                  It boasts a multicultural, multinational campus, which
                  includes 40 South African students and which allows for
                  people from all over the world to share their ideas. All
                  courses are online and students can download lecture
                  material. It collaborates internationally. It is
                  supported by the private sector and is market- and
                  industry-driven. It promotes borderless thinking and a
                  creative campus environment. Student and staff are able
                  to set up their own companies in the National Incubator
                  Centre. Programmes are implemented for the development of
                  youth in IT.


              (4) Operating Principles


                  (a)  A standard of excellence should be maintained.


                  (b)  Competent personnel should be employed (95% of
                       academic staff have masters degrees).


                  (c)  It should be performance-orientated.


                  (d)  Activities should be open and transparent.


                  (e)  All courses should be cost-effective and approved by
                       the National Accreditation Board.


              (5) Assessment of staff


                  Academic staff are assessed in the following areas:


                  (a)  Teaching should be above average (assessment of
                       3,0).


                  (b)  Research and supervision abilities.


                  (c)  Staff are required to work with the private sector
                       in respect of consultative work.


                  (d)  Staff are required to publish in renowned journals.


                  (e)  They should have administrative skills.


              (6) Funding


                  The government has implemented a National Higher
                  Education Fund to fund deserving students. In addition,
                  the University also implements programmes to collect
                  funds for students. The loans given to students will have
                  to be paid back on completion of their studies, at a 4%
                  interest rate, which in turn allows for more profit to be
                  made.


         10.     Meeting with National Economic Action Plan Committee


              In 1997 the Malaysian economy experienced a financial crisis,
              which resulted in a steep depreciation of the Ringgit and the
              collapse of the stock market. As a result, the National
              Economic Action Council (NEAC) was established as a
              consultative body to the Cabinet, to deal with economic
              problems and to restore the economy of Malaysia. The NEAC
              prepared the National Economic Recovery Plan in order to
              provide a comprehensive framework for economic recovery.


         11.     Philosophy


              The NEAC promotes a mixed economic system of free enterprise,
              but with active government support and direction.


         12.     Objectives of Recovery Plan


              (1) To stabilise the Ringgit.


              (2) To restore market confidence.


              (3) To maintain financial market stability.


              (4) To strengthen economic fundamentals (like increasing the
                  quality of investments and labour competitiveness).
              (5) To continue with the equity and socio-economic agenda.


              (6) To restore and revive adversely affected sectors.


         13.     Approach of government


              (1) Raised interest rates to attract capital.
              (2) Reduced government spending.


              (3) Lower bank credit expansion.


              (4) Shut down ailing firms/banks.


              (5) Removed subsidies.


              The result of the abovementioned approach was that Malaysia is
              now experiencing a stable economy with a very low inflation
              rate, positive outputs and growth. In addition, moderate tax
              rates and low interest rates are the norm. It also resulted in
              the expanding of trade and strong corporate restructuring.
              Since 1969 the government has implemented poverty alleviation
              strategies by providing basic amenities (granting free
              education up to form 5, free health services, etc). In
              addition, creating more jobs and privatisation of the economy
              liberated the rural poor. International companies are able to
              operate in Malaysia with a 10-year tax-free concession.
              Although these companies do not contribute much to the
              economy, they do create jobs for the Malaysians. The
              government provides housing loans, and banks are instructed to
              regard housing as a priority. Employees are also forced to
              contribute 10% of their salary to an Employment Programme
              Fund, whilst the employer contributes 11%. These savings can
              only be accessed when employees reach old age or when they
              need to purchase a house. In some rural areas the government
              also provides water and electricity at subsidy costs, whilst
              in urban areas these services are provided at market costs.


         14.     Meeting with Malaysian Indian Congress (MIC)


              The MIC is a political party that was established in 1946 to
              represent the Malaysian Indian community in the federal, state
              and local governments of Malaysia.


              (1) Influence in education


                  (a)  The Maju Institute of Educational Development (MIED)
                       was established with the task of setting up
                       educational and training institutions, providing
                       financial assistance to students to pursue higher
                       education and supporting those who do not get places
                       locally to obtain higher education overseas.


                  (b)  It collaborates internationally and establishes
                       joint ventures with nine foreign universities and
                       institutions.


                  (c)  Tafe College was established to encourage urban-
                       based Indians to pursue higher education, especially
                       those from squatter settlements.


                  (d)  It also conducts educational recovery programmes
                       every Saturday to strengthen the academic performance
                       of Indian students in high school.


                  (e)  A Women's College was established to further the
                       education standards of women.


                  (f)  They are also in the process of establishing a
                       private university in conjunction with the private
                       sector to ensure that more students are able to study
                       at tertiary level.


              (2) Funding


                  It raises funds from different sources, namely from its
                  members, via donations as well as through lottery
                  earnings. Students pay back loans at 4% interest, which
                  also allows the MIC a profit margin of 150% per month.
                  Most financial assistance comes through the loan scheme,
                  although a bursary system does exist. It also raises
                  funds through investments, corporate society, etc.


                  The MIC holds the view that its contribution to the
                  education system is for the well-being of the country as
                  a whole and not for Indians alone. In order to promote
                  racial unity, these universities are not only confined to
                  Indian students, but are multi-cultural in nature and
                  adheres to the policy of government by allowing a 7-8%
                  quota for Indian students at the universities.


         15.     Meeting with BAE systems


              The role of this body is to foster relationships between the
              Malaysian government and relevant organisations and to provide
              marketing support in respect of education, health, industrial
              development and youth and sports programmes. Areas of
              involvement include the following:


              (1) Education


                  (a)  It provided support to national "Smart Schools",
                       where the focus shifts from a teacher-centred
                       approach to a student-centred approach.


                  (b)  It initiated collaboration between the British
                       Malaysian Institute (BMI) and the Malaysian
                       government to set up a vocational college. Provided
                       financial support and expert assistance to BMI and co-
                       manages the development of the present campus.


                  (c)  It initiated collaboration with the International
                       Islamic University in respect of automotive and
                       aerospace engineering.


                  (d)  It provided support in the form of developmental
                       programmes, IT training programmes and human resource
                       management to the new project being implemented by
                       the University of Sains Malaysia.
              (2) Health Programmes


                  (a)  It has initiated cardiac programmes with the
                       National Heart Institute and fostered similar
                       programmes with the UK.


                  (b)  It works with the government to develop an
                       electronic hospital programme as well as a mobile
                       one.


              (3) Industrial Development Programmes


                  It provides support in the development of industry and
                  facilitates the transfer of technology to Malaysia from
                  other countries.
              (4) Youth and Sport Development Programmes


                  It supports sports programmes in conjunction with the
                  National Sports Council (like a series of research of
                  activities such as biokinetics). In addition, it supports
                  the Rakan Muda Aviation Camp run by the Sports Ministry,
                  to ensure the involvement of youth in sport.


              (5) Other Programmes


                  Certain socio-economic programmes are linked to South
                  Africa.


                  (a)  Schools Programme


                       BAE is in the process of providing support as well as
                       training to teachers of the following schools:


                       (i)   Qisiuisan Senior secondary (KwaZulu-Natal).
                       (ii)  Moefi Senior Secondary (North-West).


                       (iii) Kromhoek Junior Secondary School (Eastern
                             Cape).


                       (iv)  Kwa Ntisikana Junior Secondary School
                             (Orlando).


                  (b)  Public Service Programme


                       They are developing training programmes for SAMDI in
                       order to develop an institution similar to that found
                       in Malaysia.


                       BAE Systems are also in the process of discussing the
                       establishment of an Industrial Business Park, a
                       Centre for Advanced Technology and a Telehealth
                       programme.


         16.     Meeting with Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA)


              MARA was established in 1966 and is the Council of Trust for
              the Indigenous People of Malaysia, with the objective to
              promote, motivate, guide, train and assist the indigenous
              people of Malaysia (Bumiputeras) to enable them to participate
              actively and progressively in commercial and industrial
              activities. MARA is a statutory body created with the
              responsibility to promote economic development. Its primary
              objective is to eradicate poverty through strategies of
              economic development.


              (1) Vision


                  Its vision for the year 2020 is to strive towards
                  industrialism and to create and increase Bumiputera
                  entrepreneurship.


              (2) Main Activities


                  It provides entrepreneurs with counselling activities and
                  provides a wide range of training and advisory services.
                  It provides small and medium businesses with finance to
                  start or upgrade their businesses. The credit financing
                  scheme provides facilities for projects operating
                  directly in the manufacturing field, and also caters for
                  the development of business infrastructure (the building
                  of business premises for rental to the Bumiputera
                  community). Rental of these businesses is almost 30% less
                  than the current rate. It also provides a Rural Transport
                  Service to fulfil the need to link remote villages with
                  urban centres.


              (3) Other Activities


                  An Education and Training Programme was launched with the
                  ultimate aim of channelling Bumiputera students into
                  areas of study and skill pertinent to the world of
                  commerce and industry. In addition, it established
                  training institutes geared towards producing sufficient
                  skilled and semi-skilled Bumiputera human resources. It
                  also provides informal institutional training in selected
                  vocational areas pertinent to the needs of the rural
                  community. MARA provides students with interest-free
                  loans to enable them to pursue a tertiary education.


              (4) Funding


                  These programmes are fully initiated and funded by the
                  government.


         17.     Meeting with British Malaysian Institute (BMI)


              BMI is Malaysia's leading engineering institution, the result
              of a partnership between the Malaysian and British
              governments. The Malaysian government provides the
              infrastructure and staff, whilst the British provide support
              and expertise from companies such as British Airways in the
              fields of engineering and technical education.


              (1) Objectives


                  The objectives are to provide an alternative route to
                  higher levels of learning and training, facilitating the
                  transfer of modern technology and contributing towards
                  the prosperity of other developing communities.


                  BMI is in the process of providing training programmes to
                  South Africa in the form of the Centre for Advanced
                  Technology (CAT). It is proposed that three types of
                  programmes will be run in the CAT:


                  (a)  Basic skills programme: Duration - three months.


                  (b)  Artisan programmes: Duration: Two to two and a half
                       years.


                  (c)  Technician/technologist programmes: Duration - one
                       year.


                  These programmes are designed to ensure that successful
                  applicants can become self-employed. They were developed
                  in line with the South African Qualifications Authority
                  (SAQA). In addition, successfully competent artisans can
                  take up higher-level posts in the industry with the
                  relevant training provided by BMI. This project can
                  accommodate 3 000 students, with a budget of 483,5
                  million rands over five years, and the aim is to create a
                  close working relationship with the local community to
                  ensure that most people trained are able to set up
                  projects to serve the community.




         18.     Meeting with Department of Aborigines Affairs


              The indigenous people of Malaysia, the "Orang Asli", make up
              0,5% of the total population. Due to geographical, social,
              psychological and cultural factors, the Orang Asli has had a
              low percentage of socio-economic success. For this reason, the
              Department of Aborigines Affairs was established in 1953 to
              look after their affairs and protect them.
              The Aboriginal Act of 1954 (revised in 1974) provides for the
              protection and well-being of Aborigines, and states that the
              Commissioner is responsible for their development.


              (1) Objectives


                  (a)  To reduce/eradicate poverty.


                  (b)  To improve the quality of life of the Orang Asli.


                  (c)  To upgrade health standards.


                  (d)  To upgrade the community to ensure that they become
                       self-reliant.


                  (e)  To maintain and promote arts and culture.


                  (f)  To ensure greater participation of the Orang Asli in
                       industrial and commercial sectors.


                  (g)  To upgrade the Department as a highly creditable,
                       efficient and effective agency.


              (2) Developmental Programmes introduced


                  (a)  Economic Programmes - to uplift the economic status
                       of the Orang Asli (it includes the co-operation of
                       the private sector).


                  (b)  Social Programmes - to facilitate better living
                       conditions and a good quality of life, and to ensure
                       that they become self-reliant and independent.


                  (c)  Other Programmes:


                       (i)   Research and information - to instil an
                             understanding and awareness among the Orang
                             Asli of government policies and a need for
                             education.
                       (ii)  Human Resource Development - to provide
                             training facilities and increase knowledge and
                             skills of the youth.


                       (iii) Health and Medical Services - to provide good
                             medical services to the community.


              (3) Land Reform


                  Policies have been implemented to compensate the Orang
                  Asli for their 113 000 acres of land.


              (4) Staffing


                  A third of the staff of the Department consists of the
                  Orang Asli community.


              (5) Language


                  The Orang Asli is encouraged to speak their local
                  language, although the children are taught in the
                  national language (Basha Malay) of Malaysia.


         19.     Meeting with Ministry of Science and Technology


              The rich biological resources have given rise to a rich
              cultural heritage of sustainable use amongst the indigenous
              people of Malaysia. These elements are reflected in handcraft
              and in the use of forest plants and animals.


              The Ministry of Science and Technology has identified the
              value of the protection of Indigenous Knowledge Systems and
              has implemented a legal framework in this regard in order to
              prevent the exploitation of such knowledge. At both national
              and state level regular meetings take place to plan programmes
              and strategies for the country in the promotion of research on
              science and technology. The Department has recognised the role
              of the local communities and the need to upgrade the standard
              of living of people with indigenous knowledge. Research has
              shown that pharmaceutical products produce the biggest revenue
              in Malaysia. Efforts are made to protect the patent rights of
              these people and to ensure that they receive their rightful
              share of the benefits. In addition, this Department is also
              trying to encourage the processing of ethnic medicines in a
              modern way so that it can be marketed commercially.


              The Ministry of Science and Technology has initiated the
              following plan of action:


              (1) Initiate long-term studies on demographic, genetic and
                  environmental variation of indigenous species.


              (2) Improve the scientific knowledge base by establishing an
                  inventory of traditional knowledge.


              (3) Encourage private sector participation through
                  privatisation projects.


              (4) Encourage the exchange of information.
              (5) Establish funding mechanisms.


         20.     Meeting with Malaysian Industry Government Group for High
              Tech (MIGHT)


              MIGHT is a governmental body with the function to examine
              globalisation and its impact on Malaysia as well as the
              international community in general.


              The main objective of MIGHT is to develop a "high tech"
              economy by harnessing new technology and to generate new
              sources of economic growth. It is currently co-ordinating the
              preparation of a National Action Plan that will draw up
              strategies and programmes to make Malaysia an international
              manufacturing, research, development and trading centre for
              herbal products. At present, most of the herbal products
              available in Malaysia are being imported. This situation is
              unsatisfactory to the government of Malaysia, and they have
              tried to remedy the situation by implementing policies to
              promote this industry, increasing human resource development
              in this area of expertise, developing sufficient technology
              and increasing business opportunities for new and existing
              players in the market. Local companies with different racial
              backgrounds are chosen as key players in the development of
              these products and pay a subscription fee to be part of MIGHT.
              In addition, the government charges a 30% tax levy on these
              businesses. The opportunities generated is huge and varied in
              that it allows for the development of new and improved
              products, enhancement of packaging technology, use of
              technology to improve genetic materials, increase in foreign
              exchange and also the creation of employment. The government
              is trying to integrate traditional medicine with modern
              medicine. However, in order to ensure uniformity, all
              traditional healers are subject to one common Control Body,
              which ensures that they are registered and have been tested by
              the Ministry of Health. The government have also implemented
              mechanisms to protect the patent rights of individuals to the
              medicines created by them.
     E.     Recommendations


         As regards South Africa, the Committee recommends as follows:


         1. Education


              (1) To intensify information technology in tertiary, secondary
                  as well as primary education.


              (2) To intensify information technology support systems for
                  educators.


              (3) To promote science and technology in all institutions of
                  learning.


              (4) To promote and incorporate cultural norms and standards in
                  all spheres of education.


         2. Sport


              (1) Developmental sport should originate from school level in
                  order to prepare the incumbent for national and
                  international competition.


              (2) Physical education should be a top priority for South
                  African schools.
              (3) Emphasis should be placed on the development of sports
                  facilities and the promotion and facilitation of sport
                  activities in order to promote career pathing.


         3. Arts, culture, science and technology


              (1) To ensure the development and promotion of Indigenous
                  Knowledge Systems by building linkages between formal
                  scientific systems and informal knowledge systems.


              (2) To promote and create strategies to ensure self-reliance
                  through competitive innovation-based enterprises.

                          MONDAY, 18 DECEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Short title of Act No 8 of 2000 and of Act No 70 of 2000:


     (1)    The Tourism Amendment Bill [B 3 - 2000], which was introduced
         early in 2000, was passed by both Houses in March 2000. After the
         President had assented to it, it became Act No 8 of 2000, with the
         short title: Tourism Amendment Act, 2000.


     (2)    The Tourism Amendment Bill [B 50F - 99], which was introduced in
         1999, was passed by both Houses in November 2000. After the
         President had assented to it, it became Act No 70 of 2000, with
         the short title: Tourism Second Amendment Act, 2000.

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Finance on 29 November 2000 submitted a draft of
         the Pension Funds Amendment Bill, 2001, as well as the memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance by the Speaker and the Chairperson,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


          Cross-Border Insolvency Bill [B 4B - 2000] - Act No 42 of 2000
          (assented to and signed by President on 8 December 2000);


          Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Bill [B 53B - 2000] - Act No 63
          of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 8 December 2000);
          and


          South African Rail Commuter Corporation Limited Financial
          Arrangements Bill [B 64 - 2000] - Act No 64 of 2000 (assented to
          and signed by President on 8 December 2000).

4.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Housing and to the Select Committee on Public Services:


         Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
         Corporation Limited for 1999-2000.


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport and to the Select Committee on Public Services:


         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
         Aviation Authority for 1999-2000.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     (1)    Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal Commission and
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         the Financial and Fiscal Commission for 1996-97.


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
         Commission for 1998-99, including the Reports of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 1997-98 and for 1998-99.


     (3)    Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal Commission and
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         the Financial and Fiscal Commission for 1999-2000.

2.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Rider No 2 to the Financing Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the European Commission
         concerning the Cato Manor Development Programme, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Project Grant Agreement Amendment Number Three between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the United States of America acting through the United States
         Agency for International Development for the Municipal
         Infrastructure Investment Framework (MIIF) Program, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    Amendment Number Two of the Bilateral Agreement between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the United States of America acting through the United States
         Agency for International Development for the Local Government
         Support Program, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government and to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.


     (4)    Rider No 1 to the Financing Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the European Commission
         concerning Reinforcing South Africa's Participation in the Maize
         and Wheat Improvement Research Network (MWIRNET), tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (5)    Grant Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the United States of America acting
         through the United States Agency for the Increased Commercial
         Viability of Existing Small and Medium Agribusiness, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
         Affairs and to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry.
         Referred also to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
         Affairs and to the Select Committee on Economic Affairs.


     (6)    Bilateral Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of the United States of America
         acting through the United States Agency for International
         Development on Skills Development, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour and to the Select
         Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.


     (7)    Grant Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the United States of America acting
         through the United States Agency for International Development on
         Fiscal Management of Urban Environmental Infrastructure, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
         Tourism and to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government. Referred also to the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs and to the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration.


     (8)    Grant Agreement Amendment Number Four between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
         States of America acting through the United States Agency for
         International Development for the Primary Education Results
         Package (formerly the South Africa Basic Education Reconstruction
         Project), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


     (9)    Project Grant Agreement Amendment Number Five between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the United States of America acting through the United States
         Agency for International Development for the Tertiary Education
         Linkages Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (10)   Grant Agreement Amendment Number Three between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
         States of America acting through the United States Agency for
         International Development for the Support to Tertiary Education
         Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Education and to the Select
         Committee on Education and Recreation.


     (11)   Grant Agreement Amendment Number Three between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
         States of America acting through the United States Agency for
         International Development for the Support for Economic Growth and
         Analysis and Mandela Economics Scholars Program, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Education. Referred also to the Select
         Committee on Finance and to the Select Committee on Education and
         Recreation.


     (12)   Project Grant Agreement Amendment Number Three between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa acting through the
         Ministry of Health and the Government of the United States of
         America acting through the United States Agency for International
         Development for the Equity in Integrated Primary Health Care
         Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health and to the Select
         Committee on Social Services.


     (13)   Project Grant Agreement Amendment Number Three between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa acting through the
         Ministry of Health and the Government of the United States of
         America acting through the United States Agency for International
         Development for the Institutional Development Program under the
         Shelter and Urban Development Support Project (SUDS) and
         Environmentally Sustainable Housing and Urban Development Project
         (ESHUD), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing and to the Select
         Committee on Public Services.


     (14)   Project Grant Agreement Amendment Number Five between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the United States of America acting through the United States
         Agency for International Development for the Administration of
         Justice Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and to the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs.


     (15)   Government Notice No R.1112 published in Government Gazette No
         21726 dated 8 November 2000, Regulations relating to banks, made
         in terms of section 90 of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


     (16)   Government Notice No R.1149 published in Government Gazette No
         21751 dated 10 November 2000, Amendment of the Rules of the
         Government Employees Pension Fund Law, 1996, made in terms of
         section 29 and 6A of the Government Employees Pension Law, 1996
         (Proclamation 21 of 1996).
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Finance.

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Government Notice No 4477 published in Government Gazette No 21778
     dated 24 November 2000, Establishment of the Greater St Lucia Wetland
     Park and Authority, made in terms of the World Heritage Conservation
     Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).

                           MONDAY, 22 JANUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bills have been introduced in the National
         Assembly since 1 January 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Financial Intelligence Centre Bill [B 1 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance -
              National Assembly) (introduced on 8 January 2001) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 21513 of 29 August 2000.]


         (ii)    South African Sports Commission Amendment Bill [B 2 -
              2001] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Sport and Recreation - National Assembly) (introduced on 22
              January 2001) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of
              its introduction published in Government Gazette No 21549 of
              15 September 2000.]


     (2)    The Minister of Finance on 11 January 2001 submitted a draft of
         the Pension Funds Second Amendment Bill, 2001, and the memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Finance,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled on 18 December 2000 and are now
     referred to the relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. They are also
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance for information:


         (a)     Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
              Commission and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal Commission
              for 1996-97.


         (b)     Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
              Commission and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal Commission
              for 1999-2000.


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance. The reports of the
         Auditor-General contained in the following paper are referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
         report:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
         Commission and the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 1997-98 and for 1998-99.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs:


        Government Notice No 4477 published in Government Gazette No 21778
         dated 24 November 2000, Establishment of the Greater St Lucia
         Wetland Park and Authority, made in terms of the World Heritage
         Conservation Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
         Unit for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 1999-2000.


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
         Language Board for 1999-2000.

                          TUESDAY, 23 JANUARY 2001

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Truth and Reconciliation Commission for 1999-2000 [RP 180-2000].


     (2)    Interim Report of the Auditor-General on Transversal
         Environmental Audit of certain aspects of Freshwater Resources and
         Water Services [RP 181-2000].


     (3)    Performance Audit Report of the Auditor-General completed at the
         Public Investment Commissioners [RP 172-2000].


     (4)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         South African Human Rights Commission for 1999-2000 [RP 187-2000].


     (5)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         South African Medical Research Council for 1999-2000 [RP 177-
         2000].


     (6)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Meat Board for 1998 [RP 186-2000].

                          THURSDAY, 25 JANUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 25
     January 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
     classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         Unemployment Insurance Bill [B 3 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
         75) - (Portfolio Committee on Labour - National Assembly)
         [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction
         published in Government Gazette No 21563 of 11 September 2000.]

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled on 22 January 2001 and are now
     referred to the relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Select Committee
         on Security and Constitutional Affairs. The Report of the Auditor-
         General contained in the following paper is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
         report:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating Unit
         for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 1999-2000.


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts, Culture, Science and Technology and to the Select Committee
         on Education and Recreation:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African Language
         Board for 1999-2000.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:
1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance Limited for
     1999-2000.

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Veterinary Council
     for 1999-2000.

                         WEDNESDAY, 31 JANUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled and are now referred to the relevant
     committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs for information:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission for 1999-2000 [RP
              180-2000].


         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the South African Human Rights Commission for 1999-2000 [RP
              187-2000].


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
         the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry and the
         Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs for
         information:


         Interim Report of the Auditor-General on Transversal Environmental
         Audit of certain aspects of Freshwater Resources and Water
         Services [RP 181-2000].
     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on
         Finance for information:


         Performance Audit Report of the Auditor-General completed at the
         Public Investment Commissioners [RP 172-2000].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Health and the Select Committee on
         Social Services for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         South African Medical Research Council for 1999-2000 [RP 177-
         2000].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and the
         Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs for
         information:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Meat Board for 1998 [RP 186-2000].


         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Veterinary Council for 1999-2000.


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance
         Limited for 1999-2000.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The vacancy in the representation of the Province of the Eastern Cape,
     which occurred owing to the resignation of Mr P G Qokweni with effect
     from 1 September 2000, has been filled with effect from 26 January 2001
     by the appointment of the following member:


     Sogoni, H T.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1) Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


         (a)     Findings identified during an Audit of the Salary Bill at
              National and Provincial Departments [RP 163-2000].


         (b)     Financial Statements of the President's Fund for 1998-99
              [RP 179-2000].


         (c)     Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for 1996-97,
              1997-98 and 1998-99 [RP 185-2000].


         (d)     Financial Records of the Special Pension Board for the
              period 1 December 1996 to 31 March 1999.


         (e)     Financial Statements of the Maize Board for 1999-2000 [RP
              192-2000].


     (2)    The Human Rights Commission's Second Economic and Social Rights
         Report for 1998-1999.

2.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
     Natural Scientific Professions for 1999-2000.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report of the Department of Trade and Industry for 1998-99 [RP 178-
     2000].


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the
     Select Committee on Economic Affairs.

4.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.1426 published in Government Gazette No
         21939 dated 22 December 2000, Determination of Magistrates'
         salaries for the purpose of the Magistrates' Act, 1993, made in
         terms of section 12(1) of the Magistrates' Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
         1993).


     (2)    Proclamation No R.77 published in Government Gazette No 21891
         dated 12 December 2000, Remuneration of Judges, made in terms of
         sections 2 and 10A(1) of the Judges' Remuneration and Conditions
         of Employment Act, 1989 (Act No 88 of 1989).


     (3)    Proclamation No R.78 published in Government Gazette No 21891
         dated 12 December 2000, Remuneration of Judges, made in terms of
         section 2(2)(a) of the Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of
         Employment Act, 1989 (Act No 27 of 1989) (Bophuthatswana).


     (4)    Proclamation No R.79 published in Government Gazette No 21891
         dated 12 December 2000, Remuneration of Judges, made in terms of
         sections 2 of the Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Service
         Decree, 1990 (Decree No 19 of 1990).


     (5)    Proclamation No R.73 published in Government Gazette No 21806
         dated 29 November 2000, Commencement of the Promotion of
         Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000) with the
         exception of sections 4 and 10, made in terms of section 11 of the
         Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).
     (6)    Government Notice No R.1297 published in Government Gazette No
         21814 dated 29 November 2000, Determination of salaries of Deputy
         Directors of Public Prosecutions and Prosecutors for the purposes
         of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998, made in terms of
         section 18(1) of the National Prosecuting Authority Act.


     (7)    Proclamation No R.68 published in Government Gazette No 21732
         dated 10 November 2000, Amendment of Proclamations issued under
         the Special Investigating and Special Tribunals Act, 1996, made in
         terms of section 2(4) of the Special Investigating and Special
         Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


     (8)    Proclamation No R.69 published in Government Gazette No 21742
         dated 10 November 2000, Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, made in terms of section
         2(2) of the Special Investigating and Special Tribunals Act, 1996
         (Act No 74 of 1996).


     (9)    Proclamation No R.66 published in Government Gazette No 21700
         dated 1 November 2000, Commencement of the Recognition of the
         Customary Marriages Act, 1998, made in terms of section 14 of the
         Recognition of the Customary Marriages Act, 1998 (Act No 120 of
         1998).


     (10)   Government Notice No R.1101 published in Government Gazette No
         21700 dated 1 November 2000, Regulations relating to the
         Recognition of the Customary Marriages Act, 1998, made in terms of
         section 11 of the Recognition of the Customary Marriages Act, 1998
         (Act No 120 of 1998).


     (11)   Government Notice No R.1110 published in Government Gazette No
         21719 dated 3 November 2000, Amendment to the determination of
         Professional Controlling Body in terms of section 1 and
         designation of a body for purposes of section 5 of the Contingency
         Fees Act, 1997 (Act No 66 of 1997).

5.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    Proclamation No R.59 published in Government Gazette No 21610
         dated 29 September 2000, Commencement of the Tobacco Products
         Control Amendment Act, 2000, made in terms of section 11 of the
         Tobacco Products Control Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No 12 of 1999).


     (2)    Government Notice No R.975 published in Government Gazette No
         21610 dated 29 September 2000, Notice relating to smoking of
         tobacco products in public places, made in terms of section 2 of
         the Tobacco Products Control Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No 12 of
         1999).


     (3)    Government Notice No R.974 published in Government Gazette No
         21610 dated 29 September 2000, Notice relating to the maximum
         permissible yield of tar, nicotine and other constituents in
         tobacco products, made in terms section 3A of the Tobacco Products
         Control Act, 1993 (Act No 83 of 1993).


     (4)    Government Notice No R.976 published in Government Gazette No
         21610 dated 29 September 2000, Regulations relating to the point
         of sale of tobacco products, made in terms of section 3 and 6(1)
         of the Tobacco Products Control Act, 1993 (Act No 83 of 1993).


     (5)    Government Notice No R.977 published in Government Gazette No
         21610 dated 29 September 2000, Regulations relating to provision
         for exemption for unintended consequences and phasing out of
         existing sponsorship contractual obligations, made in terms of
         section 3(5) and 6(1) of the Tobacco Products Control Act, 1993
         (Act No 83 of 1993).


     (6)    Government Notice No R.1052 published in Government Gazette No
         21671 dated 27 October 2000, Amendment of regulations relating to
         milk and dairy products, made in terms of section 15(1) of the
         Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of
         1972).


     (7)    Government Notice No R.1108 published in Government Gazette No
         21711 dated 3 November 2000, Amendment of regulations defining the
         scope of profession of optical dispensing, made in terms of
         section 33(1) of the Health Professions Council of South Africa
         Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (8)    Government Notice No R.1109 published in Government Gazette No
         21712 dated 3 November 2000, Designation of facilities for the
         surgical termination of pregnancies, made in terms of section 3 of
         the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1996 (Act No 92 of
         1996).


     (9)    Government Notice No R.1150 published in Government Gazette No
         21736 dated 17 November 2000, Regulations defining the scope of
         profession of oral hygiene, made in terms of 33(1) of the Health
         Professions Council of South Africa Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (10)   Proclamation No R.70 published in Government Gazette No 21754
         dated 20 November 2000, Commencement of sections 12, 13, 14, 15,
         16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 27, 29 and 30 of the Pharmacy Amendment
         Act, 1997, made in terms of section 46 of the Pharmacy Amendment
         Act, 1997 (Act No 88 of 1997).
     (11)   Government Notice No 1154 published in Government Gazette No
         21754 dated 20 November 2000, Date of commencement of regulations
         relating to performance of pharmaceutical community service and
         community service, made in terms of regulation 2 of Regulations
         relating to the performance of Pharmaceutical Community Service.


     (12)   Government Notice No 1155 published in Government Gazette No
         21754 dated 20 November 2000, List of approved health facilities
         for the purposes of performing community service by pharmacists in
         the year 2000, made in terms of regulation 2 of Regulations
         relating to the performance of Pharmaceutical Community Service.


     (13)   Government Notice No 1156 published in Government Gazette No
         21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulations for the pharmacy
         education and training, made in terms of section 33 and 34 of the
         Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).


     (14)   Government Notice No 1157 published in Government Gazette No
         21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulations relating to the
         performance of pharmaceutical community service, made in terms of
         section 14 and 14A of the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).


     (15)   Government Notice No 1158 published in Government Gazette No
         21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulating relating to the practice
         of pharmacy, made in terms of section 35A of the Pharmacy Act,
         1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).


     (16)   Government Notice No 1159 published in Government Gazette No
         21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulations relating to the
         management of a person registered in terms of the Pharmacy Act,
         1974, unfit to practise for reasons other than unprofessional
         conduct, made in terms of sections 4, 38 and 49(1)(q) of the
         Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).


     (17)   Government Notice No 1160 published in Government Gazette No
         21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulations relating to registration
         of persons and the maintenance of register, made in terms of
         section 14 of the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).


     (18)   Government Notice No R.1198 published in Government Gazette No
         21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating to examination
         for medical practitioners and dentists who have applied for
         registration in terms of section 26 of the Health Professions
         Council of South Africa Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).
     (19)   Government Notice No R.1199 published in Government Gazette No
         21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating to examination
         for medical practitioners and dentists applying for exemption from
         the restriction relating to their registration, made in terms of
         section 61(5) of the Health Professions Council of South Africa
         Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (20)   Government Notice No R.1200 published in Government Gazette No
         21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating to registration
         of persons as general practitioners and family physicians in
         medicine, made in terms of section 24 of the Health Professions
         Council of South Africa Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (21)   Government Notice No R.1201 published in Government Gazette No
         21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating to registration
         of persons as general practitioners in dentistry, made in terms of
         section 24 of the Health Professions Council of South Africa Act,
         1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (22)   Government Notice No R.1203 published in Government Gazette No
         21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating to registration
         of persons who qualified outside South Africa as interns, medical
         practitioners or dentists, made in terms of section 25 of the
         Health Professions Council of South Africa Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of
         1974).


     (23)   Government Notice No 1308 published in Government Gazette No
         21825 dated 1 December 2000, Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied
         Health Service Professions Second Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 50
         of 2000).


     (24)   Government Notice No R.1321 published in Government Gazette No
         21830 dated 8 December 2000, Correction notice to the regulations
         relating to the Pharmacy Education and Training (R.1156 of 20
         November 2000), made in terms of the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53
         of 1974).


     (25)   Government Notice No R.1348 published in Government Gazette No
         21873 dated 12 January 2001, Regulations in terms of
         Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions
         Second Amendment Act, 1982 (Act No 63 of 1982).


     (26)   Government Notice No R.1353 published in Government Gazette No
         21879 dated 15 December 2000, in terms of the National Health
         Laboratory Service Act, 2000 (Act No 37 of 2000).


     (27)   Government Notice No R.1362 published in Government Gazette No
         21868 dated 15 December 2000, Annual Fees payable to the Council,
         made in terms of section 49 of the Dental Technicians Act, 1979
         (Act No 19 of 1979).


     (28)   Government Notice No R.1363 published in Government Gazette No
         21868 dated 15 December 2000, Regulations relating to registration
         of dental laboratories and related matters, made in terms of
         section 50 of the Dental Technicians Act, 1979 (Act No 19 of
         1979).


     (29)   Government Notice No R.1405 published in Government Gazette No
         21910 dated 22 December 2000, Amendment to the rules specifying
         the acts or omissions in respect of which disciplinary steps may
         be taken by a professional board and council, made in terms of
         section 49(2) of the Health Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of
         1974).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     President of the Republic submitted the following letter, dated 11
     January 2001, to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
     Speaker informing Parliament of the employment of the South African
     National Defence Force:
     Dear Madam Chairperson


     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN COMPLIANCE
     WITH THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
     TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS ORGANISATION AND THE ORGANISATION OF AFRICAN
     UNITY


     This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
     authorised the employment of South African National Defence Force
     (SANDF) personnel to fulfil the international obligations of the
     Republic of South Africa towards the UN and OAU Mission in Ethiopia and
     Eritrea (UNMEE and OLMEE).


     This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
     Section 82(4)(b)(ii) read with Section 227(1)(d) of the Constitution of
     the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act No. 200 of 1993), [which
     Sections continue to be in force in terms of Item 24(1) of Schedule 6
     to the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No. 108
     of 1996)], read further with Section 3(2)(a)(v) of the Defence Act,
     1957 (Act No. 44 of 1957).


     A total of 12 personnel will be deployed to Ethiopia and Eritrea as
     follows:


     (a)    UNMEE- 10 x UN Observers/Staff Officers
     (b)    OLMEE- 2 x Military Liaison Officers


     The SANDF members will be deployed for a total of two years with a
     rotation of all personnel after six months.


     The expected costs for the deployment of personnel to the mission area
     are as follows:


     A.     ERITREA


     Costs per person per year are as follows:


     i.     US$2 409.00 special daily allowance.
     ii.    R7 592 standby allowance.
     iii.   R2 401.70 danger allowance.
     iv.    R3 598.90 special danger allowance.
     v.     The total cost of one person deployed to Eritrea for one year
           amounts to R34 117.28. Calculations are based on an exchange
           rate of R7.52 to the US$ and include the special danger
           allowance.


     B.     ETHIOPIA


     Costs per person per year are as follows:


     i.     US$7 665.00 special daily allowance.
     ii.    R7 592 standby allowance.
     iii.   R2 401.70 danger allowance.
     iv.    R3 598.90 special danger allowance (if confirmed).
     v.     The total cost of one person deployed to Ethiopia for one year
           amounts to R78 898.40. Calculations are based on an exchange
           rate of R7.52 to the US$ and include the special danger
           allowance.


     Other costs to be incurred are as follows:


     (a)    4 x 4 vehicle driver orientation courseR56 000.00 (Allows for
         training of rotation personnel also)
     (b)    Stationery required for mobilisation every six months R1 000.00
     (c)    Rations during mobilisationR1 600.00
     (d)    Subsistence and travel during mobilisationR32 000.00
     (e)    Immunisation of initial and subsequent groupsR12 000.00
     (f)    Photographs for passportsR1 000.00
     (g)    Uniforms and personal equipmentR192 000.00
     (h)    Rotation every six months- air tickets for own cost (24 return
         tickets)R144 000.00
     (i)    Provision for eight one-week visits over two years
          Four return ticketsR48 000.00
          Daily allowance @ US$70.00 per dayR28 224.00
          Hotel costs @ US$120.00 per dayR48 384.00


     TOTAL ADDITIONAL COSTSR564 208.00


     TOTAL COST FOR TWO-YEAR DEPLOYMENT


     The total cost of a two-year deployment amounts to:


     (a)    9 x members to EthiopiaR1 420 171.20
     (b)    3 x members to EritreaR204 703.68
     (c)    Additional costs for mobilisation, equipping, rotation, S&T,
         staff visits, etc R564 208.00


     Total Expense for Participation:R2 189 082.88


     The Department of Defence is responsible for the costs of this
     Deployment.


     I will also communicate this report to the National Assembly, and wish
     to request that you bring the contents of this report to the notice of
     Members of the National Council of Provinces.


     Regards






     T M MBEKI

                           MONDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     (1)    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry on 24 January 2001
         submitted a draft of the National Forest and Fire Laws Amendment
         Bill, 2001, and the memorandum explaining the objects of the
         proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms
         of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been referred by the Speaker and
         the Chairperson to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and
         Forestry and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
         Affairs, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).
     (2)    The Minister of Correctional Services on 25 January 2001
         submitted a draft of the Correctional Services Amendment Bill,
         2001, and the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services
         and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled and are now referred to the relevant
     committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration
         and the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Findings identified during an
         Audit of the Salary Bill at National and Provincial Departments
         [RP 163-2000].


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         President's Fund for 1998-99 [RP 179-2000].


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Labour and the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Compensation Fund for 1996-97, 1997-98 and 1998-99 [RP 185-2000].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on
         Finance:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Records of the
         Special Pension Board for the period 1 December 1996 to 31 March
         1999.


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and the
         Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Maize Board for 1999-2000 [RP 192-2000].


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development, the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Monitoring
         Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women:


         (a)     Proclamation No R.66 published in Government Gazette No
              21700 dated 1 November 2000, Commencement of the Recognition
              of the Customary Marriages Act, 1998, made in terms of section
              14 of the Recognition of the Customary Marriages Act, 1998
              (Act No 120 of 1998).


         (b)     Government Notice No R.1101 published in Government
              Gazette No 21700 dated 1 November 2000, Regulations relating
              to the Recognition of the Customary Marriages Act, 1998, made
              in terms of section 11 of the Recognition of the Customary
              Marriages Act, 1998 (Act No 120 of 1998).


     (7)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Government Notice No R.1110 published in Government
              Gazette No 21719 dated 3 November 2000, Amendment to the
              determination of Professional Controlling Body in terms of
              section 1 and designation of a body for purposes of section 5
              of the Contingency Fees Act, 1997 (Act No 66 of 1997).


         (b)     Government Notice No R.1426 published in Government
              Gazette No 21939 dated 22 December 2000, Determination of
              Magistrates' salaries for the purpose of the Magistrates' Act,
              1993, made in terms of section 12(1) of the Magistrates' Act,
              1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


         (c)     Proclamation No R.77 published in Government Gazette No
              21891 dated 12 December 2000, Remuneration of Judges, made in
              terms of sections 2 and 10A(1) of the Judges' Remuneration and
              Conditions of Employment Act, 1989 (Act No 88 of 1989).


         (d)     Proclamation No R.78 published in Government Gazette No
              21891 dated 12 December 2000, Remuneration of Judges, made in
              terms of section 2(2)(a) of the Judges' Remuneration and
              Conditions of Employment Act, 1989 (Act No 27 of 1989)
              (Bophuthatswana).


         (e)     Proclamation No R.79 published in Government Gazette No
              21891 dated 12 December 2000, Remuneration of Judges, made in
              terms of sections 2 of the Judges' Remuneration and Conditions
              of Service Decree, 1990 (Decree No 19 of 1990).


         (f)     Proclamation No R.73 published in Government Gazette No
              21806 dated 29 November 2000, Commencement of the Promotion of
              Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000) with the
              exception of sections 4 and 10, made in terms of section 11 of
              the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of
              2000).


         (g)     Government Notice No R.1297 published in Government
              Gazette No 21814 dated 29 November 2000, Determination of
              salaries of Deputy Directors of Public Prosecutions and
              Prosecutors for the purposes of the National Prosecuting
              Authority Act, 1998, made in terms of section 18(1) of the
              National Prosecuting Authority Act.


         (h)     Proclamation No R.68 published in Government Gazette No
              21732 dated 10 November 2000, Amendment of Proclamations
              issued under the Special Investigating and Special Tribunals
              Act, 1996, made in terms of section 2(4) of the Special
              Investigating and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
              1996).


         (i)     Proclamation No R.69 published in Government Gazette No
              21742 dated 10 November 2000, Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, made in terms
              of section 2(2) of the Special Investigating and Special
              Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


     (8)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health and to the Select Committee on Social Services:




         (a) Proclamation No R.59 published in Government Gazette No 21610
              dated 29 September 2000, Commencement of the Tobacco Products
              Control Amendment Act, 2000, made in terms of section 11 of
              the Tobacco Products Control Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No 12 of
              1999).


         (b)     Government Notice No R.975 published in Government Gazette
              No 21610 dated 29 September 2000, Notice relating to smoking
              of tobacco products in public places, made in terms of section
              2 of the Tobacco Products Control Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No
              12 of 1999).


         (c)     Government Notice No R.974 published in Government Gazette
              No 21610 dated 29 September 2000, Notice relating to the
              maximum permissible yield of tar, nicotine and other
              constituents in tobacco products, made in terms section 3A of
              the Tobacco Products Control Act, 1993 (Act No 83 of 1993).


         (d)     Government Notice No R.976 published in Government Gazette
              No 21610 dated 29 September 2000, Regulations relating to the
              point of sale of tobacco products, made in terms of section 3
              and 6(1) of the Tobacco Products Control Act, 1993 (Act No 83
              of 1993).


         (e)     Government Notice No R.977 published in Government Gazette
              No 21610 dated 29 September 2000, Regulations relating to
              provision for exemption for unintended consequences and
              phasing out of existing sponsorship contractual obligations,
              made in terms of section 3(5) and 6(1) of the Tobacco Products
              Control Act, 1993 (Act No 83 of 1993).


         (f)     Government Notice No R.1052 published in Government
              Gazette No 21671 dated 27 October 2000, Amendment of
              regulations relating to milk and dairy products, made in terms
              of section 15(1) of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and
              Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of 1972).


         (g)     Government Notice No R.1108 published in Government
              Gazette No 21711 dated 3 November 2000, Amendment of
              regulations defining the scope of profession of optical
              dispensing, made in terms of section 33(1) of the Health
              Professions Council of South Africa Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of
              1974).


         (h)     Government Notice No R.1109 published in Government
              Gazette No 21712 dated 3 November 2000, Designation of
              facilities for the surgical termination of pregnancies, made
              in terms of section 3 of the Choice on Termination of
              Pregnancy Act, 1996 (Act No 92 of 1996).


         (i)     Government Notice No R.1150 published in Government
              Gazette No 21736 dated 17 November 2000, Regulations efining
              the scope of profession of oral hygiene, made in terms of
              33(1) of the Health Professions Council of South Africa Act,
              1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).
         (j)     Proclamation No R.70 published in Government Gazette No
              21754 dated 20 November 2000, Commencement of sections 12, 13,
              14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 27, 29 and 30 of the Pharmacy
              Amendment Act, 1997, made in terms of section 46 of the
              Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1997 (Act No 88 of 1997).


         (k)     Government Notice No 1154 published in Government Gazette
              No 21754 dated 20 November 2000, Date of commencement of
              regulations relating to performance of pharmaceutical
              community service and community service, made in terms of
              regulation 2 of Regulations relating to the performance of
              Pharmaceutical Community Service.


         (l)     Government Notice No 1155 published in Government Gazette
              No 21754 dated 20 November 2000, List of approved health
              facilities for the purposes of performing community service by
              pharmacists in the year 2000, made in terms of regulation 2 of
              Regulations relating to the performance of Pharmaceutical
              Community Service.


         (m)     Government Notice No 1156 published in Government Gazette
              No 21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulations for the pharmacy
              education and training, made in terms of section 33 and 34 of
              the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).


         (n)     Government Notice No 1157 published in Government Gazette
              No 21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulations relating to the
              performance of pharmaceutical community service, made in terms
              of section 14 and 14A of the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of
              1974).


         (o)     Government Notice No 1158 published in Government Gazette
              No 21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulating relating to the
              practice of pharmacy, made in terms of section 35A of the
              Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).


         (p)     Government Notice No 1159 published in Government Gazette
              No 21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulations relating to the
              management of a person registered in terms of the Pharmacy
              Act, 1974, unfit to practise for reasons other than
              unprofessional conduct, made in terms of sections 4, 38 and
              49(1)(q) of the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).


         (q)     Government Notice No 1160 published in Government Gazette
              No 21754 dated 20 November 2000, Regulations relating to
              registration of persons and the maintenance of register, made
              in terms of section 14 of the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of
              1974).


         (r)     Government Notice No R.1198 published in Government
              Gazette No 21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating
              to examination for medical practitioners and dentists who have
              applied for registration in terms of section 26 of the Health
              Professions Council of South Africa Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of
              1974).


         (s)     Government Notice No R.1199 published in Government
              Gazette No 21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating
              to examination for medical practitioners and dentists applying
              for exemption from the restriction relating to their
              registration, made in terms of section 61(5) of the Health
              Professions Council of South Africa Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of
              1974).


         (t)     Government Notice No R.1200 published in Government
              Gazette No 21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating
              to registration of persons as general practitioners and family
              physicians in medicine, made in terms of section 24 of the
              Health Professions Council of South Africa Act, 1974 (Act No
              56 of 1974).


         (u)     Government Notice No R.1201 published in Government
              Gazette No 21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating
              to registration of persons as general practitioners in
              dentistry, made in terms of section 24 of the Health
              Professions Council of South Africa Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of
              1974).
         (v)     Government Notice No R.1203 published in Government
              Gazette No 21792 dated 28 November 2000, Regulations relating
              to registration of persons who qualified outside South Africa
              as interns, medical practitioners or dentists, made in terms
              of section 25 of the Health Professions Council of South
              Africa Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


         (w)     Government Notice No 1308 published in Government Gazette
              No 21825 dated 1 December 2000, Chiropractors, Homeopaths and
              Allied Health Service Professions Second Amendment Act, 2000
              (Act No 50 of 2000).


         (x)     Government Notice No R.1321 published in Government
              Gazette No 21830 dated 8 December 2000, Correction notice to
              the regulations relating to the Pharmacy Education and
              Training (R.1156 of 20 November 2000), made in terms of the
              Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).


         (y)     Government Notice No R.1348 published in Government
              Gazette No 21873 dated 12 January 2001, Regulations in terms
              of Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Second Amendment Act, 1982 (Act No 63 of 1982).


         (z)     Government Notice No R.1353 published in Government
              Gazette No 21879 dated 15 December 2000, in terms of the
              National Health Laboratory Service Act, 2000 (Act No 37 of
              2000).


        (aa)     Government Notice No R.1362 published in Government
              Gazette No 21868 dated 15 December 2000, Annual Fees payable
              to the Council, made in terms of section 49 of the Dental
              Technicians Act, 1979 (Act No 19 of 1979).


        (bb)     Government Notice No R.1363 published in Government
              Gazette No 21868 dated 15 December 2000, Regulations relating
              to registration of dental laboratories and related matters,
              made in terms of section 50 of the Dental Technicians Act,
              1979 (Act No 19 of 1979).


        (cc)     Government Notice No R.1405 published in Government
              Gazette No 21910 dated 22 December 2000, Amendment to the
              rules specifying the acts or omissions in respect of which
              disciplinary steps may be taken by a professional board and
              council, made in terms of section 49(2) of the Health
              Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts, Culture, Science and Technology and the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation:


         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
         Natural Scientific Professions for 1999-2000.


     (10)   The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing Committee
         on Defence:


         Letter from the President informing Parliament of the employment
         of the South African National Defence Force in compliance with the
         international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
         the United Nations and the Organisation of African Unity.


     (11)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committees on
         Justice and Constitutional Development, Education, Environmental
         Affairs and Tourism, Health, Housing, Agriculture and Land
         Affairs, Social Development, Water Affairs and Forestry, and
         Correctional Services. It is also referred to the Select
         Committees on Security and Constitutional Affairs, Education and
         Recreation, Land and Environmental Affairs, Social Services and
         Public Services. It is also further referred to the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Women and the Joint Monitoring Committee on the
         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
         Disabled Persons:


         The Human Rights Commission's Second Economic and Social Rights
         Report for 1998-1999.

National Council of Provinces:
1.    The Chairperson:


     Report of the Additional Empowerment Strategies Workshop on Women in
     Politics and Decision-Making for female Members of Parliament from some
     SADC Member States, 22 - 24 September 2000, White Sands Hotel, Dar es
     Salaam, Tanzania:


                              EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


     (a)    A consultative workshop for SADC women Ministers and MPs was
         held at White Sands Hotel, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania on 22nd-24th
         September 2000. Hon Mary Nagu, Minister, Ministry of Community
         Development, Women Affairs and Children officially opened the
         workshop, which was organised by the SADC Secretariat and hosted
         by the government of Tanzania. The workshop targeted women
         Parliamentarians from countries that held general elections in the
         past three years. Participants included Ministers, Deputy
         Ministers and MPs from Botswana, Malawi, Namibia, Seychelles,
         South Africa, Swaziland and Zimbabwe. The facilitators of the
         workshop were from the Tanzania Gender Networking Programme
         (TGNP).


     (b)    The major objectives of the workshop were:


         -  To share experiences on the participation of women in
              Parliament, focusing on the achievements and constraints to
              their participation;
         -  To consult MPs on the draft outline of the Gender Resource Kit,
              with a view towards ascertaining the relevance of the topics,
              as well as identifying other needs;
         -  To facilitate female MPs to identify gender issues that require
              the attention of Parliamentarians using the four modules of
              the draft outline of the Gender Resource Kit for decision-
              makers in SADC;
         -  To enhance the acquisition of knowledge on gender issues and
              the global, regional and national instruments on gender
              equality and the role of parliament in ensuring the
              implementation of these instruments as well as the role of
              female MP in lobbying, advocating, for the gender equality
              agenda in and outside parliament;
         -  To enhance acquisition and application of analytical
              assertiveness, confidence building skills in participation in
              debates and presentation of motions in parliament and other
              decision-making structures;
         -  To advance discussions on how to strengthen and
              institutionalise Women Parliamentarian Caucuses and other
              networks at national and regional level;
         -  To draw a strategic framework/plan for better coordination at
              national level on the target to increase the number of women
              in policy and decision-making positions at all levels by a
              minimum 30% in 2005, and activities to strengthen their
              capacity in participating and effecting transformation.


     (c)    In her opening speech, Hon Mary Nagu welcomed the delegates to
         Tanzania and thanked SADC for honouring this country with the
         opportunity to host the workshop. She acknowledged the SADC
         Declaration on Gender and Development adopted by the SADC Heads of
         State in 1997. The declaration calls for equal representation of
         women and men in the decision-making bodies of SADC Member States.
         She expressed her hope that the workshop will equip MPs from the
         SADC countries represented with relevant knowledge and skills on
         gender issues. She stated her optimism that the results of the up-
         coming Tanzanian General Elections will bring more women in
         Parliament.


     (d)    During the three days, the Ministers and MPs held discussions on
         the major themes that included the following:


         -  Key gender concepts;
         -  Issues of access to political and decision-making structures,
              participation in and transformation of decision-making
              institutions such as Parliament by women leaders;
         -  The critical international and regional instruments for gender
              equality, such as the CEDAW and its Optional Protocol, the
              Beijing PFA as well as the 1997 SADC GAD Declaration and its
              1998 Addendum;
         -  The SADC Regional Programme of Action for Women in Politics and
              the role of MPs in supporting it.


     (e)    On the whole, the MPs were presented with four modules of the
         draft Gender Tool Kit for SADC Decision-Makers to utilise as tools
         for expanding their gender knowledge. An outline of the four
         modules is contained in Annex D. The draft tool kit exercises can
         be perused in Annex E.
     (f)    The MPs adopted the following resolutions at the workshop:


    (g)     To take measures in our respective Parliaments and Cabinets to
          raise issues of gender equality, and the representation of women
          in politics and decision-making at all levels i.e. Cabinet,
          Parliament, Local Government and others;


       h) In partnership with national gender machineries, NGOs and other
          stakeholders, to sensitise both women and men MPs, Ministers and
          other decision-makers on the fact that gender equality is a matter
          of democracy, human rights and development;
    (i)     To bring the attention of political leaders, the media and the
          public to the stereotypes about the role of women in society and
          leadership that have their origins in tradition, religion,
          socialisation and colonisation, and work towards changing these
          stereotypes;


    (j)     To take steps to ensure the effective participation of both
         women and men in our cabinets, parliaments and at all levels, as
         well as transforming them into well-resourced institutions that
         are conducive to the effective participation of women;


    (k)     To ensure that male and female MPs understand and acquire the
        requisite skills, with which to mainstream gender in to the
        policies, procedures and programmes of Parliament, as well as
        gender sensitive budgets;


    (l)     To remind their Heads of State, Ministers, Political Parties
        and Members of Parliaments of the commitments made by the
        respective countries at regional and international level, such as
        the Convention for the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women,
        the Beijing Platform for Action and the SADC Gender and Development
        Declaration and Addendum, especially the importance of ensuring and
        monitoring their implementation through their incorporation into
        national laws;


    (m)     To work closely with the SADC Secretariat and the various
        stakeholders at national level to implement and monitor the SADC
        Plan of Action for Women in Politics and Decision-Making, in
        particular the activities identified for women in Parliament;


    (n)     Through lobbying, networking and information sharing, to create
        or strengthen existing national caucuses of women MPs and work
        towards the creation of a SADC caucus of women MPs.

2.    The Chairperson:

    The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:


     Land and Environmental Affairs:


     Appointed: Dlulane, B N.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:

    Report of the Board for Manufacturing Development for 1999.

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Government Notice No R.1428 published in Government Gazette No 21948
     dated 29 December 2000, Amendment of regulations, made in terms of
     section 77 of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of
     1998).


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

                          TUESDAY, 6 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 6 February 2001 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)           Financial Intelligence Centre Bill [B 1 - 2001]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Finance - National Assembly).


         (ii)    South African Sports Commission Amendment Bill [B 2 -
                  2001] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee
                  on Sport and Recreation - National Assembly).


         (iii)   Unemployment Insurance Bill [B 3 - 2001] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Labour -
                  National Assembly).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 -
     Improvement of Conditions of Service for 1999-2000 [RP 127-2000].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.
                           FRIDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Defence on 30 January 2001 submitted drafts of
         the Termination of Integration Intake Bill, 2001, Constitution of
         the Republic of South Africa Amendment Bill, 2001, and
         Demobilisation Amendment Bill, 2001, and the memorandums
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The drafts have
         been referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Defence and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs, respectively, in accordance with Joint
         Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 1
         February 2001 submitted a draft of the Special Investigating Units
         and Special Tribunals Amendment Bill, 2001, and a memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, respectively, in
         accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (3)    The Minister of Safety and Security on 2 February 2001 submitted
         a draft of the Security Industry Regulation Bill, 2001, and a
         memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the
         Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, respectively, in
         accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         9 February 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Amendment
                 Bill [B 4 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 74(3)(a)) -
                 (Portfolio Committee on Defence - National Assembly)
                 [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
                 introduction published in Government Gazette No 21599 of 22
                 September 2000.]


              NOTE:
              The Portfolio Committee on Defence has been instructed by the
              Speaker in terms of National Assembly Rule 249(3)(c) to
              consult the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
              Development on the Bill.


         (ii)    Demobilisation Amendment Bill [B 5 - 2001] (National
                 Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Defence -
                 National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
                 notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
                 No 21599 of 22 September 2000.]


         (iii)   Termination of Integration Intake Bill [B 6 - 2001]
                 (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                 Defence - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill
                 and prior notice of its introduction published in
                 Government Gazette No 21599 of 22 September 2000.]

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote No 3
     - Parliament for 1999-2000 [RP 112-2000].
2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Annual Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of
     weapons of mass destruction for 1998-1999.

                          MONDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    On 12 February 2001 the following Bill, at the request of the
         Minister of Housing, was introduced in the National Council of
         Provinces by the Select Committee on Public Services. It was
         referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Housing Amendment Bill [B 7 - 2001] (National Council of
              Provinces - sec 76(2)) - (Select Committee on Public Services
              - National Council of Provinces) [Explanatory summary of Bill
              and prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 21556 of 8 September 2000.]


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 12
         February 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 8 - 2001]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Correctional Services - National Assembly) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 22020 of 25 January 2001.]

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.1414 published in Government Gazette No
         21936 dated 28 December 2000, Conditions for the conducting of the
         business of a bank by a foreign institution by means of a branch
         in South Africa, made in terms of section 90 of the Banks Act,
         1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


     (2)    Government Notice No R.1422 published in Government Gazette No
         21941 dated 28 December 2000, Designation of the institution of
         which the activities do not fall within the meaning of "the
         business of a bank" ("Financial Service Co-operative") made in
         terms of paragraph (dd)(i) of the definition of "the Business of a
         bank" in section 1 of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


     (3)    Government Notice No R.1423 published in Government Gazette No
         21936 dated 28 December 2000, Designation of the institution of
         which the activities do not fall within the meaning of "the
         business of a bank" ("The National Housing Finance Corporation
         Limited"), made in terms of paragraph (dd)(i) of the definition of
         "the Business of a bank" in section 1 of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act
         No 94 of 1990).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Draft Regulations made in terms of section 40 of the National
     Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act No 32 of 1998) submitted to
     Parliament in terms of section 40(3)(c) of the Act.

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Atomic Energy Corporation of
     South Africa for 2000.

                          TUESDAY, 13 FEBRUARY 2001

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provincies:

Papers:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

    Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of Vote No 32 - Statistics South Africa for
         1999-2000 [RP 141-2000].


     (b)    Financial Statements of Vote No 2 - Deputy President and the
         National Youth Commission for the period 1 April to 31 May 1999
         [RP 111-2000].

                         WEDNESDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2001

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provincies:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of the High School Vorentoe Disaster Fund
         for 1997-98 and 1998-99 [RP 193-2000].


     (b)    Financial Statements of the Refugee Relief Fund for 1998-99 [RP
         197-2000].


     (c)    Social Relief Fund for 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 [RP 202-
         2000].

2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     Draft Regulations made in terms of section 120 of the Local Government
     Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000) submitted to Parliament
     in terms of section 120(7)(a) of the Local Government Municipal Systems
     Act, 2000.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (a)    Report of the South African Law Commission on Juvenile Justice
         [RP 159-2000].


     (b)    Proclamation No R.3 published in the Government Gazette No 21976
         dated 12 January 2001, Commencement of the National Prosecuting
         Authority Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 61 of 2000) on 12 January
         2001, made in terms of section 26 of the National Prosecuting
         Authority Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 61 of 2000).


     (c)    Government Notice No R.41 published in the Government Gazette No
         21983 dated 19 January 2001, Amendment of Regulations, made in
         terms of section 81(2) of the Attorneys Act, 1979 (Act No 53 of
         1979).

                         THURSDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:

    The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:
     Education and Recreation:


     Appointed: Sogoni, H T.


     Public Services:


     Appointed: Sogoni, H T.
     Social Services:


     Appointed: Sogoni, H T.



TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of the Foundation for Education, Science
         and Technology for 1998-99 [RP 198-2000].


     (b)    Financial Statements of the King George V Silver Jubilee Fund
         for Tuberculosis for 1999-2000 [RP 199-2000].

2.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Government Notice No 938 published in Government Gazette No 21573 dated
     15 September 2000, Regulation 19: Transitional Arrangements, made in
     terms of section 38 of the Refugees Act, 1998 (Act No 130 of 1998).

                          FRIDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2001
TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Public Enterprises:


     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for 1999-2000.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Directives in terms of section 4(1) of the Criminal Procedure
         Amendment Act, 1997 (Act No 76 of 1997) in terms of which legal
         aid or legal representation is rendered or made available for
         purposes of section 3 of the said Act, tabled in terms of section
         4(2)(b) of the Criminal Procedure Amendment Act, 1997.


     (2)    Directives in terms of section 7 of the Criminal Matters
         Amendment Act, 1998 (Act No 68 of 1998) in terms of which legal
         aid or legal representation is rendered or made available for
         purposes of section 3(a) of the said Act, tabled in terms of
         section 7(2)(b) of the Criminal Matters Amendment Act, 1998.

                          MONDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs:


         (a)     Report of the Board for Manufacturing Development for
              1999.


         (b)     Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
              South Africa and the Government of the Socialist Republic of
              Vietnam, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (c)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.


     (2)    The following report is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration
         and to the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
         for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         18 - Improvement of Conditions of Service for 1999-2000 [RP 127-
         2000].


     (3)    The following report is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Finance and to the Select Committee on Finance for
         information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         32 - Statistics South Africa for 1999-2000 [RP 141-2000].


     (4)    The following report is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         2 - Deputy President and National Youth Commission for the period
         1 April to 31 May 1999 [RP 111-2000].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Select Committee on Finance:


         (a)     Government Notice No R.1414 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21936 dated 28 December 2000, Conditions for the
              conducting of the business of a bank by a foreign institution
              by means of a branch in South Africa, made in terms of section
              90 of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


         (b)     Government Notice No R.1422 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21941 dated 28 December 2000, Designation of the
              institution of which the activities do not fall within the
              meaning of "the business of a bank" ("Financial Service Co-
              operative") made in terms of paragraph (dd)(i) of the
              definition of "the Business of a bank" in section 1 of the
              Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


         (c)     Government Notice No R.1423 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21936 dated 28 December 2000, Designation of the
              institution of which the activities do not fall within the
              meaning of "the business of a bank" ("The National Housing
              Finance Corporation Limited", made in terms of paragraph
              (dd)(i) of the definition of "the Business of a bank" in
              section 1 of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Select Committee
         on Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and
         report:


         Draft Regulations made in terms of section 40 of the National
         Prosecuting Act Authority, 1998 (Act No 32 of 1998) submitted to
         Parliament in terms of section 40(3)(c) of the Act.


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy and to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs:
         Report and Financial Statements of the Atomic Energy Corporation
         of South Africa for 2000.


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Education and to the Select
         Committee on Education and Recreation for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         High School Vorentoe Disaster Fund for 1997-98 and 1998-99 [RP 193-
         2000].


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and to the Select
         Committee on Social Services for information:
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Refugee Relief Fund for 1998-99 [RP 197-2000].


     (10)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Social Development and to the Select
         Committee on Social Services for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Social Relief Fund for 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 [RP 202-
         2000].


     (11)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Select Committee
         on Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Report of the South African Law Commission on Juvenile
              Justice [RP 159-2000].


         (b)     Proclamation No R.3 published in the Government Gazette No
              21976 dated 12 January 2001, Commencement of the National
              Prosecuting Authority Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 61 of 2000)
              on 12 January 2001, made in terms of section 26 of the
              National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 61
              of 2000).


         (c)     Government Notice No R.41 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21983 dated 19 January 2001, Amendment of
              Regulations, made in terms of section 81(2) of the Attorneys
              Act, 1979 (Act No 53 of 1979).


     (12)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises and to the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises:


         Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for 1999-2000.


     (13)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government and to the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration for consideration and report:


         Draft Regulations made in terms of section 120 of the Local
         Government Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000)
         submitted to Parliament in terms of section 120(7)(a) of the Local
         Government Municipal Systems Act, 2000.


     (14)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
         Technology and to the Select Committee on Education and Recreation
         for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Foundation for Education, Science and Technology for 1998-99 [RP
         198-2000].


     (15)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Health and to the Select Committee
         on Social Services for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         King George V Silver Jubilee Fund for Tuberculosis for 1999-2000
         [RP 199-2000].


     (16)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs and to the Select Committee on Social Services:


         Government Notice No 938 published in the Government Gazette No
         21573 dated 15 September 2000, Regulation 19: Transitional
         Arrangements, made in terms of section 38 of the Refugees Act (Act
         No 130 of 1998).


     (17)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Select Committee
         on Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Directives in terms of section 4(1) of the Criminal
              Procedure Amendment Act, 1997 (Act No 76 of 1997) in terms of
              which legal aid or legal representation is rendered or made
              available for purposes of section 3 of the said Act, to be
              tabled in terms of section 4(2)(b) of the Criminal Procedure
              Amendment Act, 1997.


         (b)     Directives in terms of section 7 of the Criminal Matters
              Amendment Act, 1998 (Act No 68 of 1998) in terms of which
              legal aid or legal represenation is rendered or made available
              for purposes of section 3(a) of the said Act, to be tabled in
              terms of section 7(2)(b) of the Criminal Matters Amendment
              Act, 1998.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 10 -
     Education for 1999-2000 [RP 119-2000].

2.    The Minister of Defence:
     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria
         concerning Co-operation in the Field of Defence, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of Australia for the Reciprocal Protection of
         Classified Information of Defence Interest, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium concerning the
         presence of the Belgiun Air Force in the territory of the Republic
         of South Africa, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (4)    Agreement for the establishment of a Joint Permanent Commission
         on Defence and Security between Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Botswana, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (5)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Department of Defence of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Department of National
         Defence of Canada concerning Defence Industrial Cooperation,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (6)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
         Cyprus on Military and Technical Cooperation, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (7)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         through its Department of Defence and the Government Czech
         Republic through its Ministry of Defence on Defence Cooperation,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (8)    Protocol on Intelligence Cooperation between the Government of
         the Arab Republic of Egypt as represented by the Director of
         Military Intelligence and the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa as represented by the Chief of Defence Intelligence, tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (9)    Agreement between the Department of Defence of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Federal Ministry of Defence of the Federal
         Republic of Germany concerning Cooperation in the Fields of
         Defence Economy and Defence Technology, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (10)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Ghana and
         the Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning Defence
         Training and Technical Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (11)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of India on Defence
         Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (12)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan concerning
         Cooperation in the Field of Defence and Defence Equipment, tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (13)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of
         Lesotho concerning Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (14)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Kingdom of Lesotho concerning the Status of Armed Forces
         in the Kingdom of Lesotho providing assistance in the
         Establishment of a Sustainable Training Capacity within the
         Lesotho Defence Force, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (15)   Agreement between the parties contributing to the Southern
         African Development Community's Combined Task Force and the
         Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho, providing Military
         Assistance to the Kingdom of Lesotho and regarding the Status of
         their Armed Forces, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.
     (16)   Cooperation Agreement in the Field of Defence between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Republic of Mozambique, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.


     (17)   Diplomatic Note Exchange on the Employment of the South African
         National Defence Force to render Humanitarian Assistance to the
         Mozambican Government during the Widespread Flooding, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (18)   Diplomatic Note Exchange on the Employment of the South African
         National Defence Force to render Logistical Support to the
         Mozambican Government during their General Elections, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (19)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Poland on Industrial,
         Technological and Commercial Cooperation within the scope of the
         Military Industries, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (20)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         represented by the Department of Defence and the Ministry of
         Defence of the Russian federation concerning Defence Intelligence
         Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (21)   General Security Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of Sweden concerning
         the Exchange of Classified Information, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (22)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of Sweden concerning Defence Cooperation,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (23) Defence Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United Arab
         Emirates, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

                          TUESDAY, 20 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 20
         February 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals
              Amendment Bill [B 9 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
              (Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
              - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              22073 of 16 February 2001.]


     (2)    Assent by the Acting President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bill:


         General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill [B 36B - 2000] - Act No 66
          of 2000 (assented to and signed by Acting President on 20 February
          2001).


     (3)    The following members attended and participated in the
         Additional Empowerment Strategies Workshop on Women in Politics
         and Decision-Making for female Members of Parliament from some
         SADC Member States, held on 22-24 September 2000, at White Sands
         Hotel, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania:


         National Assembly:
         Xinwana, L; Motubatse, S D; Thabathe, E; Rajbally, S; Mnumzana, S
         K; Mndende, N; Sono, B; Ngubane, H; and


         National Council of Provinces:
         Witbooi, J and Themba, P.
     (4)    The Executive Summary of the Report of the Additional
         Empowerment Strategies Workshop on Women in Politics and Decision-
         Making for female Members of Parliament from some SADC Member
         States, 22-24 September 2000, White Sands Hotel, Dar es Salaam,
         Tanzania tabled on 5 February 2001 is referred to the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Women.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 5 -
     Arts, Culture, Science and Technology for 1999-2000.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:
1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
     Sorghum Industry , dated 13 February 2001:


         The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
         considered the application by the National Agricultural Marketing
         Council for the continuation of the statutory measures in the
         sorghum industry, reports, in terms of section 15 of the Marketing
         of Agricultural Products Act, 1996, that it has approved the
         recommendations of the council.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
     Citrus Fruit Industry, dated 13 February, 2001:


         The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
         considered the application by the National Agricultural Marketing
         Council for the implementation of the proposed statutory measure
         in the citrus fruit industry, reports, in terms of section 15 of
         the Marketing of Agricultural Products Act, 1996, that it has
         approved the recommendations of the council.
         The Committee further approves the recommendations to the Minister
         that the CGA submit its annual audited financial statements
         reflecting actual income and expenditure figures to the council
         and the Auditor-General on a yearly basis.


         The Committee further approves the recommendation that the council
         have observer status on the CGA's board of directors to ensure
         compliance with the original intent of the application.

                         WEDNESDAY, 21 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 19
         February 2001 submitted a draft of the High Court Amendment Bill,
         2001, and a memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
         Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on Security
         and Constitutional Affairs, respectively, in accordance with Joint
         Rule 159(2).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote No 15
     - Health for 1999-2000 [RP 124-2000].

2.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance [RP 28-2001].


     (2)    Estimate of National Revenue for 2001-2002 [RP 34-2001].


     (3)    Taxation Proposals: Income Tax.


     (4)    Taxation proposals in respect of custom and excise duties laid
         upon the Table at 15:12.


     (5)    Division of Revenue Bill [B 11 - 2001] tabled in terms of
         section 10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997
         (Act No 97 of 1997).


     (6)    Budget Review 2001 [RP 27-2001], including "Annexure E:
         Memorandum to accompany the Division of Revenue Bill", tabled in
         terms of section 10(5) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations
         Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).


     (7)    Appropriation Bill [B 10 - 2001].


     (8)    Estimate of National Expenditure 2001 [RP 30-2001], which
         includes:


         1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "Presidency", Main Estimates, 2001-
              2002;


         2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates, 2001-
              2002;


         3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002;


         4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2001-
              2002;


         5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local Government",
              Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Government Communication and
              Information System", Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002;


         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Enterprises", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002;
         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service and Administration",
              Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         10.     Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service Commission",
              Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         11.     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "South African Management
              Development Institute", Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         12.     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         13.     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Arts, Culture, Science and
              Technology", Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         14.     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Education", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002;


         15.     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2001-
              2002;


         16.     Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2001-
              2002;


         17.     Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Social Development", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         18.     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Sport and Recreation South
              Africa", Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         19.     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Correctional Services", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         20.     Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2001-
              2002;


         21.     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Independent Complaints
              Directorate", Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         22.     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Justice and Constitutional
              Development", Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         23.     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Safety and Security", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         24.     Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002;


         25.     Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Communications", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         26.     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism", Main Estimates, 2001-2002;


         27.     Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2001-
              2002;


         28.     Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002;


         29.     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Minerals and Energy", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         30.     Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Works", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002;
         31.     Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Trade and Industry", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         32.     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Transport", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002;


         33.     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
              Main Estimates, 2001-2002.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter, dated 19
     February 2001, to the Chairperson informing Parliament of the
     employment of the South African National Defence Force:


     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN COMPLIANCE
     WITH THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
     TOWARDS THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE FOR HUMANITARIAN
     ASSISTANCE DURING WIDESPREAD FLOODING


     This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that the
     President authorised the employment of South African National Defence
     Force (SANDF) personnel to fulfil the international obligations of the
     Republic of South Africa towards the Government of the Republic of
     Mozambique for humanitarian assistance during widespread flooding in
     the Zambezia Province.


     This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
     Section 82(4)(b)(ii) read with Section 227(1)(d) of the Constitution of
     the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act No 200 of 1993), [which
     Sections continue to be in force in terms of Item 24(1) of Schedule 6
     to the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108
     of 1996)], read further with Section 3(2)(a)(iv) of the Defence Act,
     1957 (Act No 44 of 1957).


     (a)    Personnel. A total of 13 personnel have been deployed to
         Mozambique: 3 x pilots, 2 x navigators, 2 x flight engineers, 3 x
         air loadmasters, 1 x interpreter and 2 x medical personnel.


     (b)    Aircraft. 1 x C-130 cargo aircraft and 2 x medical personnel
         aircraft.


     The SANDF members were deployed for a total of three days over the
     period 10 February 2001 to 12 February 2001.


     FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS


     The estimated financial implications are as follows:


     (a)    18 hrs Flying Time @ R26 641 per hourR479 538
     (b)    Fuel required is 53 000 litres @ R3.00 per litreR159 000
     (c) Subsistence and Travelling Allowance for 13 personnel at US $62.00
         per day per person @ R7.90 to a US$R19 102
     (d)    Accommodation @ US $100.00 per day per personR30 810
     (e)    Total cost of a 3 day deploymentR688 450


     The cost indicated above does not include landing, parking,
     navigational, ground support equipment and lighting surcharge fees.
     The Department of Foreign Affairs is responsible for the costs of this
     Deployment.


     I will also communicate this report to the Members of the National
     Assembly, and wish to request that you bring the contents of this
     report to the notice of the National Council of Provinces.


     Regards






     S V TSHWETE
     ACTING PRESIDENT




     Mrs G N M Pandor
     Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
     P O Box 15
     CAPE TOWN
     8000

                         THURSDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2001

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 -
     Government Communication and Information System for 1999-2000 [RP 123-
     2000].

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (a)    Government Notice No R.108 published in the Government Gazette
         No 22027 dated 02 February 2001, Regulations made in terms of
         section 40 of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act No
         32 of 1998).


     (b)    Government Notice No R.109 published in the Government Gazette
         No 22030 dated 02 February 2001, Designation of special
         investigators, appointed in terms of section 19A(1) of the
         National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act No 32 of 1998), as
         commissioners of oaths, made in terms of section 6 of the Justices
         of the Peace and Commissioners of Oaths Act, 1963 (Act No 16 of
         1963).

                          FRIDAY, 23 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 23
         February 2001 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Security Industry Regulation Bill [B 12 - 2001] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Safety and
              Security - National Assembly) [Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 22100 of 23
              February 2001.]
     (2)    Report of the Parliamentary Delegation which attended a seminar
         on Democracy and Good Governance held at Tokyo, Japan, on 25
         September - 6 October 2000:


     SEE ATTACHED REPORT


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 -
     Independent Complaints Directorate for 1999-2000 [RP 128-2000].

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Explanatory Memorandum on the designation of Ireland in terms of
     section 2(1)(b) of the Extradition Act, 1962 (Act No 67 of 1962).
                          MONDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 26 February 2001 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(2), classified the following Bill as a section
         74 Bill:


         (i)     Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Amendment
                  Bill [B 4 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 74(3)(a)) -
                  (Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
                  Development - National Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 26 February 2001 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)     Demobilisation Amendment Bill [B 5 - 2001] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Defence -
                  National Assembly).


         (ii)    Termination of Integration Intake Bill [B 6 - 2001]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Defence - National Assembly).


         (iii)   Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 8 - 2001]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Correctional Services - National Assembly).


     (3)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 26 February 2001 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bills as section 76
         Bills:


         (i)     Housing Amendment Bill [B 7 - 2001] (National Council of
                  Provinces - sec 76(2)) - (Select Committee on Public
                  Services - National Council of Provinces).


         (ii)    Division of Revenue Bill [B 11 - 2001] (National Assembly
                  - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National
                  Assembly).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote No 28
     - South African Management Development Institute [RP 137-2000].

                          TUESDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Education and the Select Committee
         on Education and Recreation for information:
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         No 10 - Education for 1999-2000 [RP 119-2000].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs:


         (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the People's Democratic Republic
              of Algeria concerning Co-operation in the Field of Defence,
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of Australia for the Reciprocal
              Protection of Classified Information of Defence Interest,
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (c)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium concerning
              the presence of the Belgiun Air Force in the territory of the
              Republic of South Africa, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
              the Constitution, 1996.


         (d)     Agreement for the establishment of a Joint Permanent
              Commission on Defence and Security between Agreement between
              the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
              Government of the Republic of Botswana, tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (e)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Department of
              Defence of the Republic of South Africa and the Department of
              National Defence of Canada concerning Defence Industrial
              Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (f)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
              Cyprus on Military and Technical Cooperation, tabled in terms
              of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (g)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa through its Department of Defence and the Government of
              the Czech Republic through its Ministry of Defence on Defence
              Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (h)     Agreement between the Department of Defence of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Federal Ministry of Defence
              of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning Cooperation in
              the Fields of Defence Economy and Defence Technology, tabled
              in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (i)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Ghana
              and the Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning
              Defence Training and Technical Cooperation, tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
         (j)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of India on Defence
              Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (k)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
              concerning Cooperation in the Field of Defence and Defence
              Equipment, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (l)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of
              Lesotho concerning Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (m)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Kingdom of Lesotho concerning the Status of
              Armed Forces in the Kingdom of Lesotho providing assistance in
              the Establishment of a Sustainable Training Capacity within
              the Lesotho Defence Force, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
              of the Constitution, 1996.


         (n)     Agreement between the parties contributing to the Southern
              African Development Community's Combined Task Force and the
              Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho, providing Military
              Assistance to the Kingdom of Lesotho and regarding the Status
              of their Armed Forces, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
              the Constitution, 1996.


         (o)     Cooperation Agreement in the Field of Defence between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Mozambique, tabled in terms of section
              231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (p)     Diplomatic Note Exchange on the Employment of the South
              African National Defence Force to render Humanitarian
              Assistance to the Mozambican Government during the Widespread
              Flooding, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (q)     Diplomatic Note Exchange on the Employment of the South
              African National Defence Force to render Logistical Support to
              the Mozambican Government during their General Elections,
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (r)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Poland on
              Industrial, Technological and Commercial Cooperation within
              the scope of the Military Industries, tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (s)     General Security Agreement between the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa and the Government of Sweden
              concerning the Exchange of Classified Information, tabled in
              terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
         (t)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of Sweden concerning Defence
              Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (u)     Defence Cooperation Agreement between the Government of
              the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
              Arab Emirates, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence, the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs and the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence:


         (a)     Protocol on Intelligence Cooperation between the
              Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt as represented by the
              Director of Military Intelligence and the Government of the
              Republic of South Africa as represented by the Chief of
              Defence Intelligence, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.
         (b)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa as represented by the Department of Defence and the
              Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation concerning
              Defence Intelligence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
              231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
         Technology and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation
         for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         No 5 - Arts, Culture, Science and Technology for 1999-2000.


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Health and the Select Committee on
         Social Services for information:
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         No 15 - Health for 1999-2000 [RP 124-2000].


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance for consideration and
         report:


         (a)     The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance [RP 28-2001].


         (b)     Estimate of Revenue for the financial year ending 31 March
              2002 [RP 34-2001].


         (c)     Taxation Proposals: Income Tax.


         (d)     Taxation proposals in respect of custom and excise duties
              laid upon the Table.


         (e)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 11-2001] tabled in terms of
              section 10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act,
              1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).


         (f)     Budget Review 2001 [RP 27-2001], including "Annexure E:
              Memorandum to accompany the Division of Revenue Bill", tabled
              in terms of section 10(5) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal
              Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).


         (g)     Appropriation Bill [B 10-2001].


         (h)     Estimate of National Expenditure 2001 [RP 30-2001].


         (i)     Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002.


         (j)     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (7)    The following programmes of the Memorandum on Vote No 1 -
         "Presidency", Main Estimates, 2001-2002 are referred to the
         following committees:


         (a)     Programme 4: National Youth Commission of Vote No 1 to be
              referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
              Quality of Life and Status of Youth, Children and Disabled
              Persons.


         (b)     Programme 5: Auxiliary and associated services to be
              referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
              Quality of Life and Status of Youth, Children and Disabled
              Persons and the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
              Quality of Life and Status of Women.


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Foreign Affairs and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates, 2001-
         2002.


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs and the Select Committee on Social Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2001-
         2002.
     (10)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government and the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration:


         Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local Government", Main
         Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (11)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises:


         Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Communications", Main Estimates, 2001-
         2002.


     (12)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises:


         Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Enterprises", Main Estimates,
         2001-2002.


     (13)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration and the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration:


         (a)     Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service and
              Administration", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


         (b)     Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service Commission",
              Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


         (c)     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "South African Management
              Development Institute", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (14)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts, Culture, Science and Technology and the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation:


         Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Arts, Culture, Science and
         Technology", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (15)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation:
         Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Education", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (16)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health and the Select Committee on Social Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (17)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Housing and the Select Committee on Public Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (18)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Social Development and the Select Committee on Social Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Social Development", Main Estimates,
         2001-2002.


     (19)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Sport and Recreation and the Select Committee on Education and
         Recreation:


         Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Sport and Recreation South Africa",
         Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (20)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Correctional Services", Main
         Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (21)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (22)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs:
         (a)     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Independent Complaints
              Directorate", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


         (b)     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Safety and Security", Main
              Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (23)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Justice and Constitutional
              Development", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


         (b)     Government Notice No R.108 published in Government Gazette
              No 22027 dated 02 February 2001, Regulations made in terms of
              section 40 of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998
              (Act No 32 of 1998).


         (c)     Government Notice No R.109 published in Government Gazette
              No 22030 dated 02 February 2001, Designation of special
              investigators, appointed in terms of section 19A(1) of the
              National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act No 32 of 1998),
              as commissioners of oaths, made in terms of section 6 of the
              Justices of the Peace and Commissioners of Oaths Act, 1963
              (Act No 16 of 1963).


     (24)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs:
         (a)     Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002.


         (b)     Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2001-2002.


     (25)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Environmental Affairs and Tourism",
         Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (26)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises:


         Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (27)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:
         Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Minerals and Energy", Main Estimates,
         2001-2002.




     (28)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Works and the Select Committee on Public Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2001-
         2002.
     (29)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Trade and Industry", Main Estimates,
         2001-2002.


     (30)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Transport", Main Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (31)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry and the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Water Affairs and Forestry", Main
         Estimates, 2001-2002.


     (32)   The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing Committee
         on Defence:
         Letter from President of the Republic dated 19 February 2001
         informing Parliament of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in compliance with international
         obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards the Government
         of the Republic of Mozambique for humanitarian assistance during
         widespread flooding.


     (33)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report.


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         No 14 - Government Communication and Information System for 1999-
         2000 [RP 123-2000].
National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 27 February 2001 and transmitted
     for concurrence:


     National Council for Library and Information Services Bill [B 44B -
    2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Education and
    Recreation - National Council of Provinces).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote No 30
     - Sport and Recreation for 1999-2000 [RP 139-2000].

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of Canada on Extradition, tabled in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of Canada on Mutual Legal Assistance in
         Criminal Matters, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    Explanatory Memorandum to the treaties.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    First Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on
     Constitutive Act of the African Union, dated 27 February 2001:


         The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having considered the
         request for approval by Parliament of the Constitutive Act of the
         African Union, referred to it, and having conferred with the
         Select Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Security
         and Constitutional Affairs, recommends that the Council, in terms
         of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the international
         agreement containing the Constitutive Act.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Second Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on
     Constitutive Act of the African Union, dated 27 February 2001:


     The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having considered the request
     for approval by Parliament of the Constitutive Act of the African
     Union, referred to it, and having conferred with the Select Committee
     on Finance and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs, further reports as follows:


     1.     The Committee does not wish to, and should not be understood to,
         be proposing the adoption of any reservations or of a declaration
         in respect of the said Act.


     2.     The Committee accepted that the Act would have some far-reaching
         implications and obligations for South Africa, but that South
         Africa would not be able to continue its prominent role in the
         subregion and on the continent if it remained outside the
         framework of the Act. Although there is understanding for the
         implications the Act has for South Africa, it is, from a political
         point of view, imperative that the Act be ratified as a matter of
         priority if South Africa wishes to remain a committed, influential
         and credible member of both the OAU/AEC and the SADC.


     3.     However, the Act appears to contain -


         (i)     various clauses that could be open to different
                  interpretations;


         (ii)    various clauses that appear to be contradictory;  and


         (iii)   clauses that may be interpreted as impinging upon the
                  sovereignty of Member States, in the executive,
                  legislative or judicial spheres, more than is usual in
                  the case of the formation of such a Union.


     4.     Due to constraints of time and information, the Committee wishes
         to only highlight two such examples, which are possibly of a more
         serious nature.


     5.     Firstly, there are the various clauses that deal with the issue
         of socio-economic policies and integration of the continent, in a
         potentially contradictory manner, or which may be interpreted as
         possibly impinging on the sovereignty of the Member States, or
         which, at the very least, could be open to various
         interpretations.
         On the one hand, there are provisions providing -


         (i)     in article 3(c), that an objective of the Union shall be
                  to accelerate the political and socio-economic
                  integration of the continent;


         (ii)    in article 3(l), that an objective of the Union shall be
                  to co-ordinate and harmonise the policies between the
                  existing and future Regional Economic Communities for the
                  gradual attainment of the objectives of the Union;


         (iii)   in articles 9(1)(a) and (e), that the Assembly shall
                  determine the common policies of the Union and monitor
                  the implementation of policies and decisions of the
                  Union; and


         (iv)    in article 13(2), that the Executive Council shall be
                  responsible to the Assembly, and shall consider issues
                  referred to it and monitor the implementation of policies
                  formulated by the Assembly.


         On the other hand, there are provisions providing -


         (i)     in article 13(1), that the Executive Council shall co-
                  ordinate and take decisions on policies in areas of
                  common interest to the Member States, and then 12 such
                  specific grounds are included, like education, social
                  security and so on; and


         (ii)    in article 11, that the decisions of the Executive Council
                  may be taken by a two thirds majority of the Member
                  States.


     6.     Secondly, the issue of whether the Act is consistent with
         International Law and South Africa's international obligations,
         requires examination.


         In this regard there are some provisions, read individually or
         collectively, which require further attention, namely -
         (i)     article 3(b), requiring states to defend the sovereignty,
                  territorial integrity and independence of its Member
                  States;


         (ii)    article 4(d), on the establishment of a common defence
                  policy for the African Continent;


         (iii)   article 4(h), on the right of the Union to intervene in a
                  Member State pursuant to a decision of the Assembly in
                  respect of grave circumstances, namely war crimes,
                  genocide and crimes against humanity;


         (iv)    article 4(j), on the right of Member States to request
                  intervention from the Union in order to restore peace and
                  security; and


         (v)     articles 7 and 11, allowing for decisions of the Assembly
                  and the Executive Council, respectively, to be taken by a
                  two thirds majority of the Member States.


         The difficulty with these provisions, as presently worded, is that
         they may be used to justify a use of force in contravention of
         International Law and the Charter of the United Nations. Article
         2(4) of the Charter of the United Nations provides that all
         "Members shall refrain in their international relations from the
         threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
         political independence of any state, or in any other manner
         inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations". In
         exceptional circumstances, where force may be used, this can only
         be done in self-defence or with the authorisation of the Security
         Council (Chapter VII of the UN Charter).


         It should also be noted that interventions and the use of armed
         force without Security Council authorisation are illegal.
         According to prevailing legal opinion, there is an indication that
         international law may be changing in this regard.  The recent NATO
         intervention in Kosovo (though by no means uncontroversial) is a
         case in point. Furthermore, there is a trend in interpreting
         Article 51 of the UN Charter (which condones the use of force for
         individual or collective self-defence until the Security Council
         has become seized of the matter) very widely to condone
         interventions.


         Thus, it can be said that the aforementioned provisions do not per
         se give a right to use force, but, at the very least, they may
         present the opportunity for such an interpretation. Therefore, the
         conclusion may be reached that both international law on the use
         of armed force and the provisions of the Act are possibly open to
         interpretation. Having said that, however, the possibility of
         having the Act conflict with International Law, including the UN
         Charter, may be a serious one and must be considered seriously.


     7.     In response to the above issues and other matters raised by the
         Committee, the Department of Foreign Affairs has indicated that
         the Act is a mere skeletal framework underpinning such an African
         Union, which will have to be elaborated on for its effective
         implementation. This elaboration may take place by way of
         negotiation and adoption of various protocols on specific aspects
         of the Act or decisions of the Assembly or revision and amendment
         of the Act in accordance with Article 32. The Department is of the
         view that this will provide the opportunity to ensure that the
         potential problems identified by the Committee would be able to be
         dealt with through these processes, which are intended to
         concretise the provisions contained in the Act. The Committee
         agrees with this point of view and the approach suggested by the
         Department. The Committee recommends accordingly.


     8.     It is recommended that the Executive monitor the processes
         leading to the adoption of the Act and the implementation of the
         Act upon adoption, to ensure that it is interpreted and applied in
         accordance with our Constitution and legal dispensation and our
         obligations under International Law and international conventions
         and treaties. The Committee would further like to recommend that,
         during the process of negotiation, drafting and adoption of such
         protocols and the implementation of the Act, Parliament be kept
         informed of progress, including, if and when possible, to be
         consulted on such processes, in an inclusive attempt to strengthen
         the hand of our negotiators during such processes.


     Report to be considered.

