---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 June 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-06-20
---

WEDNESDAY, 20 JUNE 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 2 - Parliament:

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker:


  As we strengthen the bonds of friendship and solidarity with our fellow
  Africans we have an obligation to help ensure, in our country and
  elsewhere on our continent, that no African child should ever again walk
  in fear of guns, tyrants and abuse; that no African child should ever
  again experience hunger, avoidable disease and ignorance; that no African
  child should ever again feel ashamed to be an African.

This is the vision of our President, articulated when he opened Parliament
on 9 February. We, this Parliament, must rise to the challenges of this
vision.

We have already, as a Parliament and as a people, won national, regional,
continental and international acclaim for our commitment to democracy
within our borders and beyond. After stunning the world with the peaceful
transition from a tyrannical, brutal and enslaving apartheid regime to a
rights-based one, we astounded even ourselves by our willing embrace of
reconciliation and nation-building.

We have agreed, as a country, to build peace and security; to build our
economy for the benefit of the many, not just the few; to sustain and
intensify the transformation of our society; to ensure and guarantee
equality before the law, the dignity of all our people and mutual respect
for our rich and diverse cultural differences.
At the centre of all this, was and is, Parliament. Like a pregnant mother
who goes through painful labour, who lets the infant suckle on her
nurturing breast and watches it grow with pride; in the same way we passed
a large number of transformatory laws, ensured that committees report on
all their work, increased our oversight responsibility, agreed on more
labour-intensive constituency periods to listen to the people. We changed
some of the old, like the Questions and Interpellations sessions, to give a
voice to all parties in Parliament.

Since 1994, the opening of Parliament and the Budget Address are a
celebration of democracy. The fact that the President of the Republic and
his Cabinet come to this democratic Parliament to account for their actions
and decisions is a celebration of democracy; a celebration that causes a
stir in all our communities; a celebration which makes us all pregnant with
expectation and breathless with anticipation; and a celebration to which
all our people are invited.

This Parliament, under the laudable leadership of the Speaker and the
presiding officers, has gained the respect and awe of the world. In
organisations of international repute, like the Commonwealth Parliament
Association, the Organisation of African Unity, the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, and SADC, our Parliament carved out a positive profile for itself.
It played a leading role in the birth of the African Union and the Pan-
African Parliament.

When he addressed the Parliament of Ghana on 6 October last year, our
esteemed President, Thabo Mbeki, said:


  Our elected legislatures, an independent judiciary and a free press are
  important parts of the new Africa we are working to create. We are firm
  in our conviction that we need to ensure that we have the capacity to
  intervene both in defence of democracy and human rights and to achieve
  the goal of a better life for all.

Our efforts in the region and continent cannot dwindle, because we are all
of one mother - mother Africa. The hon the President went on to say:


  Africa shares a common destiny. We are, to one another, brother and
  sister, whatever the nationality of the passports we carry. What Kwame
  Nkrumah said about the liberty of the peoples of Africa being indivisible
  remains true to this day.

What are the challenges we face now that the foundation has been laid? We
must increase our oversight capabilities to play a greater role in speeding
up change and creating a better life for all. It is our constitutional duty
to ensure that the laws we pass here have the intended impact on the lives
of our people.

Addressing this Assembly the hon President Mbeki called on MPs to dedicate
more time to their constituencies; to listen to the people's experiences on
the ground; to raise their concerns with the executive and follow up on it;
and to report to them on the work we do here.

We must also, as this Parliament, strengthen the democratic culture that is
enveloping this continent. As President Mbeki told the Ghanaian Parliament:



  In the last decade, we have seen much progress in the deepening of
  democracy with multiparty democratic elections being held in many of our
  countries. I believe that in the greater part of Africa, we have made
  great strides towards the creation of conditions for sustained democracy.

Parliamentarians must count themselves among the decision-makers of the
country and the continent. Every day we hear of the role that civil
society, business and labour have to play in the transformation project.
We, too, must more and more assume a high priority role in the quest to
restore Africa to her former status as a world leader.

Another crucial area that needs our urgent attention is the empowerment and
development of members of Parliament to better understand and participate
in the intricacies of Parliament. This is evident from a number of
experiences varying from misunderstanding to arrogant misfires. The most
recent and glaring example of such a misfire was the unsubstantiated
allegations the hon Holomisa made about the Speaker.

The subsequent debate was aimed at concluding that no one, including the
media, should be allowed to make such remarks about the Speaker, who is the
embodiment and the integrity of this House and of the rules of this
institution, except by tabling a substantive motion in the House. This is
an international convention. The lesson for all of us is to put the
necessary rules and guidelines in place to prevent a recurrence of this
nature.

A gravely misunderstood question is that of the role of the opposition. We
must ask the opposition what it has delivered since 1994, apart from
piggybacking on the ANC ... [Applause] ... apart from the occasional name-
change with great fanfare and apart from strange bedfellows sleeping with
their enemies. [Interjections.] The official opposition should rightfully
engage the Government and should do so constructively, critically and in
line with the aspirations of millions of people whom we represent.

Unfortunately, we have an opposition that subscribes to negative criticism
and bad-mouthing; an opposition that hurls insults and abuse instead of
engaging seriously on issues; an opposition that shouts loudly from the
benches; an opposition whose politics depend on the dictates of the media
that chases after every rumour and wild allegation; an opposition that
suffers from selective amnesia; an opposition that prophesies selective
oversight; and an opposition that endorses selective democracy. Maybe our
democracy and the people will benefit more from an opposition that does not
only represent and reflect a small and wealthy minority, but rather one
that reflects and represents the demographics and wishes of our diverse
society. [Interjections.]

We thank the Speaker and the presiding officers for their guidance through
the stormy seas. We must thank the Leader of Government Business, the hon
Deputy President Jacob Zuma, for his hands-on approach and his commitment
to Parliament. [Applause.] We want to thank the Chief Whips' of the
opposition parties for their role in the Chief Whips Forum.
[Interjections.] We have to thank the Secretary to Parliament and his staff
for their support. We are also grateful for the support staff of the ANC,
including the political staff, researchers, personal assistants,
secretaries, administrative assistants and constituency office staff.

Democratic South Africa has truly been blessed with the outstanding
visionaries and intellectuals in this Presidency, who led our country out
of its isolation from Africa and the world to its rightful place in the
assembly of nations. We must heed the clarion calls made by the vision of
our President. We must focus on our efforts in resolving the problem of the
colour line by ongoing confrontations with the demons of racism and racial
prejudice wherever they rear their heads, increase our role in the region,
the continent and the world to speed up change, give a louder voice to our
constituents, strengthen the hand of committees and stabilise the capacity
of Parliament itself to better serve the needs of our people. And we must
ensure that Parliament is located at the centre of our efforts, as a
nation, to bring change.

In supporting Vote 2, we must reiterate that, for Parliament to complete
its historic mission, it must be resourced adequately. We must implore the
hon the Minister of Finance to give more resources to Parliament, and not
less. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I want to say that the hon Mr Doidge has
really brought a very strange element into this debate - a debate that is,
normally, quite friendly. But today Mr Doidge has chosen to attack from the
start. That is fine, because, quite frankly, we can do the same.

Unfortunately, I think what he has done today is to set a precedent for the
future. I find it very sad indeed that generally speaking, a debate that is
good and positive about Parliament has taken on the kind of tone that it
has this afternoon. I think that he is going to have a great deal to answer
for in the future. [Interjections.]

Make no error, nothing is quite as good as Mr Doidge would like it to
appear to be. He talks about the opposition in a particular way, ie what we
have not done, what we should be doing, and so on. The opposition reserves
the right, forever, to challenge this Government when it does things wrong.
[Interjections.] The fact that we find that the Government is doing far too
much wrong is, of course, a very important point and one that the hon Mr
Doidge seems to forget. But, quite frankly I, again, want to say to Mr
Doidge that it is a huge pity that he has brought this element into this
debate today, a great pity indeed.

Let me say that in some respects Parliament has improved quite
considerably. For example, we now do have computers - I think many MPs are
not really aware of the fact that we struggled for a long time to get these
computers. But, quite frankly, we are still inundated with huge piles of
papers each day, and notices of meetings that too often arrive too late. We
obviously look forward to the day when the network is set up properly, so
that we can make proper and efficient use of our computers.

However, there are many other areas where parliamentary life struggles on
from one year to the next, and which need to be resolved urgently. One of
these, clearly, is the issue of Hansard where, just as it looked as though
things were coming right and speeches would be available within 48 hours
after delivery, the situation has yet again deteriorated. Hansard is an
essential service - I think, all MPs will agree - and we again urge that
the problems being experienced are resolved as soon as possible.

Another issue is that of staffing. However grateful one is - and we,
certainly, are grateful for the assistance received, for example from the
EU - it is still a fact that only the most senior office bearers in the
various parties have anything like a reasonable staffing complement. All
other members have to struggle with shared secretaries who are not always
available when they are required and this, obviously, remains
unsatisfactory.

The parking situation is atrocious. The matter has been going on for
months, if not years, and yet it remains absolutely unresolved. We have
discussed it at the Chief Whips' Forum. Quite frankly, after the type of
speech the hon Mr Doidge has made today, I understand why we do not get
anything done at the Chief Whips' Forum ... [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: He is busy playing politics!

Mr M J ELLIS: Yes, he is too busy playing politics, Madam Speaker. If he
actually got down to doing some of the things that he was supposed to do,
maybe these matters would in fact be resolved. But I would say that, quite
frankly, it is atrocious that this parking problem has continued to the
extent that it has. Yet again, we have to appeal to everyone to make sure
that it is resolved as a matter of urgency.

However, we note with a great deal of interest that there is a vast sum of
money being spent on the parliamentary buildings and the parliamentary
villages. It certainly seems as if the decision must have now been taken
that Parliament is to remain in Cape Town. We would certainly like
confirmation of this fact. If this is not the case, then we would certainly
like to know how we can justify the spending of millions of rands on
Parliament if Parliament is only temporarily in the city.

I want to add another point of deep concern to the DP and the DA, ie
Question Time. It does remain a serious bone of contention. It is, of
course, an essential part of the parliamentary process and we are now
finalising the proposed changes to Question Time, but we remain very
unhappy in view of the fact that the ANC appears to be developing the
system more to the liking of Ministers, who have to answer questions, than
to the rights of members to ask questions.

Question Time should always be to the benefit of members, and not to the
benefit of the executive. I believe that, at the end of the day, we are
bending over backwards now. Certainly, the ANC is aided and abetted by
certain people, like Mr Koos van der Merwe. We are bending over backwards
to make life easier for Ministers while denying the right of members to ask
legitimate questions of the executive. It is a point that we will fight for
forever. [Interjections.] I beg your pardon, sir?

An HON MEMBER: Why are you so self-righteous?
Mr M J ELLIS: I want to say to the hon member that I have a duty to this
country to make sure that we do the very best, and we will continue to do
it regardless of what he says. [Interjections.]

The dust has settled somewhat concerning the controversy surrounding the
Office of the Speaker. Some very sharp comments were made at the time. I
trust that all of us have learned from the experience. This is not the
occasion to address that matter again, and I merely want to thank the
presiding officers for the work which they do - Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy
Speaker, the Chair and the Deputy Chair. I certainly believe it cannot
always be easy to preside over a House that has as much spirit as this one,
and we appreciate the manner in which it is done. Thank you, Madam Deputy
Speaker and your presiding officers. [Applause.]

I also want to thank the Chief Whips of all the various parties, but I will
not go into details, because of the opening remarks that Mr Doidge made. I
want to say that, generally speaking, in the Chief Whips' Forum, we have
developed a pretty good rapport which I think has been spoiled somewhat
this afternoon. I also want to say thank you to the Secretariat to
Parliament for all the hard work that they do. We really do appreciate the
efforts they make to ensure that Parliament does run properly and smoothly.
[Applause.]

Ms B O DLAMINI: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President and hon members, I wish
to start by congratulating hon member Doidge on being able to shake the hon
member Mike Ellis. [Interjections.] I wish to state categorically that the
ANC is not afraid of criticism, but criticism from the opposition has
always been very destructive and arrogant. [Interjections.] One can see
from the response of the hon Mike Ellis that, if we can keep on fighting
fire with fire, they would vanish. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

During the Makifeng Conference of December 1997, the ANC resolved that all
MPs and MPLs, including presiding officers, Cabinet Ministers, Premiers and
MECs shall be accountable to their constituencies, report regularly on
developments in the legislature and the executive, take up issues raised by
constituencies and address the needs of the constituencies.
This resolution is based on the fact that the ANC believes in participatory
democracy, which informs the ANC's call on our people to unite in action
for change.

Participatory democracy has also helped people to participate in the law-
making process. This has helped Parliament to interact with the electorate.
It is the duty of all MPs to report back to the electorate during
constituency work, so as to remain accountable to the people. Constituency
offices have changed the face of Parliament for the people.

Ngaphambi kokhetho luka-1994 abantu bebengakwazi ukuhlangana namalunga
ePhalamende. Lokhu sikuzwa uma siye emihlangwaneni sihambise imibiko
yePhalamende emiphakathini. Abantu bajabula kakhulu ngokuthi
isishayamthetho basibona ngamehlo, into abangakaze baze bayibone, into
engakaze ize yenzeke ngaphambi kokhetho luka-1994. Bekushaywa imithetho nje
abantu bengabambi iqhaza ekushayweni kwayo, futhi bengazi ngisho nangayo
leyo mithetho ngoba kwakuyimithetho yokuvikela idlanzana labantu
ababephethe ngaleso sikhathi - i-DP ne-New NP eyayiyingxenye yayo leyo
mithetho. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)
[Before the 1994, elections people could not meet members of Parliament. We
hear this when we are in meetings in which we give parliamentary reports to
communities. People are happy because they can see the legislators with
their own eyes, whereas this was not the case before. It is something which
did not happen before the 1994 elections. Laws were made and people did not
participate in that process. They did not even know about those laws,
because they were laws to protect only the minority that was in power at
that time. Only the DP and the NP, were part of that process.]

The ANC has drawn its representatives from different constituencies so as
to ensure that all constituencies are represented. In the ANC one does not
apply to be an MP there is a democratic process and one is elected by the
structures. This results from the fact that we in the ANC believe in
collective decision-making.

The ANC remains accountable to its membership and supporters, but we have
adjusted to the fact that constituency offices are for people from all
walks of life. People from different political organisations have been able
to access our constituency offices, because we are committed to unite in
action for change.

Communities from rural areas have used these offices for a number of
problems and issues. For example, the problems with pensions, maintenance,
child support grants and identity documents, as well as problems related to
farmworkers, womens' rights, and many others. Members of the public can
access Parliament through the public awareness programmes, publications,
tours to Parliament and information technology. The above have enabled
Parliament to close the gap between itself and ordinary people.

There is still room for improvement in all this. Parliament needs to find a
structured way of processing reports and information from the electorate.
We need to ensure that MPs report to the executive about problems they find
in their constituencies.

Parliament needs to look seriously into time allocated to constituency
work. The way we are approaching constituency work presently, leaves much
to be desired, because we only go to constituencies for one or two weeks
and we quickly return to Parliament, ending up not doing thorough work. We
need to dedicate more time to constituency work, so as to balance
constituency work and parliamentary work. Parliament needs to find ways of
taking important documents like Hansard and annual reports to
constituencies, so that people can have access to these.

Constituency offices must be equipped in a way that people do not feel the
distance between Parliament and themselves. This could be done in a number
of ways. For example, the hon member Andries Nel has suggested that members
should have CD-ROMs with Parliament's website on them. This information
could be updated on a quarterly basis. It would enable people to access
Parliament through constituency offices.

We need to acknowledge that constituency allocations have been increased
this year, but there is still room for improvement. There are still
constraints that face members when they have to discharge their duties in
their constituencies. Some MPs are deployed in very remote and vast areas.
Parliament needs to find a way of providing more financial assistance to
these members, so that they can travel to these areas. This should go hand
in hand with improved ways of accountability.
The ANC supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Speaker, the issue before us concerns the House's
consideration of the parliamentary Vote for the 2001-02 financial year.

In supporting this Budget the IFP would like to raise a few points. The
first concerns areas of expenditure. In general, we are pleased with the
increase in the allocation given to Parliament. In addition, we are pleased
with the deployment of those moneys across particular areas of importance
for the way we do our work here. I think all these are starting to count
towards us and towards this Parliament becoming a Parliament of the people
and acting in their interest.

There are, of course, areas that we are always going to point our fingers
at, to say where we would like more money spent. I can think of two in
particular. One would be research facilities for the committees themselves.
If the committees are to give considered views in overseeing the work of
Government, especially when it comes to legislation, in my view the need
for in-committee research facilities grows all the more important. The
current arrangement where we have an independent and separate research unit
has not fulfilled that function. This is partially expressed by the amount
of funds that we have difficulty in spending in that area.

I would like to point to an area where a lot has happened. There is a lot
to be grateful for in the facilities that have been accorded to the
physically disadvantaged and other disadvantaged people in the House. I
would like to suggest, as part of that small community, that there are a
few other areas which we hope to see addressed in the near future.

The second area I would like to touch on, concerns financial management,
and coming from where I do, I cannot let that go. I think that generally
the accounting officer and his team have done a pretty good job, as
expressed in the Auditor-General's report on financial management matters
of Parliament. I think a lot of improvement, eg on risk assessment,
management and the internal control side, as well as on segregation of
duties and the way it is geared up for the new Public Financial Management
Act, all need to be acknowledged.
The third and final area I wish to refer to concerns a subcommittee that I
used to serve on under the hon Barbara Hogan - I am now serving under the
hon Pallo Jordan - ie the subcommittee on Parliament's budget, which is an
arm of the Rules committee. There I would I like to suggest that the Rules
of Parliament more clearly define what the exact role of that committee is.
As things happen now, people make submissions to that subcommittee, we hear
what they say and pass them on, and the figures are changed. I think there
is a critical need to assess the budget, the areas of spending and the
relative proportions, as well as to make more constructive suggestions. So
with that, I do hope that the Rules committee will consider giving greater
definition to the role of the subcommittee. I do think that we have an
important role to play.

Mr J F VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, Deputy President and hon members, let me
start by acknowledging the mayor of the Colesberg municipality and some
other people from my constituency in the gallery. [Applause.]

One morning when I was approaching the gates of Parliament, I nearly caused
an accident. This was because, to my surprise, I noticed that the statue of
Louis Botha in front of Parliament had been replaced by a statue of what
seemed to me to be an African warrior. This surprise was short-lived,
because I noticed that someone had only dressed up the honourable General's
statue in that way. Later on I found out that it was only part of Cape
Town's One City, Many Cultures Campaign.

Parliament is a product of our new Constitution, and its role should
therefore be redefined in terms of the new Constitution. It is also
important that Parliament should transform its physical appearance to fit
into the new dispensation. With that I do not necessarily mean that we
should have new buildings, although the current architecture does not
reflect African culture. It will have cost and other implications that we
currently cannot afford. But there are elements of Parliament that should
change, with less cost but with very important implications for the
transformation of this institution.

The process of transformation in our country brought about a growing and
urgent need for Parliament to review its symbols. The symbols are the
parliamentary emblem, the mace of the National Assembly, the black rod of
the NCOP and the ceremonial garments. The continued use of the Westminster
system's symbols in the South African Parliament does not bode well for the
spirit of the African Renaissance, which anchors transformation in South
Africa. Our new symbols should redefine and rewrite the history of
Parliament. The symbols should further demonstrate and reflect South
African institutions as part of the proud, diverse and rich traditions of
Africa. Therefore, Parliament has embarked on a national campaign involving
the public in the development of new parliamentary symbols.

We also need to look at what messages we want to convey from Parliament. We
need to look at how best we can convey these messages through the artworks
that we display in the precincts of Parliament. But we should ask questions
about some of the artworks that are currently being displayed within
Parliament. For instance, what is the message that we send out with the
continued presence of the statue of Louis Botha and others like him, which
reflect our colonial apartheid past? Should these artworks not be replaced
by works that are symbolic of our liberation and diverse culture? Artworks
have the potential to contribute to national consciousness and nation-
building.

Our challenge is that art that is exhibited in Parliament should portray
the broad spectrum of our 11 official languages, and the other languages
mentioned in section 5 of the Constitution. We should embark on a conscious
and deliberate selection of artworks reflecting all these cultural groups.
Parliament is in  the process of appointing a curator and drafting policy
on artworks. These are steps in the right direction, but a lot of work
still needs to be done and these processes need to be speeded up.

Yesterday the South African-born Hollywood actress, Charlize Theron said
about ex-President Mandela: `` He is one of the reasons why I am proud to
be a South African. He is a great inspiration to me.'' I truly believe that
most South Africans echo these words. The Chief Whip of the ANC, Comrade
Tony Yengeni, said on the occasion of the debate on the 10th anniversary of
the release of Comrade Nelson Mandela,and I quote:


  ... his life serves as an inspiration to the people of South Africa, both
  black and white, to the people of the African continent and the
  international community.


  He is the founding father of our rainbow nation, and through his term of
  office, managed to foster our national unity.

It is therefore important for Parliament to honour Madiba in the most
appropriate manner for the role he played. It is important that a
resolution adopted by this House during the above-mentioned debate, i.e.
that a bust of this great man should grace the precincts of Parliament, is
implemented as soon as possible.

The establishment of the NCOP is an important breakaway from the old
Westminster system. The NCOP ensures that through its system of permanent
and special delegates, the nine provinces and local government have a
direct voice in Parliament when laws are made. This is an important part of
the transformation of Parliament, because most laws have to be carried out
at provincial and local level. The refurbishment of the NCOP Chamber is,
therefore, an important part of the transformation of the physical
appearance of Parliament. The reorganisation of the space within the NCOP
Chamber will make it more functional and effective for the role that that
House is playing in this new dispensation of co-operative governance.
The new coat of arms is one of our new national symbols of the new
democratic South Africa. It is therefore important that it should be
displayed within Parliament. Suggestions by the New NP and DP that both the
new and old coats of arms should be displayed is unacceptable. The country
has one coat of arms - that and nothing else should be displayed. It is
time this ``Deurmekaar'' Alliance understood that the days of ``Eendrag
maak mag'' are over, they are finish and klaar. Now it is the time for !ke
e: /xarra //ke. [Laughter.] Now it is the time for unity in diversity.

The problem is that we do not currently have a proper slot in the meetings
of the Rules subcommittees to deal with these and other issues that affect
the transformation of Parliament on our parliamentary programme, because
portfolio committees get preference over these committees on the programme.
Our challenge is for Parliament to find a proper space for the housekeeping
committees on its programme. It is also important that members, especially
those with expertise, address these issues, to demonstrate more commitment
and effort to making a contribution.

Some of the issues covered in my speech are not covered by the budget of
Parliament, but are funded by the Public Works department. But the
responsibility for policy and decision-making still rests with Parliament.
Whether it is the budget of Parliament or that of Public Works, it is
important that provision is made for decisions on transformation to be
implemented.

I want to close by thanking Madam Speaker and the presiding officers of
both Houses for their leadership in the transformation of Parliament as an
agent for change. I also want to thank the Secretary to Parliament, his
management team and staff for their contribution. All of us are sometimes
working under very difficult circumstances, but we should always remember
that our ultimate goal is a better life for all.

The ANC supports the Vote. [Applause.]

Mr C H F GREYLING: Madam Speaker, normally this debate is not a debate in
which to score political points. I must say that I was surprised at the
tasteless attitude displayed by the hon the Deputy Chief Whip of the
Majority Party. It is obvious that he has ambitions to succeed the hon the
Chief Whip, should the latter vacate his seat. [Interjections.] But I have
news for him; rumour has it that he does not have the necessary support
amongst his colleagues. And to the hon Van Wyk, I must just say ...

 ... die agb lid moet sy feite regkry. Hy ken nie die geskiedenis nie en hy
moet uitvind wat by die ``internal arrangements''-komitee gebeur het.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[... the hon member must get his facts straight. He does not know the
history and he must find out what happened in the internal arrangements
committee.]

The discussion of Vote 2, namely Parliament, is important for various
reasons. One reason is that Parliament's effective functioning to a great
extent serves as a display window of our democracy. Our conduct as
representatives of Parliament - and therefore as representatives of all the
people of South Africa -  should at all times comply with what the voters
expect of us, and dignity should be part of this.

The public is placing us under a magnifying glass and it is our duty to
ensure that we continuously strive for excellence. Parliament's budget for
2001-02 amounts to R422,7 million. Constituency allowances will increase by
R6,3 million, and I would like to express my gratitude that constituency
allowances were increased from R4 800 to R6 000 per month, per member. This
amount is definitely more realistic for maintaining an office with
infrastructure. We also appreciate the fact that funding for party support
and members' facilities was increased. All these increases can only lead to
MPs doing a better job and enable them to perform their duties more
effectively.

Na my beskeie mening moet ons in hierdie debat krediet gee waar dit
geregverdig is, maar ons moet ook nie huiwer om op bepaalde tekortkomings
te wys waar dit bestaan nie. As ek dan na laasgenoemde moet verwys, wil ek
tog die aandag daarop vestig dat daar 'n paar aspekte is wat kwel.

Voorbeelde hiervan is portefeuljekomiteevergaderings wat steeds nie betyds
begin nie. Behoorlike kennisgewing word nie gegee nie. Soms is die
vergaderings reeds verby, dan kry ons eers kennis daarvan. Verder is daar
portefeuljekomitees wat sit terwyl die Huis ook sit. Net gister het agt
portefeuljekomitees gesit terwyl die Huis ook in sitting was.

'n Verdere aspek wat pla, is die slordigheid van die parlementêre terrein
wat werklik daadwerklike aandag moet kry. Die Parlement is Suid-Afrika se
simbool van ons jong demokrasie, en as sodanig behoort dit te alle tye
onberispelik netjies te vertoon. Besonder baie buitelandse besoekers word
hier ontvang, en dit is werklik nodig dat die terrein te alle tye ten
minste skoon sal wees.

'n Reëling waarvoor ons ook dankbaar is, is die feit dat Maandae nou
beskikbaar is vir die doeleindes van partye se studiegroepe. Ons vertrou
dat waar daar nog portefeuljekomitees op Maandae vergader, hierdie
aangeleentheid ook reggestel sal word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[In my humble opinion we must give credit where it is due in this debate,
but we should also not hesitate to indicate specific shortcomings where
they exist. If I then have to refer to the last-mentioned, I would like to
draw attention to the fact that there are a few aspects which are causing
concern.
Examples of this are portfolio committee meetings which still do not begin
on time. Adequate notification is not given. Sometimes the meetings are
already over before we are notified about them. Furthermore, there are
portfolio committees which sit while the House is also sitting. Just
yesterday eight portfolio committees sat while the House was also sitting.

A further aspect which is causing concern, is the untidiness of the
parliamentary grounds, which must really receive decisive attention.
Parliament is South Africa's symbol of our young democracy, and as such it
should be immaculately neat at all times. An exceptionally high number of
foreign visitors are received here, and it is really necessary that the
grounds should at least be clean at all times.

An arrangement which we are also grateful for, is the fact that Mondays are
now available for the purposes of parties' study groups. We trust that
where there are still portfolio committees meeting on Mondays, this matter
will also be rectified.]

In conclusion, I would like to add my voice to those who have already
thanked the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the Chairperson and Deputy
Chairperson of Committees for their sometimes difficult role, not only in
maintaining the dignity of the House, but also order. This is truly not
always an easy task and we would like to thank them for their role in this
regard.

I would like to thank the Chief Whip and the Deputy Chief Whip of the
Majority Party for the co-operation we enjoy in the Chief Whips' Forum. To
the Secretary to Parliament, Mr Mfenyana and his staff, I would like to
extend a word of gratitude for their service at the Table.

Ek rig ook aan alle ander parlementêre personeel elders in die kompleks wat
die ratte van die Parlement geolie hou 'n besondere woord van waardering.

Laaste maar nie die minste nie, 'n besondere woord van dank aan die media,
wat die taak het om te rapporteer oor die bedrywighede van die Huis en sy
komitees. Die rol wat hulle speel om die werksaamhede van die Parlement aan
die gemeenskap bekend te stel kan nie onderskat word nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[I would also like to address a particular word of appreciation to all
other parliamentary staff elsewhere in the complex who keep the wheels of
Parliament turning.

Last but not least, a particular word of thanks to the media, which has the
task to report on the activities of the House and its committees. The role
they play to introduce the community to the proceedings of Parliament
cannot be underestimated.]

We support this Vote.

Mr M J MAHLANGU: Madam Speaker and hon members of Parliament, members are
tasked with scrutinising legislation emanating from the executive,
developing legislation and exercising oversight over the executive function
in general and the transformation process in Parliament.

It is expedient to begin the transformation of our people and institutions,
including Parliament, by changing the mindset of the people. The synergy
between the thinking and practice of the the thoughts is still lacking in
some conjunctions. To be on the same wavelength, it is a known scenario
that the imperatives of transformation dictate that whenever management of
change occurs, like our present scenario, one cannot avoid the change of
management style.

When the mindsets of the people are ready, having been frozen by the past
regime, we need to sensitise them about thorny issues and democratic
priorities that should be undertaken by all of us. I am persuaded to assume
that we are at that stage now. Another further step will be to jointly
defrost our minds onto a scenario where the calibration of our action is
measured by the positive feedback from our communities, without partly
blemishing and point scoring.

It is evident that we have travelled a long and uneasy road that demanded -
and still demands from all of us - perennial commitment, preparation of
strategic plans and aggressive implementation thereof, to improve the
quality of lives of our people. We realise and recognise the constraints
under which we have worked, but have progressed as far as we have made
inroads into the stages at which we are.

There is progress which our democracy can boast about in delivery and
development by both our members as instruments of democracy and our people
as targets for development. Our Parliament has instituted one of the most
ideal, pragmatic systems in its workings, which is the parliamentary
committee system. I am going to deal with this point extensively.

Our democracy is about the participation of our entire population in the
affairs affecting their own political, socioeconomic and cultural
livelihood. Lack of finance prevents those who live a distance away from
travelling to Cape Town to make a presentation. I want to mention two
options today. We should either improve the budget effectively so as to
allow people to come to Parliament, or committees should visit villages
which are far from Parliament so that they can participate in the
presentations of the legislative processes of this country. This is to make
it possible for Parliament to access people who have something different to
say.

Currently, the public hearings within the committee system benefit big,
organised businesses and their lobbyists. Our committee system is globally
acclaimed, because of its all- inclusiveness, a scenario that was never
dreamt of before. Our results will show if we work together in the building
of our nation. It is important to underline that when we are in committees,
political point-scoring accelerates retrogression, instead of accelerating
progression.

Our current budget cannot even begin to address the sore points of our
Parliament in general and committees in particular. We need up-to-date,
adequate technology, information management technology and strong research
units that will service our community as and when research is requisitioned
or required. The committees are the engine of Parliament. This is where the
real issues are assigned for thorough deliberation and reported to this
House.

The committee system has settled very well, but inadequate research support
is hampering efficiency. Chairpersons would like to have researchers
attached to each committee. Resources and capacity have to be looked at.
Parliament's research component is a very transient arrangement. It is
definitely not sufficient. Researchers are very few and are not attached to
committees according to their experience, qualifications and professions.

Parliamentary committees are the ideal vehicle for Parliament to fulfil its
role in terms of the Constitution. The Constitution makes provision for
representative and participatory democracy, accountability and
transparency. It facilitates public involvement in the legislature and
other processes of Parliament.

Committees have been actively involved in promoting these ideals on behalf
Parliament. Structures and procedures have been put in place to promote
these goals, enabling these committees to be much more active and effective
than before. Committees are generally assigned other functions and other
responsibilities. Besides considering legislation in portfolio and select
committees, they are expected to have oversight of Government in the
financial field and in domestic functions, as well as to examine specific
areas of public life and matters of public interest, to monitor and oversee
Government affairs and provinces, consider private members' legislative
proposals and a few others.

I want to dwell on an issue which I think is very important for Parliament.
This issue is the question of oversight. Parliament, in representing the
people of the Republic of South Africa, also has an obligation to act as a
custodian of their resources. The rendering of public service can only be
as effective as the management of the money that funds them. For this
reason, Parliament played an active part in drafting the Public Finance
Management Act, which is already transforming public spending at the
present moment. Therefore, the implementation of the PFMA becomes a very
crucial role of Parliament itself to monitor the spending by the
departments, public entities and constitutional institutions.

Parliament also finds itself in the accountability chain as the ultimate
arbiter of the financial performance of accounting officers. This
accountability chain represents a critical drive for improving management
in the public sector.

In conclusion, I would also like to join the rest of the House in thanking
the Secretary to Parliament for making it possible to begin to train the
staff in the committee section, so that they can play their role
efficiently in assisting and supporting the work of committees in
Parliament.

I wish to thank the presiding officers and congratulate them on setting the
national agenda. The manner in which they have objectively secured most
crucial debates and have been able to treat all matters with impartiality
is laudable.

I also want to applaud the prudent leadership of Dr Pallo Jordan, who is
the chairperson of the Rules subcommittee, in terms of the budget. He has
made it possible to drive the budget process in this Parliament.

Let me thank all chairpersons who have really given me respect and co-
operation in my work as Chairperson of Committees, as well as the Leader of
Government Business, the Whips and the presiding officers. My task has been
made easy by them, and I want to say bravo to all of them.

I also thank the Secretary to Parliament for completing the task of getting
the secretaries to chair Parliament. I support this Vote. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, I rise to support this Vote.

The ACDP is generally satisfied with the new interim Questions procedure
that is being applied. What we are not happy with, though, is the way in
which the Deputy Speaker seems to ignore us, or her failure to acknowledge
us when we raise our hands to attract her attention. There must be the same
acknowledgement from her that we receive from Madam Speaker. Otherwise we
have to keep our hands raised throughout Question Time, which is not fair.
She must either nod her head, smile, frown or do something to say to
members, ``Yes, I have seen you.'' [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The new system of questions is definitely working better than the
interpellations, which did not give many members an opportunity to
participate. [Applause.]  Some Cabinet members respond to questions by hon
members very well, and with politeness. They should be commended for that.
I especially want to give credit to Ministers such as Valli Moosa, Ronnie
Kasrils, Jeff Radebe and Thoko Didiza for treating members of the
opposition with dignity and respect as fellow parliamentarians. I wish I
could say the same for all Cabinet Ministers!

The ACDP would also like to see the parliamentary programme divided into
four quarters, with our recess coinciding with school holidays.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Speaker, am I included in that
list? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, why have I been slandered in
Parliament by being excluded from the list? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Speaker, do
we allow such divisive behaviour in this Parliament? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! It is parliamentary to make comments about
Ministers. Proceed, hon member.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Members of Parliament must have time to be with their
families, especially children who still need their guidance. It is never
good news to hear about Cabinet Ministers either divorcing or separating
from their spouses. Much of this is a result of pressure of work that keeps
them away from home for long hours and days.

The ACDP maintains that we cannot build a nation while we are failing to
maintain our families. We cannot show care and concern to the children of
this nation while we are failing to show love, care and concern to our own
children. Charity should begin in our own homes. To emphasise the important
fact that children and teenagers need their parents, especially fathers, I
am going to read a portion of an e-mail I received this morning from my 19-
year-old daughter:


  Dear Dad. This is just a short note to let you know how much I love,
  respect and appreciate you. Thank you for, even though you are extremely
  busy, always having the time to talk, laugh and for taking care to find
  out what's happening in our lives. Thank you for, together with mom,
  training me up in the way that I should go. Now, when I act the way I do
  and people are amazed, all I can say is that I was brought up well.

This is possible because we are able to make time for our families. My
daughter continues:
  You are my role model and I smile with pride when I am told, ``you take
  after your father in many areas!'' I am honoured to be known as your
  first daughter. Not many people can boast of the father-daughter
  relationship that we have. I am grateful for it and am proud that I can
  boast of having ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, I want to ask the hon Meshoe: Witness hy nou,
of brag hy nou? [Is he testifying or is he boasting?] [Laughter.]

Parliament is more than a mere functional body that has to work through a
specific agenda. Parliament is the mirror of society. The Constitution
reflects something along these lines, in describing Parliament as a
national forum. Parliament is a microcosm of the country as a whole.
[Interjections.]

But Parliament does not only reflect society - it also impacts on society,
not only through what it does, but also through the way in which it
operates and not only through its agenda, but also through its modus
operandi. Bitterness, malicious confrontation and insulting behaviour in
Parliament inevitably results in a heavily polarised society. It conditions
our different communities outside to think that confrontation and
aggression are the name of the game. This is even more so in a pluralistic
society like South Africa, where the laagers can so easily be drawn up
against each other.

As such, a huge responsibility rests on our shoulders as members of
Parliament. We must have a healing and consoling influence on society.
Therefore, I fully support the plea by the Chief Whip and by the Speaker
that the level of debate, and especially of interaction with each other in
this House, must be raised. The golden rule must certainly be: ``Play the
ball, and not the man.'' It is a myth that politics is a licence for bad
manners. Yes, Parliament is not a place for sissies. We must have vibrant
debates and a healthy level of heckling. But let us take note of the Roman
proverb: Suaviter in modo, fortiter in re.

Dit beteken: wees sterk in jou saak, maar gematig in jou aanslag. Dit is
net wanneer 'n mens nie 'n regverdige saak het nie, dat mens dit wil opdos
met 'n groot lawaai en geskreeu, soos die dominee wat in die kantlyn by sy
preek geskryf het: ``Argument weak, shout hard!'' (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[This means: be gentle in manner, but resolute in deed. It is only when one
does not have a just cause that one wants to   embellish it with a lot of
noise and shouting, like the preacher who wrote in the margin of his
sermon: ``Argument weak, shout hard!'']

Maybe it would be a good suggestion that every day, just after the moment
of silence for prayer or meditation, we do the haka across the floor, and
then calm down a little bit. [Laughter.]

Daar moet egter ook sekere konstitusionele ontwikkelinge in Suid-Afrika
plaasvind om die Parlement werklik 'n forum vir al die gemeenskappe te
maak. Suid-Afrika het 'n unieke, gediversifiseerde samelewing. Die belange
van die verskillende gemeenskappe moet nie net verteenwoordig en verwoord
word in debatte nie, maar ook in besluitneming. Die tradisionele liberale
demokrasie wat in wese deur individue verteenwoordig word, moet plek maak
vir 'n plurale demokrasie, wat gemeenskappe verteenwoordig.

Die konstitusionele meganismes waarvolgens ons Parlement opereer, loop
onvermydelik uit op meerderheidsoorheersing en op die tirannie van getalle.
En die meerderheidsparty skroom nie om hierdie getalle-tirannie aan te wend
nie.

Binne ons parlementêre stelsel het ons geen voorsiening vir wigte en
teenwigte, wat wêreldwyd in plurale gemeenskappe toegepas word nie. Die
stem van minderhede word verdra, maar nie verdiskonteer nie. Getalle het
``the name of the game'' geword, en nie belange nie. Die onvermydelike
gevolg is konfrontasie, eerder as konsosiasie.

Konstitusionele meganismes moet geskep word waardeur die verskeidenheid of
kaleidoskoop van die Suid-Afrikaanse samelewing in reële terme
verdiskonteer word. Suid-Afrika is 'n unieke land met unieke probleme en
unieke vraagstukke. Dit vra ook unieke oplossings. Ons kan nie maar 'n
voorafvervaardigde demokratiese stelsel van die rak afhaal nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[However, some constitutional developments should also occur in South
Africa to make Parliament a true forum for all the communities. South
Africa has a unique, diversified society. The interests of the different
communities should not only be represented and expressed in debates, but
also in decision-making. The traditional liberal democracy which is
essentially represented by individuals must make place for a plural
democracy representing communities.

The constitutional mechanisms according to which our Parliament operates
inevitably lead to domination by the majority and the tyranny of numbers.
And the majority party does not hesitate to use this tyranny of numbers.

We have no provision in our parliamentary system for the checks and
balances which are applied worldwide in plural communities. The voice of
minorities is tolerated, but not taken into account. Numbers have become
the name of the game, and not interests. The inevitable outcome is
confrontation rather than consociation.

Constitutional mechanisms should be created through which the diversity or
kaleidoscope of the South African society can be taken into account. South
Africa is a unique country with unique problems.  This also requires unique
solutions.  We cannot simply pick a prefabricated democratic system from
the shelf.]

We need tailor-made solutions, and therefore a tailor-made Parliament. The
degree to which a real problem-solving approach and system is adopted and
applied in the highest council of the country, will spell out the
difference between failure and success in South Africa. We need a win-win
situation instead of the out-dated winner-takes-all approach. Striving
towards that goal makes it worthwhile for me to serve in this august House.


May I take this opportunity to thank the Speaker, the personnel and every
colleague in this Parliament. [Applause.]

Dr Z P JORDAN: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon members and comrades:


  The Magna Carta, the Petition of Rights, and the Bill of Rights are
  documents which are held in veneration by democrats throughout the world.


  I have great respect for the British political institutions and for the
  country's system of justice. I regard the British parliament as the most
  democratic institution in the world, and the independence and
  impartiality of its judiciary never fail to arouse my admiration.


  The American Congress, that country's doctrine of separation of powers,
  as well as the independence of its judiciary, arouses in me similar
  sentiments.

These were the words spoken in court by Nelson Mandela before he was sent
to prison for 28 years. That these words fell on the wilfully deaf ears of
most of his white compatriots does not diminish their importance, because
they encapsulate the ANC's attitude to democracy and specifically to
Parliament as an institution.

My remarks today are on Parliament and what it means to this country and
the future of our democracy. Since 1994 this august Assembly has been
responsible for 669 Bills and has passed 632 Acts. Thirty-one Bills are
being considered by the committees of Parliament this year. Six of them
have already become law. Because South Africa has now been readmitted to
the international community, this Parliament approved 47 international
treaties and conventions during the first three years of its life. Between
1994 and the year 2000, 283 international agreements were tabled in
Parliament and 57 of these have been approved.

It is a matter of pride for all South Africans that South Africa is ranked
amongst the first 10 parliaments in the world for the equitable
representation of women in Parliament. [Applause.] This is highly
commendable, but the question we must ask ourselves is why we are amongst
the top 10 and not yet number one.

Since 1994 the doors of Parliament have been thrown open to the South
African public. The media, a crucial pillar of any democracy, now has free
access to every committee of this Parliament, except perhaps the Portfolio
Committee on Intelligence, and I think even our hypersensitive fourth
estate will agree that this is unprecedented. We trust that the
transparency with which Parliament now operates assists South Africa's
media to keep our people informed about how the decisions that so directly
affect their lives are taken. Perhaps it is the papers I read, but I rarely
have a sense that South Africa is living through an exciting period when I
read our daily newspapers. [Interjections.] But if that is truly the case,
it is not Parliament that is failing the nation.
Parliament gives palpable expression to the principle of ``government of
the people, by the people, and for the people''. In a sense, Parliament is
a distillation of the national will, as expressed through free and fair
elections in which all South Africans have an equal right to participate.

In the first instance Parliament is accountable to the South African people
who, through their votes, mandate us as their elected representatives to
manage the affairs of the nation on their behalf. It is from amongst the
members of this House that the President constitutes his Cabinet. That
executive is accountable to this Parliament, whose role it is to act as a
watchdog of the public interest by exercising its oversight function.

The issue of the representativity of Parliament has always been of
paramount concern to us. It was our sensitivity to the pluralism of our
society that persuaded the ANC to eschew party-political considerations in
favour of a system of proportional representation that could better reflect
the reality of diverse opinions and political preferences in our society.
Ironically, it is those who bay loudest about representivity who appear
keen to collapse the numerous diverse viewpoints represented here into a
conventional two-party system, if they can manage it. Or, if they cannot,
at least to reduce the multiplicity of opposition voices to one - theirs.
This, we are told, they will do in the interests of democracy.
[Interjections.]

Representative government is based on the possibility of consensus about
the key issues within society. Parliamentary debate consequently is not
merely an opportunity to iterate and reiterate known policy positions and
options; its purpose is also to search out areas of commonality and to
create the space for the proponents of differing viewpoints to find each
other.

Because this will not always be possible, the universally accepted deadlock-
breaking device is calling a division. Without exception, it is recognised
that when a division is called it is the majority view that prevails. It is
also generally accepted that the committees of Parliament are not mere
agglomerations of individuals who happen to serve on the same committee.
What Parliament therefore expects from its committees is a collective view.
In the instance where disagreement runs too deep, as in all other
instances, the view of the majority of members is taken as the view of the
committee. On the whole, parliaments do not accept the notion of minority
reports.

Democratic politics, however, is by its very nature fluid. There are no
stable majorities or minorities. Today's majority may become tomorrow's
minority and vice versa. It consequently is the beginning of wisdom that a
majority wields its power responsibly, displaying due sensitivity to the
views of minorities who could, in the course of time, dislodge it from its
dominant position. Equally, minorities, recognising that they could be
tomorrow's majority, should also display maturity, because the precedents
they establish today might well be applied against them tomorrow.

It is this fluidity that also dictates that hon members conduct themselves
with a degree of decorum and try to protect the dignity of this
institution. One would have expected, for example, that after Mr Welz, the
editor of Noseweek, admitted that the matters he had reported on were
unfounded, based on unsubstantiated rumour and gossip, hon members who used
them to raise motions and place them on the Order Paper would have had the
moral courage to retract those motions in the light of the fact these were
just rumours.

We do of course expect that the cut and thrust of real political
constatation will animate Parliament. But while we do that, let us guard
against reducing this institution to a marketplace where any member can
broach scandal and wild rumours in the full knowledge that parliamentary
privilege protects him or her against charges of libel. [Interjections.]

In a democracy government derives its power from parliament but that power
is also limited. The doctrine of the separation of powers is intended to
build in the necessary checks and balance. In our case, having borrowed
extensively from the British model, the majority party in Parliament is
called upon to constitute the executive. Thus, though separate from the
legislature, members of the executive have access to power by virtue of
their membership of this legislature. When Minister Fraser-Moleketi says
that the separation of powers is not absolute, this is one dimension of
what she is referring to.

In order to carry out the tasks our nation has charged us to perform,
Parliament needs a substantial budget. But, even the wealthiest household
cannot live above its means. Parliament is entirely dependent on the fiscus
for its finances and the National Treasury has, therefore, to weigh the
demands of Parliament against our nation's other transformative priorities.

During the current financial year, Parliament's budget stands at R422 669
000 million. That represents a 0,13% increase over the previous financial
year. Members' remuneration accounts for 36% of Parliament's budget; 15% of
the budget is spent on members' facilities. Put another way - we, hon
members, spend more than half of Parliament's budget. The remaining 49% is
divided amongst the other six programmes that provide support services for
this institution.

But, because ours is a young democracy, our expectations of Parliament far
exceed what older democracies vest in theirs. We have already implemented a
number of changes to demonstrate a commitment to making this a far more
representative institution. Access ramps, braille, and voice announcements
in our elevators have made these premises more user-friendly to the
disabled and sight-impaired. Yet we still need to do much more to
facilitate the work of members who are physically challenged by disability.
We should continue to be seized with this matter.

Parliament's language policy is also still under discussion. But we have
the constitutional obligation to equality of treatment of all our official
languages, and that implies that the outcome of such discussions will
necessarily entail more facilities for indigenous African languages,
supported by an appropriate detachment of interpreters and translators.

The real work of Parliament, as we all know, is conducted in its
committees. We should expect the committees to make even bigger demands on
the fiscus in the immediate future as this institution takes on more
responsibilities both nationally and internationally.

All-party delegations, from this Parliament, observed elections in
Zimbabwe, Tanzania and Namibia in the year 2000. Our Parliament has also
hosted the 35th CPA African Regional Conference. We are members of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union and the Pan African Parliament. Because of the
prestige that South Africa enjoys internationally, committees of this
Parliament are being invited to give of their experience to emergent
democracies and to assist in the resolution of a number of thorny problems
in various parts of the world.

We are currently hosting a delegation from the Parliament of Burundi.
During the course of this year, we have received delegations from the US
Congress, the Chinese Parliament, the Kuwaiti Parliament, and Rumania.

Amongst the responsibilities that Parliament will have to shoulder is that
of conducting a constitutional literacy campaign for South African citizens
about their Constitution. This will empower citizens to access the rights
they should enjoy. There is deep and widespread ignorance among ordinary
citizens about the provisions of our Constitution. Let us face it, even the
best Constitution in the world will be a dead letter if the citizens, whom
it is designed to protect, neither know nor understand it.

The ANC's commitment to Parliament and its sovereignty, dignity and esteem,
as one of the central pillars of our democracy, remains undiminished. We,
therefore, support this budget. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, after the speech of the hon
Mr Jordan, it is perhaps appropriate that I look closer to home, in terms
of what we, ourselves, are doing. I intend, today, to actually deal with
some of the issues that have come up recently, and the way we need to move
forward from there.

On 15 May, I referred for the consideration of the House, serious
allegations contained in an open letter. In doing so I said that unless
substantiated, they attack the integrity of the House and of Parliament. I
regret that, though referred to and raised by some hon members in a debate
that ensued, the issues placed before the House have not been adequately
debated and much less resolved.

Given the opportunity to substantiate its allegations, the UDM and its
leaders have chosen not to do so even though protected by parliamentary
privilege. Instead, what the author of the letter has said is and I quote:
``What our letter seeks is clarification on all the matters raised in the
letter in question. What a strange way of seeking clarification. However,
the author will soon have the opportunity to substantiate his allegations,
though in a different venue. [Interjections.]

The hon Mr Gibson has presumed to indicate my alleged preferences on how
the issues I had referred should be handled. I cannot accept his advocacy,
purportedly on my behalf, in the amendment put forward, that the issue
should be the appropriateness of the existing relationship between the
Speaker, the majority party and the executive.

As is all too often the case, the more so recently, the House once again
descended into a party-political confrontation, with most parties failing
to address matters that are of fundamental concern to the consolidation of
our democracy and particularly about the nature and strength of Parliament.
For some members, the issue has simply become my membership of the ANC
leadership which has, in itself, been defined as the problem.

Hon members, I want to make clear that my membership of the ANC or its
leadership is not negotiable. [Applause.] It was not in the days when these
precincts declared such membership a crime, nor is it now, nor will it ever
be. [Applause.] In 1994, I refused to allow it to be used as an
opportunistic bargaining chip to obtain public office. I will not do so
now. I have been honoured by members of the ANC who chose to entrust me
with the task of assisting in leading their organisation. Only the
membership of the ANC will determine when I should relinquish that
responsibility. [Applause.]

In debates, and also in public discourse, all too often, an assumption is
made that membership of a political party automatically impairs one's
capacity to be impartial or to judge issues on their merit. It would appear
that the absence of debates and decades of intolerance of any freedom of
thought and association has led to a diminished capacity to appreciate or
recognise principle, integrity and critical examination of ideas and issues
as factors that guide one's judgment.

Surely what is of relevance in this context is to assess whether any
particular judgment or action is motivated by party-political advantage.
The critical factor in considering the conduct of any Speaker, is not a
perceived conflict between parliamentary responsibility and party loyalty,
but gauging specific actions in the context of the responsibilities placed
on the office-bearer by the Constitution and the rules.

In 1995, after I had apologised to President Chissano for the damage
inflicted on his country by South Africa, there were calls for my
resignation as Speaker and my membership of the ANC was raised by the old
NP and DP. After discussions it was agreed that we needed to consider what
kind of Speaker the Parliament of a democratic South Africa needed. We
still need the discussion on the manner and parameters within which the
presiding officers of our democratic Parliament should function.

In the recent case of the Gauteng Legislature v Killian and Others, the
Supreme Court of Appeal recognised that the common law powers of a
presiding officer included acting as spokesperson of the House in its
collective capacity, regulating the business of the House by means of
order, and as the interpreter and custodian of the rights and privileges of
members of the House.

Let me place before members today some of the principles and considerations
which, I believe, should give direction to this institution and to its
presiding officers. In so doing I will refer to some of the examples cited
in members' debate two weeks ago, to illustrate what the functions of the
Speaker are and are not, and also what the responsibilities of hon members
and political parties are, both the majority and the minority. In so doing
I will take advantage of the suggestion by the Leader of the Opposition
that, having stepped off my throne, I enter the hurly burly of contested
politics. But it is not a path I intend to pursue hereafter.
[Interjections.]

I have often argued on Commonwealth and other platforms that in emerging
democracies a Speaker needed to have a voice in the councils where the
process of transforming society and its institutions were debated and
decided, in order to help shape the legislature in accordance with
fundamental democratic values and principles. I am not alone in holding
that view. The Empire has passed and most of us cannot afford to wallow in
colonial nostalgia ... [Applause] ... or try and emulate what the House of
Commons does. We should rather focus on what South Africa needs.
[Interjections.]
Since 1994 we have accepted that Parliament should function in an inclusive
way, making space for all parties, regardless of size, on front benches, in
committees, in delegations and in the provision of facilities. This is not
a personal view or idiosyncrasy, but emanated from the majority party's
assessment of what was necessary in order to entrench good governance and
democracy in our circumstances.

Whereas in some parliaments powers are vested in the personal office of the
Speaker, I believe that in South Africa presiding officers can only
exercise the authority of the House as prescribed in the Constitution and
the Rules. In doing so, we inevitably have to interpret these to the best
of our ability, and it is always open to the House to declare its different
understanding or interpretation, and to expect the presiding officers to
act accordingly.

We try to create an illusion that Speakers or Deputy Speakers are
infallible, but that is not really so. It just helps us keep  control of
the House. The point is that we are interpreting Constitutions and Rules
and, ultimately, it is the House that will determine which interpretation
should prevail at any particular time.

The presiding officers are required to interpret the Constitution
regularly. In the first instance we are responsible for ensuring that
Parliament exercises its powers within the Constitution. Interpretation is
necessary both for procedure and for substance. If legislation or a
procedure is found to have been unconstitutional, the Court requires
Parliament to rectify the problem and we cannot opt out by saying: ``But
the executive sent us a flawed Bill.'' It is our responsibility.

The presiding officers are also required to interpret the Rules. This
members notice mostly when we are presiding over debates and calling
members to order. But much more is involved. I had assumed that parties
that felt aggrieved by interpretations or actions would use formal and
informal channels to take up any perceived party-political bias. I was
surprised when I read in the Hansard that the Chief Whip of the DP claimed
that ``there have been a number of occasions, and many more recently, when
the duality of roles of the Speaker has led to very unfortunate
consequences'', and that ``this has led to some shocking incidents which
have weakened Parliament instead of strengthening it''.

I cannot help asking why someone who professes a commitment to
strengthening Parliament did not feel it necessary to raise these shocking
incidents until a parliamentary debate was precipitated by another party.
The hon Mr Gibson should really try, at some point, to explain his silence
while ``Parliament was being weakened''. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: I was not silent, I ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: One of the examples, cited was the Patricia de Lille case. The
only correct part of what was said about that case was that the hon De
Lille withdrew such statements as I had requested. That she did do. But the
hon Mr Gibson went on to say that the ``Speaker allowed what amounted to a
Kangaroo court to convict Mrs De Lille and impose an unconstitutional
sentence ... [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Correct, quite correct.

The SPEAKER: ... and further that ``the Speaker pursued the matter through
the Cape High Court and the Appeal Court, knowing full well that the Powers
and Privileges of Parliament Act was flawed and unenforceable''.

I very much regret that I would have had to use unparliamentary language if
I were to describe the complete inaccuracy of that statement. [Applause.] I
also regret that the Deputy Speaker did not consider the point of order
made by the hon Chohan-Kota that Mr Gibson's statement inferred extreme
mala fides.

As I have said, the Speaker exercises the authority of the House. I would
be grateful if the hon member or anyone else could point out the Rule or
Rules under which the Speaker could deny the National Assembly the right to
set up a committee or refuse to implement a decision taken by a resolution
of the House. Clearly, the hon Gibson operates by Rules that are different
from the ones adopted by the National Assembly.

Further, I would have expected him to have noted the judgment, on appeal,
given by the late Chief Justice Mohammed that while we could not limit
freedom of speech, there was nothing unconstitutional in Parliament
disciplining its members, provided that we made provision for this in the
Rules. So instead of blaming the Speaker for the inability of the House to
act, the DP - and, indeed, all parties - should specifically address this
shortcoming in our Rules as soon as possible.

The hon Mr Gibson is correct in saying that the Powers and Privileges of
Parliament Act has still not been amended. But his reason for this does not
coincide with the facts. He says that ``the Speaker has indicated that she
would like something to happen and has kept on pointing fingers at Whips
and party leaders and said we must take the initiative ... It cannot be up
to other people to take an initiative'', he said, ``which properly belongs
to the Speaker. She has dragged her feet and the result is that one can
take no action, almost, against a recalcitrant member of Parliament.''

Really, where has the hon member Gibson been during these past three years
... [Interjections] ... during which I have been chairing a committee that
has completed new draft legislation on powers and privileges? Perhaps he is
also unaware that the DP was absent at every single meeting of that
committee throughout 1998. [Interjections.]

In no parliament is it the responsibility of the Speaker to whip members of
the opposition or, indeed, of any party to attend to their parliamentary
duties. I believe that is the hon Mr Gibson's job. [Applause.]

I do intend to keep on pointing fingers at Whips and party leaders of most
parties for having failed to participate in considering the crucial issues
in the proposed legislation. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: You are talking about four years ago ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: The only other specific example about functions of the Speaker
has been raised by the Chief Whip of the IFP, who introduced the
chairperson of Scopa as an actor in the controversy, and claimed that I
``became involved in the functional affairs of a portfolio committee'' and
referred to matters raised in the media and in correspondence by the hon
Gavin Woods.

It is very clear that the hon Woods has a view of the Constitution and
Rules of Parliament, in particular the relationship between the NA and
committees, that is different from the one set out above, as well as of the
functions of the Speaker. Any genuine concerns should have been raised in
the Chairpersons Forum or brought to the Rules Committee. But here again,
the forum of the media and generating publicity has been elevated above the
use of parliamentary channels to resolve differences.

Any Speaker who did not draw the attention of a committee or chairperson to
a possible violation of the Rules or Constitution would have been in grave
dereliction of duty. In a letter to the Joint Investigating Initiative,
dated 21 November, the hon Woods said that, after discussions with the
Speaker and the legal adviser, Prof Haysom, a number of issues have been
clarified. He writes:


  The first of these concerned Scopa's position vis-à-vis the investigating
  bodies. Legal interpretation would have it that having helped facilitate
  the working together of the four bodies concerned in terms of its
  parliamentary resolution, Scopa should not play an interventionist or
  instructive role in the course of the crucial investigation. Each of the
  bodies concerned must be allowed its legal independence from Parliament
  in the course of its work.
  Scopa would, however, appreciate being kept informed of the progress of
  the investigations, and especially of their final conclusions.

This accords with the constitutional position. It is quite clear then that
as early as 21 November, a meeting with Prof Haysom had been facilitated -
at which I was not present - and the hon Woods had accepted the advice
provided at that meeting, namely that Scopa could not intervene or instruct
bodies that were accountable to the executive or were independent.

A great deal of time, when hon members should have been scrutinising the
processes involved in the arms purchase, has been spent on debating the
intention of Scopa, expressed in the 14th Report adopted by the NA. Let me
repeat ``adopted by the NA'' and stress that thereby the Report is a report
of the NA and no longer that of a particular committee.

A presiding officer must assume that hon members knew what they were doing
and would not knowingly have intended to go against the Constitution. It is
only when media reports suggested that the House had agreed to instruct the
President to act in a particular way, that it became necessary to clarify
the constitutional position that ``any such action would be of dubious
legal and constitutional validity''.

I want to stress that this would be the constitutional position, whether
the Report was promoted by the majority or the minority parties. As the
late Chief Justice Mohammed declared, it is not Parliament, but the
Constitution which ``is the ultimate source of all lawful authority in the
country'' and hence both the majority and minority parties are bound by it.

I have already indicated that there is a view - fortunately not of the
majority - that committees are autonymous of the NA. We are dealing with
some of this at the next meeting of the Joint Rules Committee. I want to
request the hon Woods and the IFP to bring their concerns regarding the
perceived interference by the Speaker in the functioning of committees to
that meeting, so that the details of their complaints can be examined and
differences can be resolved in Parliament where they belong.

I would also like the Rules Committee to consider who, besides the Speaker
and Deputy Speaker, should have responded to the Deputy President and
advised him that the special review by the Auditor-General had been
correctly referred to Scopa and that it was Scopa's responsibility to
enquire into the issues raised.

Importantly, it is necessary to confirm whether the presiding officers
should be the channel of communication between the executive and Parliament
and whether it was correct for the Speaker to assert that documents and
information could only be made available to the executive in terms of our
Rules.

It is also necessary to clarify the role of all the parliamentary office-
bearers and to distinguish their functions from political party office-
bearers. In 1994, we abolished the Office of the Chief Whip of Parliament,
which allowed the executive to run Parliament, but the cultural hangover
remains. We also need to consider a formal relationship and possibly a
forum for interaction with the Secretary to Parliament and his staff.

I want to return to a matter I raised earlier and which has been raised
also by other members in this debate. The democratic Parliament began to
take shape in a very positive way. Prior to the 1999 elections, I had paid
tribute to the first Chief Whips who co-operated to shape this institution
in accordance with the founding principles of our Constitution.

I regret to say, the second Parliament has regressed. Instead of developing
into a national forum where issues of national importance and international
significance can be debated, ideas exchanged and policies developed, much
as the hon Jordan has outlined, we have become an arena for continuing
interparty conflict, a perpetual election campaign. Parties have not been
able to agree on guidelines for having any debate that is not a party
motion except by calling it a Speaker's debate. For over a year parties
have not agreed on a new formula for the composition of parliamentary
delegations.

Any idea, policy or action cannot be critically examined. Rather, the focus
is on the party affiliation of the person who originates the idea or policy
or takes the action. We consistently seek underlying agendas and motivation
for everything a member does or says and thereby we drown all good ideas.

We do not make time to discuss and build consensus on the principles and
policies on which the institution of Parliament should be developed. Rules
and conventions should flow from such discussions among all members, but
there is no appropriate forum for this and we are too busy to devote time
to this at our meetings of the Rules Committee.

The spirit of confrontation is extended also to the executive.
Constitutions are interpreted and conventions and practices evolve over
decades. We have a strong authoritarian history in   South Africa, but also
another tradition of drawing mandates and authority through grass-roots
participation and consultation. Our Constitution provides for a very
powerful Parliament and for a strong executive with sufficient authority to
drive the transformation process. This was by design, not accident. Our
Constitution is not a replica of that of the United States, Germany or
Britain, but provides for clearly defined, exclusive jurisdiction between
the executive, legislature and judiciary. We need to understand this, as we
strive for balance.

Initially there will be tension which needs to be managed. But we cannot
operate on the principle that the executive is the enemy, and neither are
we in Parliament the enemy. Many members now in the executive led the
negotiations which gave birth to the Constitution. This is also true of
members of Parliament, particularly because here we find members who are
not part of the majority party, but who also participated in giving birth
to this Constitution. We therefore have a unique opportunity to manage our
relations in a way that will secure a balance favourable to Parliament and
the space to exercise the power provided in our Constitution. I believe
this House needs to seize that opportunity before it passes away with time.


Finally, I would like to thank the Secretary to Parliament and his staff in
all their divisions for the support that they provide to all of us. I would
like to thank in particular Mr Kasper Hahndiek, the Secretary of the
National Assembly, and the Table staff, for ensuring that our debates and
proceedings are managed smoothly. To the Chair and Deputy Chair of
Committees my thanks for always making themselves available to assist us,
as well as for undertaking their specific and unenviable challenge of
managing the scheduling of committees. My thanks also go to the presiding
officers of the NCOP, for their co-operation which has allowed the two
Houses to move in tandem and to you, Deputy Speaker, for your calming
presence and your support. I would also like to thank the members here and
the Whips, notwithstanding my critical comments. We have achieved much but
we still have far to go. Let us please move forward together. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Members, there are so many of
you rising that I am not quite certain who is going to be moving.

Mr M R BALOYI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the DA MEC, Helen Zille, has rejected Minister Kader
       Asmal's announcement of a move to replace apartheid-era school names;


  (2) believes that the rejection by Helen Zille of this move is motivated
       by the DP's approval of what apartheid represented and stood for ...

[Interjections.]


  (3) condemns Helen Zille for not supporting the Minister's move; and


  (4) calls on the parents, teachers and learners to support the Minister's
       plan to replace apartheid-era school names.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the statement by the ANC condemning what it describes as the
       ``tomfoolery'' of the hon Winnie Madikizela-Mandela;


  (2) notes further that although ``tomfoolery'' and grandstanding have
       characterised the attitude and actions of that hon member for years,
       she has not been disciplined either by her party or by the Whips of
       this House; and


  (3) expresses its dismay at the way in which the ANC has sought to
       justify and excuse the inexcusable and again calls upon the President
       to apologise for his action.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -
  (1) sadly notes that two commuters were killed and three seriously
       injured when a gang of dagga-smoking teenagers ran amok on a train in
       Belhar on Monday night;


  (2) further notes that the other three injured passengers had to jump out
       of the moving train to save their lives due to the new threat on
       passengers' lives;


  (3) calls upon the Department of Safety and Security to deploy more
       police on trains to protect innocent people;


  (4) compliments the SAPS for having arrested three suspects in connection
       with these murders; and


  (5) believes that this arrest will alert other teenagers not to involve
       themselves in such criminal activities.

Ms N E NGALEKA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that the DA unicity mayor for Cape Town, Peter Marais, is
       alleged to have given his five family members low-cost houses that
       were meant for the poor in Parow ...


Interjections.]


  (2) further notes the call for investigation into the alleged corrupt
       practices of staff that manage the blocks of low-cost flats in Parow;
       and


  (3) calls on the Western Cape MEC for Housing, Cecil Herandien, to
       investigate these allegations, and on Tony Leon and the DA to be loud
       in condemning this corruption in the DA-controlled unicity.

[Applause.]

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock -
       (a)  the brutal and senseless murder of two commuters, Cornelius
           Adolf and Nico Fuller, when a knife-wielding gang ran amok on a
           train near Belhar, on the Cape Flats;


       (b)  that three other passengers were injured after they jumped out
           of the train to escape the gang; and


       (c)  that three violent deaths have occurred on trains in the past
           ten days;


  (2) finds it unacceptable that safety on trains has deteriorated to such
       an extent that commuters are placing their lives in danger; and


  (3) urges the Minister of Transport, Metrorail and the SAPS to speed up
       the formation of a dedicated Transit Police Force, because many South
       Africans rely on this form of transport, and their safety must come
       first.

Mr D G MKONO: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:
  That the House -


  (1) notes the ongoing taxi violence in Umtata, which has escaped the
       attention of the Minister of Transport, as well as the Minister of
       Safety and Security;


  (2) further notes that the uncertainty in the taxi industry is reflective
       of the nondelivery of Government in formalising regulation and
       implementing necessary steps vital to ensure safety; and


  (3) calls upon the Minister of Transport, as well as the Minister of
       Safety and Security, to immediately implement action plans to ensure
       that no further unnecessary loss of life occurs.

Mrs J CHALMERS: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that police in Port Elizabeth arrested three suspects in a
       crackdown on perlemoen poachers and confiscated perlemoen valued at
       R200 000;
  (2) commends the Government for halting the practise of auctioning
       confiscated perlemoen which often merely boosted the coffers of the
       smugglers;


  (3) further commends the police for their tireless efforts to fight
       perlemoen poaching and smuggling; and


  (4) calls on the Government to impose more severe sentences in the courts
       on perlemoen poachers in order to act as a real deterrent to this
       costly and destructive criminal practice.

[Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a democratic dispensation is determined by the results of
       a general election;


  (2) that time for debates is determined by the same results, and in some
       cases a little more time has been given to the minority parties;


  (3) nevertheless regrets that a lot of time available to one party
       results in monotonous and repetitive debates, which amounts to the
       majority party speaking to itself; ...

[Interjections.] [Applause.]


  (4) therefore recommends that minority parties be given more time - at
       least 5 minutes - in order to stimulate discussions and raise the
       standard of debates in this august House.

[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order!

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock and disgust that Asnath Mhlongo, a physically
       disabled woman in Sasekani Village, outside Tzaneen in the Northern
       Province, was burnt to death in her house by some unknown hoodlum;


  (2) thanks the neighbour who pulled the deceased's children from the
       house to safety, though he could not rescue their mother;


  (3) calls on all who provide information leading to the arrest of the
       perpetrator to assist the police to ensure  a quick arrest;


  (4) sympathises with the deceased's colleagues at Munghana Lonene FM and
       the entire SABC where she was employed; and


  (5) sends condolences to her children and all her next of kin.

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with approval the decision of the Director of Public
       Prosecutions of the Western Cape to persist with the prosecution of
       Mr E C Adams, former Chairperson of the Muizenberg Police Forum, in
       connection with R3 000 missing from the forum's account;


  (2) further notes that the former treasurer of the police forum, who is
       now a DA councillor in the Cape Town Unicity Council, withdrew the
       charge without consulting the forum; and


  (3) urges the DA leadership, and particularly the hon Gibson, to take
       action against this DA councillor for attempting to cover up alleged
       fraud and theft of public funds.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

An HON MEMBER: Maduna!

Adv P S SWART: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the instruction from the North West Provincial Secretary of the
       ANC that the ANC deployment committee ``is about to conclude the
       deployment of municipal managers in all our councils'' and that no
       council may appoint managers until they have consulted with this
       committee; and


  (2) believes that if the ANC insists on orchestrating every municipal and
       provincial appointment from central level, those who make these
       deployment decisions must accept the blame for every failure that
       occurs in ANC-run councils and provinces.

[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, while we were
busy someone shouted ``Maduna.'' I think we have requested from the Chair
that the honorific ``hon'' should precede the name of any hon member here.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Hon Maduna!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes, please. [Laughter.]

Mr J H SLABBERT: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) applauds the sentencing of the convicted fraudster Vito Assante to 1
       620 years in jail as sending a resounding signal to criminals that
       crime does not pay;


  (2) regrets that large sums of money are lost through fraud and
       corruption in this country, which is a very critical investment
       disincentive; and


  (3) hopes that this record prison term will set a trend to criminals and
       bring hope to business people and investors about South Africa.

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the announcement by the Minister of Defence, hon Mosiuoa Lekota,
           of a new voluntary military service for matriculants; and


       (b)  that this project is part of job creation and skills development
           and will target science and technology students with
           historically disadvantaged backgrounds;


  (2) believes that this plan will contribute positively to youth
       empowerment and development; and


  (3) commends the Minister of Defence for embarking on this important
       initiative.

[Applause.]

Dr S J GOUS: Comrade Chair ... [Laughter.] ... I hereby give notice that on
the next sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with grave concern that according to the Actuarial Society of
       South Africa's new behavioural-demographical model of the Aids
       epidemic -


       (a)  5,3 million South Africans were infected in 2000 - 600 000 more
           than the Health Department's estimate of 4,7 million; and


       (b)  if there is no significant change in sexual behaviour, 45% of
           the adult population will die of Aids;


  (2) further notes that the Government is still using the report of the
       presidential advisory panel on Aids to hide their inactivity, as they
       are still ``weighing up'' the report; and


  (3) calls on the Government and all respective role-players to address
       the threat of Aids by initiating projects to change present sexual
       behaviour, and to co-ordinate a programme of antiretroviral
       medication to prevent this disease from reaching disastrous
       proportions.

[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, comrade hon member.
[Laughter.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the announcement by Cosatu to call for a nation-wide strike ...

[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr M N RAMODIKE:


  [... because of their opposition to the privatisation of state assets;


  (2) expects the tripartite alliance to address labour problems at all the
       available negotiation forums without in any way disrupting the
       economy of the country; and


  (3) calls on the Government to ensure that the restructuring process
       addresses the plight of workers.

                              WORLD REFUGEE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today is World Refugee Day;


  (2) recognises that 2001 marks the 50th anniversary of the adoption of
       the 1951 United Nations convention relating to the status of refugees
       which, together with its 1967 protocol, is the most broadly accepted
       foundation instrument of the international protection regime;


  (3) alarmed at the expanding number of refugees around the world and
       their terrible plight, notes that the council of the International
       Parliamentary Union, at its 168th session, adopted a resolution which
       called on all parliaments to mark this anniversary in any appropriate
       manner, for example by holding a debate on the refugee issue, and
       resolves to take this question forward; and


  (4) affirms its continued commitment to the plight of refugees.
Agreed to.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, yesterday, in the
course of her reply to the debate on her Vote, the hon the Minister of
Housing, when addressing an hon member of this House, used the words, ``he
is very dishonest''. This is clearly, in terms of parliamentary rules,
unparliamentary and I call upon the Minister to withdraw the words, ``he is
very dishonest''.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: I withdraw that part of my input.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, that is all that you are
required to withdraw. [Interjections.]

Order! Are you rising on a point of order, hon member?
Mr M RAMGOBIN: Chairperson, yes. I would like your ruling on the question
of honesty and dishonesty. If members of this Parliament use untruthful
information in this Parliament and do not retract that untruthful
information - like Patricia de Lille and members of the DA using
information from Noseweek - is it permissible, and is it not important for
those members to withdraw those remarks?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, the Chair cannot
rule on a hypothetical situation. All that the Chair attempts to do, as
Madam Speaker indicated earlier in her debate, is to interpret the Rules
which have already been made and which are binding on this House, so that
if, within the context of those Rules, something is said or done that is
not acceptable, the Chair will ask that the matter be retracted.

Hon member, do you still wish to ...

Mr K M ANDREW: Chairperson, while I recognise that the hon Ramgobin is not
an expert on issues of truth and honesty, I would suggest that his comment
regarding a particular hon member and members from a political party, in
terms of which he alleged that they are making, or have made, untruthful
statements, is, in fact, in itself out of order, and he should be required
to withdraw that. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Sit down, hon member. Inasmuch
as I would like to pursue what you are saying, hon member, even at the
beginning of the remarks that you made is a suggestion that the hon member
does not know the truth. [Interjections.] That part in itself is also
problematic for the Chair, because it goes to the question of a member's
integrity. I think what we have done from the Chair is to ask hon members
to observe the integrity of all hon members in this House.

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, on a point of order: May I just remind you that
he not only referred to Mr Ramgobin's truthfulness, but also honesty. He
said that he was not an expert on honesty. May I suggest that that is ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! In the spirit, yes. I would
ask that both sides withdraw, if there is any suggestion as to someone's
honesty or dishonesty. I think that that is clearly unparliamentary and,
therefore, not permissible. Let us ask the hon Andrew to withdraw the
suggestion that he is not ...

Mr K M ANDREW: Chairperson, yes, I withdraw and I also ... [Interjections.]


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! What portion do you want the
hon Mr Ramgobin to withdraw?

Mr K M ANDREW: Chairperson, the suggestion that there are untruthful
statements made by the hon Patricia de Lille and hon members of the DA.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, would you withdraw that
portion?

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Chairperson, I did not say that. [Interjections.] I asked
for a ruling from you whether it was permissible for members of this
Parliament, for example Mrs Patricia de Lille, to use untruthful reports
from outside and to do so in the sanctity of this Parliament.
[Interjections.] I am saying I require, as a reasonable human being, a
ruling from you whether it is correct, whether it is honest, to use an
untruthful report from Noseweek in this Parliament. Chair, I am suggesting
that, in the spirit of openness and to protect the integrity of this
Parliament, people like Mrs Patricia de Lille withdraw such statements.
That is all I am saying.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I think, to the extent that
the hon member is ... [Interjections.] Order! Order, hon members! I will
recognise you now, hon member. Let us take one point at a time. To the
extent that the hon Mr Ramgobin says that the report itself is untruthful
and not the member, I think that is quite permissible in terms of the
Rules.

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, on a point of order: The question is out of
order. We are not discussing any report or anything. I think the whole
question is out of order. I would ask you to rule on it in that way.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I accept that, yes. It is out
of order. It is hypothetical, and therefore does not really merit being a
point of order. Yes, hon member?

Mr A C NEL: Chairperson, are we closing that?
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! We are going to close this
issue, because I think there is no further point in pursuing it.
[Interjections.]

          FAST-TRACKING OF DRAFT CRIMINAL PROCEDURE AMENDMENT BILL

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! This afternoon the Joint
Programme Subcommittee took a decision in accordance with Joint Rule 216,
that the draft Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill be fast-tracked. In terms
of Joint Rule 216(4), this decision is tabled in the House for
ratification.

Decision ratified.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I move:

  That Order No 1 under Further Business be considered.
Agreed to.

    CONSIDERATION OF LEGISLATIVE PROPOSAL TO AMEND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I move:


  That the House, in terms of Rule 238(3), gives permission for the
  legislative proposal to be proceeded with.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 18:01.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bill:


         (i)     National Council for Library and Information Services Bill
              [B 44B - 2000] - Act No 6 of 2001 (assented to and signed by
              President on 19 June 2001).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 20 June
         2000 took a decision, in accordance with Joint Rule 216(2):


         That, in accordance with Joint Rule 216(2), the Criminal Procedure
         Amendment Bill be fast-tracked.


         That the Joint Programme Subcommittee -


              (i) notes the urgent nature of the amending legislation
                  (Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill) proposed by the
                  Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
                  Development, as explained in the Memorandum in terms of
                  Rule 238 submitted by the Committee (Announcements,
                  Tablings and Committee Reports, p 695);


             (ii) provided that the National Assembly gives permission that
                  the legislative proposal be proceeded with -


                  (a)  approves that the draft Criminal Procedure Amendment
                       Bill be finalised in the shortest possible period by
                       the Committee, and that for that purpose, the
                       provisions of Assembly Rules 239(1)(c) and (3);
                       240(a) and (b); 241; 243(1)(b) and 253(1) be
                       suspended in order for both Houses to pass the
                       legislation before Parliament adjourns in June 2001.


         In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in both
         Houses for ratification.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


     Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council of
     Provinces on 20 June 2001 and transmitted for consideration of
     Council's proposed amendments:


     (i)    Eskom Conversion Bill [B 16B - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
         75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings,
         Committee Reports).


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Enterprises for a report on the amendments proposed by the
         Council.

