---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 February 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-02-15
---

THURSDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                   WELCOMING OF SOUTH AFRICAN AMBASSADORS

The SPEAKER: Order! Before calling on the President, I wish to acknowledge
the presence in the gallery of South Africa's ambassadors, almost all of
them overseas.

We welcome you. [Applause.]

                             PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS

              (Resumption of Debate on Subject for Discussion)

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon
members, your Excellencies Ambassadors and High Commissioners, one of the
major events in the global political calendar last year was the UN
Millennium Assembly.

As the House is aware, this Assembly adopted an important millennium
declaration. We participated in the preparation of this declaration, as
well as its adoption. Accordingly we made a commitment to strive for the
realisation of the objectives contained in that declaration.

One of these objectives relates to the issue of poverty. In this regard the
millennium declaration said that we would spare no effort to free our
fellow men, women and children from the abject and dehumanising conditions
of extreme poverty to which more than a billion of them are currently
subjected.

We are committed to making the right to development a reality for everyone,
and to freeing the entire human race from want. We resolve, therefore, to
create an environment at the national and global levels alike, which is
conducive to development and to the elimination of poverty.

We resolve further to halve, by the year 1015, the proportion of the
world's people whose income is less than $1 a day, and the proportion of
people who suffer from hunger. By the same date, we resolve to halve the
proportion of people who are unable to reach or to afford safe drinking
water. We must also take note of the fact that the declaration includes a
special section on Africa which commits the world community to the
following:


  ... to take special measures to address the challenges of poverty
  eradication and sustainable development in Africa, including debt
  cancellation, improved market access, enhanced official development
  assistance and increased flows of foreign direct investment, as well as
  transfers of technology.

For its part, the Human Development Report 2000 of the UN Development
Programme said:


  The 1995 South African Participatory Poverty Assessment described the
  reality behind the statistics. It reported that millions of citizens are
  plagued by continuous ill-health, experience extraordinary levels of
  anxiety and stress - and the accompanying realities of violence and abuse
  vented mainly on women and children - and perform harsh and dangerous
  work for low incomes. There is pervasive demoralisation and fatalism. A
  sense of hopelessness and an inability to alter the conditions of life is
  a defining feature. Yet all this is matched by the courage and
  perseverance with which South Africa's poor attempt to hold these ravages
  at bay.

This report was absolutely correct to draw attention to the fact that
poverty is not only expressed in a shortage of food, shelter and clothing,
but also in ill-health, high levels of anxiety and stress, the prevalence
of a spirit of disempowerment and hopelessness, high levels of crime,
including violence among the poor themselves, especially against women and
children, in many instances accompanied by substance abuse, the further
entrenchment of discrimination against women, destructive ignorance and
superstition, and the destruction and denial of the human dignity of
millions of people.

I would like to thank those members of the National Assembly who focused
their comments on or integrated in their interventions the centrally
important issue of the fight against poverty. The majority of our people
are poor, a significant minority among them very poor. As members of the
House have said, we cannot speak of the new South Africa if we fail to deal
with the urgent challenge of poverty.

If we are to speak of important matters on the national agenda and of
matters that are of pressing concern to the greatest numbers of our people,
the elimination of poverty and the racial and gender disparities that
continue to characterise our society occupy pride of place. If we are to
speak of matters that must continue to take pride of place in all the
programmes of the Government, then the restoration of the human dignity of
the majority of our people, and thereby the eradication of poverty, racial
and gender imbalances and inequalities, constitute those matters. The
Government's programme for 2001 that we announced in the state-of-the-
nation address and the more detailed programmes the hon Ministers have
communicated to the country during the last few days through the media, are
all focused on this matter.
We need a larger economic growth at high rates to be able to generate the
material resources that would enable our country to meet the needs of the
people. We need to introduce the ways and means by which this economy will
develop in a manner that enables it to absorb those who are unemployed, as
well as the new entrants into the labour market.

The realisation of these objectives requires that we achieve much higher
levels of new public and private investment into the economy than we have
achieved thus far. The Government has made its commitment towards the
accomplishment of this goal and will proceed to implement the investment
plans we have outlined, including those that will be implemented by the
state corporations. The hon the Minister of Finance will also address this
matter when he presents the Budget next week.

The job-creating growth to which we are committed also requires that we pay
particular attention to the development of small, medium and micro
enterprises. The Government is determined to assist in making capital
available for investment in these sectors of business and will, therefore,
act on this matter.
The growth of our economy also depends on its competitiveness. We will,
therefore, implement the measures that are within our means to contribute
to such competitiveness, including reducing input costs, of which we spoke,
and increasing labour productivity through the vigorous implementation of
the Human Resource Development Programme.

We renew our call to business and organised labour to respond positively to
these initiatives, so that through united action we can expedite our
advance towards the eradication of poverty in our country, raising our
level of development and restoring the dignity of all our citizens.
Similarly, the Government will continue to intensify its work directed at
improving the quality of life of our people in other ways.

Accordingly, the implementation of our rural development and urban renewal
programmes will take place. Through these programmes we aim to reach the
very poor in our country who are in most need of the basic necessities of
life. We have to contend with the most abject poverty, paying particular
attention to women, youth and the disabled. It is not the intention of
these programmes to distribute welfare handouts, but to help generate
sustainable development that will help the affected people out of endemic
poverty and entrenched underdevelopment permanently.

The Government recognises the fact that in the short to medium term many
people will still not be able to enter the labour market and economy as
income earners. These will continue to require direct Government assistance
to alleviate the impact of poverty. It is for this reason that we will, as
we have already announced, work to expand the social security net, bearing
in mind what the economy can afford and the need for us to achieve the
correct balances between social and economic spending.

This year, Statistics South Africa will conduct a new population census for
2001. This important exercise will help us once again to gain a more
accurate and up-to-date picture of our reality. I appeal to all our people
and institutions to co-operate fully with Statistics SA to facilitate the
successful conclusion of the vital and necessary work it has to do.

The hon Ministers working in the criminal justice cluster have more than
adequately addressed the issue of safety and security which, as we have
already said, is fundamental to the better quality of life for all which we
all seek to achieve. As the masses of our people have grown accustomed to
the fact that we now have a democratic state and Government and no longer
an apartheid state and government, to which they were naturally hostile and
from which they were alienated, their participation in determining their
destiny has increased. We must encourage this trend.

In this regard, a special responsibility rest on the shoulders of the
political parties. Among other things, we must encourage the people to take
an even more active part in the community police forum and urge them to
continue communicating with the law enforcement agencies and other organs
of state with any information they may have on corrupt and criminal
misconduct. As some members of the National Assembly have said, we must all
work to mobilise the masses of our people to be involved in all of these
programmes of social upliftment.

The political parties in particular and other mass-based formations will
have to make a special effort to help develop a veritable mass movement for
development and change to speed up the process towards the eradication of
poverty. Again, we appeal to those who have skills and other resources that
they can bring to support the efforts of this movement and to notify
especially their municipal governments of their availability to work for
change.

Everything points to the need for us to continue to focus on the challenge
of youth development. All the programmes that we have announced will
concentrate on the youth, among others. In addition, during this year of
the 25th anniversary of the Soweto uprising, the Presidency, the National
Youth Commission, Ministries and Departments of Sports and Recreation, Arts
and Culture and Education will co-operate to develop programmes to draw
larger numbers of our youth into sports and cultural activities, including
those directed at the promotion of traditional culture and sports.

These programmes should also enable us to take the necessary steps to bring
up our youth in the context of a new value system aimed at ensuring that
they grow up to be good and responsible citizens. Clearly, youth
organisations will be critical to the success of this programme as they
will have to mobilise and inspire the youth to get involved in what should
be an act of self-development.
The legislation enabling the establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission empowers the President by proclamation in the Gazette to
reconvene the Commission for the purpose of completing its final report
after the Committee on Amnesty has completed its work. It is expected that
the Committee on Amnesty will complete its work next month. This will
enable the Committee on Reparation and Rehabilitation and the TRC itself to
prepare their final reports. This will also enable the Government to
complete its own work on the complex issue of final reparations. In the
meantime, we will continue to meet our obligations with regard to interim
reparations as we have done.

I would also like to take this opportunity, once more, to pay tribute to
our SA National Defence Force for the valuable work it continues to carry
out at home and abroad. At home it has continued to play a significant role
in the fight against crime. As I speak, it is also involved in humanitarian
work relating to India and Mozambique, helping to deliver relief in the
aftermath of the earthquake and the renewed floods in these two countries
respectively. Our other military personnel serve in peacekeeping operations
of the United Nations in other parts of Africa and will be increasingly
involved in these operations.
Hon members may be aware of the announcement made this morning concerning
Anglo American PLC and De Beers. In this regard I would like to thank the
chairperson of De Beers Mr Nicholas Oppenheimer, and other leaders of De
Beers and Anglo American, for their courtesy in discussing this major
corporate restructuring with us ahead of its finalisation. An important
result of this transaction for our country and economy will be the
immediate flow into South Africa of foreign currency estimated at $2,8
billion or about R21,8 billion. I would like to express our sincere
appreciation for the confidence in the new South Africa demonstrated by a
group and a family that have played a major role in our country's economic
growth and development for more than a century. [Applause.]

One of our daughters and mothers, Miriam Makeba, has in reality become a
citizen of the world. She has distinguished herself on our continent and
beyond as one of the most well-known and beloved musicians and
personalities of our era. During her period in exile, she made valuable
friends and became internationally recognised for her music. She has not
only been active in the music and political arena, but has made valuable
contributions to and has been recognised for her work in the social,
cultural and humanitarian fields. Her fearless humanitarianism earned her
the Dag Hammarskjold Peace Prize in 1986. The ordinary people of our
continent gave her the title ``Mama Africa''. As we strengthen our bonds of
friendship and solidarity with our fellow Africans and reinforce our work
in this regard, I am pleased to announce that I have appointed Mama Africa,
Miriam Makeba, as South Africa's Goodwill Ambassador to Africa. [Applause.]

Ahead of us is an exciting period of our country's renaissance. It will be
marked by our steady advance towards the elimination of poverty, rather
than the expanding pauperisation of the majority that has been one of the
distinguishing features of our country for 300 years. It will be
distinguished by the recovery of the identity and pride of the millions of
Africans that colonialism and apartheid sought to transform into a
depersonalised mass of disposable commodities. It will experience the
flowering of all our diverse cultures and languages without antagonism
among them, which constitute essential building blocks towards the
formation of a South African nation and identity.

We will be involved in the creation of a situation in which an African
people will contribute something of great value to the rest of the world, a
nonracial society whose racial and cultural diversity will serve as a
factor of strength and enrichment rather than one of division and conflict.
The day will dawn when we as Africans will, as all our people desire,
restore the situation that obtained at periods now dimmed by the mists of
time, when Africans were in the vanguard of the advance toward higher
levels of civilisation.

Poor as they were, uneducated as they were, barefoot and poorly clothed,
and while the theoreticians argued, on the the one hand this on the other
hand that, the masses of our people carried the burden of our struggle for
democracy, peace, nonracism, nonsexism and prosperity. I know it as a
matter of fact that these great masses will join the historic struggle in
which we are engaged for fundamental change and development.

The political leadership gathered in this House will have to take its own
decision as to whether it will lead or follow these masses. The faint-
hearted and cynical will mock the strivings of the people, because they do
not want to join in the offensive to make a decisive break with our past.
What we would say in Setswana is: ``Se sa feleng se a tlhola.'' [That which
does not come to an end, is taboo.] [Applause.]

'n Donker gat verslind sterrestelsels. [A black hole swallows up galaxies.]

I thank the hon members for their participation and debate, as well as
their attention. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 14:21.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:


1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements of the Foundation for Education, Science
         and Technology for 1998-99 [RP 198-2000].


     (b)    Financial Statements of the King George V Silver Jubilee Fund
         for Tuberculosis for 1999-2000 [RP 199-2000].

2.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Government Notice No 938 published in Government Gazette No 21573 dated
     15 September 2000, Regulation 19: Transitional Arrangements, made in
     terms of section 38 of the Refugees Act, 1998 (Act No 130 of 1998).

