---
title: 'National Assembly - 28 March 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-03-28
---

WEDNESDAY, 28 MARCH 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

  ALLEGATIONS AGAINST TONY YENGENI REGARDING HIS MOTOR VEHICLE AND THE ARMS
                                    DEAL

                                 (Statement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the hon Mr Yengeni has requested an
opportunity to make a personal statement. I will now grant him that
opportunity.

Mr T S YENGENI: Madam Speaker, in the light of various media statements,
speculation and innuendos - in respect of which I am seeking legal advice
as to whether they amount to defamation - I have been left with no
alternative but reluctantly to respond to some of these reports.

As hon members are all aware, the allegations regarding how I acquired my
motor vehicle are within the big picture of the arms procurement
investigations in respect of which the three statutory investigating bodies
are involved. I have stated in the media that as this is due legal process
which has been established within our legal framework, I am prepared to
submit myself fully and co-operate with the investigation. There have been
statements that the investigating bodies may hold certain parts of their
investigation privately, and some in public. I again reiterate that I will
co-operate with such a process, be it a public or a private hearing.

The legal process which I have committed myself to co-operate with will
afford me the opportunity of going through a fair process during which my
rights and dignity will be protected, and not the trial by the media which
I am currently subjected to. However, the spotlight on public
representatives by a vigilant media is important and helps to expose
wrongdoers. And more importantly, it acts as a deterrent to those who are
contemplating wrongdoing.

Hon members are also aware that the Democratic Alliance has approached the
Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests for an investigation into
the matter, and I believe that the chairperson of the committee is taking
up this matter. My decision is not to respond in detail to these media
speculations and innuendos. Such conduct on my part should not be construed
as an admission of guilt in respect of any speculation or innuendo,
whatsoever.

However, I would like to reiterate that the motor vehicle in question has
been legitimately purchased by myself. Its acquisition does not in any way
amount to a gift or a donation. More importantly, the acquisition of the
vehicle did not, in any way whatsoever, influence the award and/or is not
related to the awarding of any contract in the arms procurement deal which
is under investigation.

During my tenure as Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence,
the committee was involved in the formulation of the White Paper on Defence
and the Defence Review. The arms procurement process and the ultimate
decisions relating to the awarding of the contracts were taken by Cabinet.
Neither the chairperson nor the committee had any part in decisions on
these matters.

I want to assure the South African public and all MPs that I will fully co-
operate with the legal process underway. It would be most crucial, and in
the interests of the nation, if this process can be speeded up so that the
matter can be laid to rest, once and for all. My personal wish is that the
hearing I will be subjected to by the investigators be held in public so
that when I explain myself, it will not only be to the investigators, but
to the nation as a whole.

On the allegation of my nondisclosure of my house at No 5 Fitzpatrick
Street, Tijgerhof, in Milnerton, I wish to put on record that the said
property was disclosed by me in 1996. [Applause.]

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr R P ZONDO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes from news reports that two farmers were killed in the Marico
       area and that in the Free State a farmer and his son were shot and
       injured;


  (2) condemns in the strongest terms this kind of violent crime and the
       brutal attacks on farmers, who constitute an important component of
       our economy;


  (3) warns the perpetrators of these heinous crimes that there is no place
       in the new South Africa for their destructive criminality; and


  (4) calls on the Police Service to speedily investigate the farm attacks
       and put the perpetrators behind bars where they belong.

[Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that under the expanded definition, South Africa's unemployment
       rate continues to climb and is now at 37,3% with more than 4,3
       million people unemployed;


  (2) further notes that the Centre for Development and Enterprise's recent
       round table report, which included contributions from two of
       President Mbeki's economic advisors and one of the authors of Gear,
       lists the reasons for South Africa's failure to create jobs and
       achieve economic growth as including -


       (a)  an intense focus on race;
       (b)  an inflexible labour market;
       (c)  costly equity laws;
       (d)  a deep and growing skills shortage; and
       (e)  a President who has spent too much time and effort focusing on
           foreign affairs; and


  (3) calls on the Government to take heed of these ominous trends and the
       effects they are having on the everyday lives of our people, and to
       show the political will to deliver jobs for all the people.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Chairperson ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members who are making noise, the
member is at the podium. [Interjections.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that


       (a)  the Minister for Provincial and Local Government and the
           Minister for the Public Service and Administration respectively,
           are engaged in attempts to combine South Africa's local
           government employees with the national and provincial public
           service; and


       (b)  such a move has the potential for public servants in the
           provincial and national Government to strengthen managerial
           capacity in the local authorities and ensure speedier service
           delivery; and


  (2) therefore welcomes this initiative and expresses the hope that this
       matter will be pursued with vigour and energy, so that all officials
       serving at all levels of Government are within one combined service.

Mr E S MAGASHULE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a great revolutionary and supporter of the struggle for
       freedom in South Africa, Comrade Fidel Castro, has welcomed another
       great revolutionary, Comrade Thabo Mbeki, to his country;


  (2) further notes that Comrade Castro has bestowed Cuba's highest award,
       the Jose Marti medal, on President Mbeki; and


  (3) congratulates President Mbeki on this achievement and also
       congratulates President Castro on honouring our President.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

[Applause.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with disgust that South African girls ...

[Interjections.] No, not that we are wasting our time on Cuba!


  (1) notes with disgust that according to a Human Rights Watch report,
       South African girls are being  raped and sexually abused at school by
       classmates and teachers;


  (2) further notes that this serious problem has not yet enjoyed enough
       attention from Government;


  (3) urges the Government to ensure that all perpetrators convicted of
       sexual assault or rape should not be permitted to teach or attend
       school any further; and


  (4) suggests that provision be made for a special counselling fund for
       victims of sexual abuse at school level as suggested by the Human
       Rights Watch report.

[Applause.]

Mr J T MASEKA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises the huge threat posed by tuberculosis to the population of
       South Africa, especially since half of all new infections are HIV-
       related;


  (2) notes with dismay that the South African National Tuberculosis
       Association is experiencing problems with misappropriation of funds,
       and other problems that could seriously affect the country's ability
       to fight this dread disease; and


  (3) urges the Minister of Health to intervene immediately and ensure that
       the important work of Santa stays on track.

Ms N M TWALA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  President Thabo Mbeki and President Fidel Castro have signed a
           series of agreements which could lead, amongst other things, to
           the production of low-cost HIV/Aids drugs; and


       (b)  other areas of co-operation will include sport, commerce,
           science and technology;


  (2) believes that these agreements will be mutually beneficial to both
       countries and will strengthen the linkages between the peoples of
       Cuba and South Africa; and


  (3) welcomes the agreements signed by the governments of South Africa and
       Cuba.

[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the ACDP has promoted the concept of restorative justice
       which includes the Biblical principle of the payment of restitution
       by the criminal to the victim of crime;


  (2) notes that the Asset Forfeiture Unit has attached assets derived from
       a specific crime, namely ransom money paid by a businessman in
       Transkei for the release of his kidnapped child; and


  (3) consequently welcomes the announcement by the Asset Forfeiture Unit
       that the amount of some R1,1 million will be repaid to this victim of
       crime, and this amounts to a form of restitution.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the FA:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that Santa has a lack of funding;


  (2) hears that despite this Dr Ratsela, the CEO of Santa, is receiving a
       salary of R500 000 per annum for two days' work a month and,
       according to press reports, is spending large sums of money by means
       of credit cards and petrol cards;


  (3) expresses concern that tuberculosis is now reaching alarmingly high
       levels in this country and every effort is needed to contain this
       curable disease; and


  (4) urges the appropriate authorities to investigate the allegations
       against Dr Ratsela and, if they are found to be true, to take urgent
       action.

Ms P N MNANDI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with alarm the Human Rights Watch report stating the prevalence
       of sexual molestation and rape of learners in South African schools;


  (2) believes that these barbaric acts pose a serious threat to the
       economic, social and physiological wellbeing of our country's youth;


  (3) condemns this barbaric behaviour; and


  (4) calls on -


       (a)  the police to bring the perpetrators to book; and


       (b)  the Government to step up efforts to curb this inhumane
           behaviour and protect the rights of the girl child.

[Applause.]

Mr A J BOTHA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its sympathy with the families of the victims of five
       murders in the rural areas this week, as well as with the families of
       the two members of the South African Police Service murdered this
       week;


  (2) notes the senselessness of these and other murders and the
       ruthlessness of the killers, some of whom were members of a rugby
       club;


  (3) condemns the actions of Dr Barney Pityana while visiting farm schools
       in the Free State, when he identified farmers in general as being
       guilty of human rights violations;


  (4) notes that this is in addition to a long list of hate speeches
       delivered by members of the ANC whereby race relations in the country
       have been damaged;


  (5) commends the call this morning by the Policy Committee on Rural
       Safety and Security for the development of national values and norms
       so as to develop a national identity that can reduce racial tensions;
       and


  (6) therefore calls on all South Africans to unite in stopping the
       violence and bloodshed that is destroying our country.

[Applause.]

Mr M S M SIBIYA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with great concern that -


       (a)  following a serious of exposés by the Mail & Guardian, auditors
           have allegedly recommended that the national office of the South
           African National Tuberculosis Association (Santa) be closed
           down; and


       (b)  this same report allegedly found that the office wastes much-
           needed money and resources, and has little contact with its own
           hospitals and clinics;


  (2) is alarmed to learn that Dr Andrew Ratsela, CEO of Santa, allegedly
       earns a salary of R500 000 a year for working two days each month,
       whereas previous Santa CEOs had been either unpaid volunteers or were
       paid a token allowance; and


  (3) urges the Department of Health to take a more active ...

[Time expired.]

Miss T E LISHIVHA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes from news reports that two boys were shot and injured and one
       was killed in a senseless attack on a farm in the Northern Province;


  (2) also notes that eight members of the Northerns Rugby Club, including
       the chairperson of the club, have been arrested on charges of murder
       and attempted murder, and that more arrests are expected;


  (3) strongly condemns this mindless attack on our young people by sports
       persons who are supposed to be role models for our youth; and


  (4) calls on the South African Police Service to investigate this
       barbaric attack and ensure that the perpetrators meet with the full
       wrath of the law.

[Applause.]

Mr J DURAND: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with alarm the report that recently revealed shocking evidence
       of abuse and neglect of SA's elderly;


  (2) acknowledges that the elderly form a very important part of our
       society and that efforts should be made by all to ensure that they
       are in no way abused, manipulated or neglected;


  (3) further notes that the abuse of the elderly is a direct result of the
       fact that the social services for the elderly are clearly in a state
       of disarray and remain deeply fragmented, poorly managed, under-
       resourced and racially divided;


  (4) urges the Minister of Social Development to give the assurance that
       his department will commit itself unconditionally to implementing the
       recommendations of this report; and


  (5) calls on the public to realise that the DA is the only party that is
       prepared to deliver to all the people and not just to a select few.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay and trepidation irregularities, corruption and
       mismanagement involving millions of rands by the unscrupulous
       officials of the Northern Province Tender Board;


  (2) is alarmed and shocked at the high level of bribery and corruption in
       this province and that many contractors are forced to grease the
       palms of officials for the processing and approval of tenders to
       supply meat to hospitals and books and stationery to schools, and
       contracts for the rehabilitation of roads;


  (3) is amazed at the consideration of political party affiliations and
       support as a criterion for awarding contracts;
  (4) notes, in conclusion, that a Northern Province school supplies
       company, Nu-Vita, has filed a R46 million lawsuit against the
       provincial tender board for mismanaging tenders for the supply of
       schoolbooks and stationery; and


  (5) calls on the national Minister of Education ...

[Time expired.]

Ms F HAJAIG: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the 25th meeting of health ministers from the Non-Aligned
       Movement (NAM) countries held in Johannesburg this week;


  (2) further notes that NAM fully supports South Africa in its court
       battle against multinational pharmaceutical companies who want to
       prevent the Government from importing cheaper generic drugs;
  (3) notes that this is in line with the growing international support for
       our Government to ensure affordable access to drugs for all
       infectious diseases;


  (4) appreciates the resolution taken by NAM health ministers regarding
       the court battle between the pharmaceutical companies and the South
       African Government; and


  (5) hopes that the success of this court case will have a significant
       impact on the countries of the South.

[Applause.]

The House adjourned at 17:29.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:
     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         Report and Financial Statements of Investment South Africa for
         1999-2000.


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Labour, the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy, the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs for
         information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Mines
         and Works Compensation Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 10-2001].


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises and the Select
         Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Accounts of the Transkei
         Electricity Supply Corporation for 1994-95, 1995-96, 1996-97 and
         for 1 April to 31 December 1997 [RP 184-2000].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and the Select
         Committee on Social Services for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Refugee Relief Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 12-2001].


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Education and the Select Committee
         on Education and Recreation for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         High School Vorentoe Disaster Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 13-2001].


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. They are also
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance for information:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Independent Development Trust (Main Fund) for 1998-99
              [RP 6-2001].


         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Temporary Employees' Pension Fund, the Associated
              Institutions' Pension and Provident Fund for 1997-98 and 1998-
              99 [RP 9-2001].


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select
         Committee on Economic Affairs for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Refsa
         (Pty) Limited for the period ended 14 July 1998 [RP 22-2001].


     (8)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report:




         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the President's Fund for 1999-2000 [RP 7-2001].


         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the State President's Fund for 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-
              2000 [RP 14-2001].


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing Committee
         on Defence:


         Letter from the President informing Parliament of the employment
         of the South African National Defence Force in compliance with the
         international obligations of the Republic of Mozambique for
         humanitarian assistance during widespread flooding.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Transport:


     (a)    Protocol between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water Management
         of The Netherlands concerning Bilateral Cooperation in the Fields
         of Transport and Infrastructure Development, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol.


     (c)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Italian Republic on Cooperation in the
         Field of Public Transport, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.


     (d)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.


     (e)    Declaration of Intent between the Department of Transport of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Department of Transport of Canada
         concerning Technical Cooperation in Transportation, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (f)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Declaration of Intent.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Division of
     Revenue Bill [B 11D - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 28
     March 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the Division
         of Revenue Bill [B 11D - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 76),
         amended by the National Council of Provinces and referred to the
         Committee, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Filling of Vacancies on Commission
     for Gender Equality, dated 28 March 2001:


         The Ad Hoc Committee on Filling of Vacancies on  Commission for
         Gender Equality, in accordance with a Resolution of the House,
         dated 27 March 2001, further considered and examined nominations
         for the filling of vacancies on the Commission for Gender
         Equality.


         The Committee nominates, in terms of section 193(5) of the
         Constitution, the following persons for appointment to the
         Commission:


              As full-time commissioners, to commence serving immediately
              for a term of five years:


              1.  Beatrice Ngcobo.
              2.  Manana Tlake.
              3.  Gertrude Fester.


              As full-time commissioners, to commence serving on 1 May 2001
              for a term of five years:


              4.  Nombulelo Siqwana-Ndulo.
              5.  Sheila Meintjies.
              6.  Bafana Khumalo.


              As part-time commissioners, to commence serving on 1 May 2001,
              or as soon as possible thereafter, for a term of five years:


              7.  Rashida Manjoo.
              8.  Sophia de Bruyn.
              9.  Themba Kgase.
              10. Teboho Maitse.
              11. Nozipho Bhengu.


     Report to be considered.


