---
title: 'National Assembly - 30 October 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-10-30
---

TUESDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

                                     and

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker and hon members, today we place
before this House both the Adjustments Appropriation Bill and the Medium-
Term Budget Policy Statement. The Bill invites Parliament to consider
changes to spending estimates for this financial year, set out in more
detail in the Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure.

We know that changes to budgets in the course of the year are almost
inevitable, as budgeting is not a perfect science. In many ways, preparing
the February Budget may be likened to a farmer ploughing and sowing the
field. Since the Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs recently
celebrated the Female Farmer of the Year, it is appropriate that we get the
gender correct. This farmer looks ahead to harvest time, calculating the
yield of the crop that holds much promise. Good rains and favourable omens
allow her to harvest a crop that exceeds her highest expectations. Too much
or too little rain may cause her to review her prospects when planning
ahead for the next season.

Equally, when preparing the Budget, it is impossible to foresee all the
events that may affect spending during the year. The Adjusted Estimates of
National Expenditure, which are in a new format, revise the Estimates set
out in the February Budget. As I have said, this is a new format combining
various explanatory memoranda prepared for each national Vote in previous
years. I know that members will find the new format both convenient and
informative. Indeed, I hope that in this interesting place called
Parliament, the review of the information provided by departments will
become a standard part of the intelligence-gathering role of all portfolio
committees, alongside the interrogation of the departments' annual reports,
the main Estimates published in February and strategic plans due to be
tabled for the first time in March next year.

Alongside the Adjusted Estimates, we lay before this House the 2001 Medium-
Term Budget Policy Statement. This is the framework that we will use when
finalising the Budget that will be tabled in February next year. The
statement sets out our economic forecasts for the next few years and the
fiscal framework within which the 2002 Budget will be compiled. It outlines
the policy matters that will shape next year's Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework and proposes the division of revenue between national, provincial
and local government for the next three years. So, in many respects, it is
like talking about the Budget without the numbers, because the focus is
largely on the policy issues.

Firstly, let me say that both these documents have benefited greatly from
constructive comments and advice emanating from this House. The revised
format of the Adjusted Estimates is largely the result of recommendations
made at this time last year when the 2000 Adjustments Budget was considered
by the Portfolio Committee on Finance and both this Assembly and the NCOP.

In keeping with the spirit of the Public Finance Management Act, the
changes to departmental budgets provided for in the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill are now more fully explained against the background of
the aims, objectives and programmes of each Vote. Whilst the PFMA sets
strict limits to the kind of spending for which additional funds may be
appropriated, it also provides for various other changes, mainly the roll-
over of unspent moneys from the previous year and the shifting or virement
of funds from one purpose to another. These are all explained in a single
consolidated document.

In the case of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, the guiding
influence of Parliament is clearly much greater. Since the first MTBPS was
published in December 1997, the annual debates in its proposals have
increasingly shaped the prioritisation and policy reviews that accompany
the Budget process. The Medium-Term Expenditure Framework is increasingly
an outcome of the legislative and policy oversight role that this House and
the NCOP play.

I am particularly pleased that, this year, the Intergovernmental Fiscal
Review has attracted such careful and considered attention in the NCOP.
Members will find echoes of the issues which were raised in these hearings
in several chapters of the MTBPS. I know that when budgets are tabled both
here and in the nine provincial legislatures next year, and when filling in
the details of the 2002 MTEF, the profound contributions of parliamentary
review towards shaping our Budget and spending plans will be much more
evident.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement will be explored in detail over the
next fortnight by a brand new Budget committee with joint representation of
the NA and the NCOP. In establishing this committee, Parliament is taking a
giant step forward in its fiscal responsibility and oversight role. I am
particularly pleased that it begins its life with the review of the annual
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. Although the statement does not
contain all the details that the committee will in due course want to
examine, it is entirely appropriate that its work should begin with the
broad framework, wider economic context and the fiscal policy objectives
and medium-term goals of Government as a whole, including, of course, the
national, provincial and local spheres.
Allow me to say a few words about the Adjustments Appropriation before
returning to the broader Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. In the 2001
Budget, tabled in this House on 21 February, we anticipated a total
expenditure this year of R258,3 billion. The revised estimate is R261,1
billion or R2,8 billion more than the main estimate. However, the
Adjustments Appropriation provides for a total of R8,5 billion in addition
to the amounts voted in the main appropriation this year. The arithmetic is
as follows.

The Treasury Committee has recommended unforeseeable and unavoidable
expenditure of R2,8 billion for national departments, R1,5 billion for
provinces and R328 million for local government, against the contingency
reserve this year of R2 billion. Therefore, there is an additional R4,6
billion recommended, which raises the expenditure level by R2,6 billion.

The House is requested to agree to roll-overs of unspent moneys from last
year's appropriations of R2,2 billion. Against these roll-overs, we
anticipate that aggregate underspending this year will be just under R2
billion, which results in a net contribution to the expenditure level of
R200 million.

The Adjustments Appropriation also provides for R1,7 billion in spending on
infrastructure, flood damage repairs and poverty relief, announced in the
main Budget but not yet appropriated. This does not add to the spending
level; in fact, there is a net saving of R70 million, mainly because of
projects that will extend beyond the present year.

Other adjustments yield a net saving of R14 million. These include self-
financing expenditure of R30 million, an increase of R9 million in the
remuneration of judges, which is a statutory appropriation, a reduction of
R50 million in the expected proceeds of the skills development levy, and a
saving of R3 million on the Housing Vote. The Adjustments Appropriation of
R8,5 billion adds just R2,8Â billion to the national Budget expenditure. If
only all our arithmetic worked out like this!

I do not propose to detail all the adjustments made, but members are
entitled to an explanation of some of the larger amounts. Let me deal first
with the additional amounts recommended by the Treasury Committee as
unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure.

This year's Public Service negotiations led to an average increase in
salaries of 6,58%, whereas the original budget provided for an average of
6%. The difference is taken into account in the additional allocations to
provinces and national departments, except where our review of in-year
spending trends indicates that national departments will be able to meet
the revised personnel costs without further assistance.

For budgetary purposes, I know that my provincial colleagues will join me -
all nine of them, not just one - in expressing appreciation to the Minister
for the Public Service and Administration, but also to the Public Service
unions for reaching an agreement in time for the Adjustments Appropriation.
This means that we can budget with greater certainty for personnel costs
next year, and public servants will receive their increases in July 2002,
and not in October.

The provincial share of the additional amounts for personnel costs is
included in the proposed supplement to provincial equitable share
allocations of R1,2 billion. Also taken into account here is the rapid
progress made in registering beneficiaries of the child support grant and
the need to clear backlogs in rank and leg promotions, particularly in
provincial health departments.

The Adjustments Appropriation also provides for R300 million to go to
Mpumalanga province, as part of an intervention in terms of section
100(1)(a) of the Constitution, following an approach by the province after
it experienced cash-flow problems. Members will be relieved to know that
steps to put financial management on a sound footing are well advanced.

For local government, the 2001-02 year has of course been something of a
watershed. The entire municipal landscape has been swept clean, the
boundaries have been redrawn, new authorities have been constructed, and
there is a new momentum to the extension of basic services to low-income
communities. The Adjustments Appropriation provides R108 million as a once-
off transitional subsidy for remuneration of councillors, and R200 million
to supplement free basic services. The additional allocation to local
government will address unforeseeable transitional issues that have emerged
in this financial year, including the funding of municipalities that have
weak fiscal and institutional capacity relative to their service delivery
responsibilities.

Amongst the national departments, the largest adjustments go to Foreign
Affairs, Statistics South Africa, Public Enterprises, Social Development,
Defence, Safety and Security, Communications, Labour, Land Affairs and
Transport. Foreign Affairs receives R79 million to compensate for the
effect of the depreciation of the rand on the cost of maintaining our
overseas diplomatic capacity. In addition, R215Â million deals with the
inclusion of foreign service allowances in the taxable income of personnel
working abroad.

Statistics SA is allocated supplementary funding for Census 2001. The
costing of the census was initially based on the 1996 census experience.
However, on the advice of the Statistics Council, Statistics SA has
increased the number of enumerator areas, substantially improved census
management, strengthened checking of census returns and invested in new
equipment to accelerate the processing of information. The Treasury
Committee has recommended an additional R140 million, and R155 million is
included as a roll-over of unspent funds from last year. The overall cost
of Census 2001 will be the equivalent - and I apologise for using ``the
equivalent'' thus - but the equivalent of $2,50 a person, which compares
favourably with the costs in countries as diverse as Botswana with $3,40,
Namibia with $5,33, Hungary with $3,70 and the United States with $20 a
person.

I know that members will want to be assured that this expenditure will
deliver a reliable count, so let me take this opportunity to commend the
many thousands of census workers who have successfully completed the count
in most enumeration areas. In some metropolitan areas counting has again
been slow, and for those who have not yet been counted, please be patient.
I have agreed to the request by the Statistician-General, Mr Pali Lehlola,
that enumeration can continue for the next week in those neighbourhoods
where gates, walls, dogs, out-of-date street maps, incomprehensible family
structures, poor communication and other unforeseeable and unavoidable
circumstances may have led to delays. [Interjections.]

The Public Enterprises Vote receives additional allocations of R70 million
for the anticipated costs of the Telkom IPO, and R94Â million to deal with
the pension fund shortfalls of Safcol. Safety and Security receives R250
million to enable rank and leg promotion backlogs to be cleared.
[Interjections.] Is that all right?

Ms N E HANGANA: Chairperson, yes.

The MINISTER: Good. An amount of R600 million is recommended for the
Communications Vote to finance a R300Â million a year subsidy for the Post
Office for the present year and last year. Government has accepted that a
new programme of reorganisation will be required in order to achieve a
sustainable balance sheet and operational structure for the Post Office and
its banking arm. The Communications Vote also receives additional funding
to meet costs incurred by the Independent Communications Authority, Icasa,
to prepare for the licensing of the second national telephone service
operator.

On the Labour Vote, R605 million is recommended to meet the accumulated
shortfalls of the Unemployment Insurance Fund. The UIF is a key component
of our social security system, providing relief to many people who lose
their jobs in the course of industrial structuring or restructuring, and
also maternity and death benefits to workers. The UIF is funded by employer
and employee contributions, and it should not need supplementary
allocations. However, in recent years contributions collected have lagged
behind while benefits claimed have continued to escalate. Recognising the
important role of the UIF in contributing to the income security of the
poor, the restructuring of the fund has been prioritised. Legislation and
reorganisation as well as management of the fund will, in due course,
return it to a self-sustaining financial position.

Against the background of an unanticipated acceleration in Government's
Land Restitution Programme, an additional R50 million is recommended for
the Land Affairs Vote. Projects targeted for completion this year include
Alexandra and District Six.

The Treasury Committee has recommended an additional R250 million for the
Transport Vote to meet shortfalls in bus subsidy payments and the
operational budget of the SA Rail Commuter Corporation. These are, in part,
related to the cost escalation associated with higher fuel costs, and
unforeseeable events such as rail accidents and restructuring within the
bus service industry. These and other adjustments and the resulting changes
in the overall allocations by Vote are set out in the published Adjusted
Estimates of National Expenditure.

As in the past the Treasury Committee has evaluated a wide range of
requests for additional funding against the criteria for unforeseeable and
unavoidable expenditure set out in the Public Finance Management Act and
its regulations. In some cases, such as the UIF and Post Office
allocations, the amounts recommended are substantial and Government
recognises that further work needs to be done to ensure that programmes or
agencies involved are put on a sound and sustainable footing.

In a number of other cases the Treasury Committee has found itself
evaluating requests for minor adjustments or specific commitments, which
whilst satisfying the unforeseeable and unavoidable test, nonetheless
represent items that could be accommodated if departments had made
appropriate provision for contingencies in their forward planning and
budgeting. Now that the Public Finance Management Act requires formal
evaluation of risks and the risk management framework to be in place, we
expect fewer requests to the Treasury Committee for additional funds in
future.

The House will be pleased to know that the additional expenditure
recommended can be accommodated without anticipating higher Government
borrowing. This year's harvest has exceeded our expectations, based on the
robust trend in the first half of the year. The expected revenue this year
will exceed budget projections by some R4,8 billion. The deficit for the
year is expected to be R22,8 billion or 2,3% of GDP, compared to the
February estimate of 2,5%. I am therefore pleased to commend the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill for the 2001-2002 year for consideration.

Let me now turn to the 2001 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement and the
economic context within which next year's Budget will be framed. Since the
Budget was tabled on 21 February, an already deteriorating international
economic trend has been rocked by attacks on the US and the resulting war
in Afghanistan.

The slowdown in world growth has deepened and financial markets have
experienced a flight from risk to safe havens. The rand has weakened
considerably. But our trade performance in the first nine months of this
year has remained impressive. Government revenue has grown strongly and
there has been recovery in capital spending. Although we now expect growth
of 2,6% this year, down from our February estimate of 3,5%, we expect South
Africa to avoid the dislocation that many other emerging economies are
presently experiencing. As we speak, Argentina is living through yet
another crisis.

Indeed South Africa's healthy balance of payments, declining inflation and
sound public finances allow us to propose fiscal policy adjustments that
will sustain and reinforce the momentum of our growth and development. The
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement reaffirms Government's firm intent to
address our social and developmental challenges within a consistent growth-
oriented fiscal and budgetary framework.

When we tabled the Budget in this House in February we said, and I quote:


  This Budget tells the story of the choices and decisions we have made and
  which have advanced the transformation of our country and its economy to
  the point where we can now begin to enjoy the fruit. It tells the story
  of a young and proud democracy hard at work to improve the lives of all
  its people.

In a world where so many economies are already in recession, where millions
of workers are being retrenched, where tens of thousands of firms are
closing down, where governments are battling to collect the taxes necessary
to fund even basic services, we must pause to consider the correctness of
the tough decisions we took earlier.

If we compare our situation now to that in 1998 when, in response to the
global financial crisis interest rates rose by more than 7%, little money
was available to support the policy choices of departments, pensions and
grants could not be increased to keep pace with inflation. All of the
pressures we faced were very real then. However, the present global
economic crisis is much worse: The rand has depreciated by the same margin
as in 1998, but our economic base is now much stronger. Interest rates have
not been increased this time.

Key features of economic performance include the following: Firstly, growth
of 10,4% in merchandise export volumes in the first half of this year
compared to the same period last year, whilst services exports grew by some
15% over the same period; secondly, a decline in the net open forward
position of the Reserve Bank, representing uncovered future claims in
foreign exchange reserves, down from US$ 9,5 billion in January to US$ 4,8
billion in September; thirdly, steady growth in most sectors in the economy
this year, and particularly in wholesale and retail trade, financial
services and the transport, storage and communication sectors; fourthly, an
improvement in domestic investment across a broad range of industries,
including real growth in both public and private sector capital formation;
fifthly, a modest recovery in domestic saving accompanied by an encouraging
reduction in household debt relative to incomes; and sixthly, steady
declines in both producer and consumer price inflation.

In September the consumer price index minus mortgage costs, the so-called
CPIX, increased by 5,8%. Within the target range set for next year our
expectation is that it will average 5,5% next year. Taking into account the
lags involved in monetary policy implementation, it is necessary to set
inflation targets for the medium term. Accordingly, I have consulted with
the Governor of the Reserve Bank and we reached full agreement on all
issues. I therefore presented a proposal to the Cabinet reflecting this
common position. Having considered the matter, Cabinet agreed with our
proposal.

Therefore, I am mandated by Cabinet to make the following announcement,
covering the years 2003 to 2005. The inflation target will remain an annual
average increase of between 3% and 6% in CPIX in 2003. For 2004 and 2005
the target will be 3% to 5%. There has from time to time been speculation
on the flexibility of the inflation targets in the event of large external
shocks and the impact on price trends. In order to remove uncertainty, we
have agreed with the Reserve Bank on the escape clause dealing with such
events, which is set out in full in chapter 2 of the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement.

Our expectation is that inflation will steadily ease over the years ahead,
reaching about 4,5% in the third year of the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework. Economic growth of 2,6% in this year will result in growth in
the fiscal year of about 2,4%, followed by growth averaging 3,5% over the
forthcoming three-year period.

If one considers all these issues, all these positive trends in the
economy, we need to remind ourselves, as we did in February, that ``its
fruits gradually acquire the sweet taste of liberty''. Our fiscal policy
stance plays a role in supporting this projected recovery in growth. The
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement outlines a bold programme of further
tax relief and strong real expenditure growth, building on the firm
foundation to fiscal consolidation in recent years.

Expenditure increases over the next three years will be focused on health
services and social grants, municipal infrastructure and housing, improved
police and justice services and critical administrative services to
citizens. Budgetary provision for the electrification programme will also
be stepped up.

We have made provision for shortfalls in the operating budgets of the Post
Office and the Unemployment Insurance Fund over the next three years,
allowing for a period of restructuring in order to restore self-
sufficiency. Moderate easing of the overall tax burden will continue, with
relief particularly for low and middle-income wage earners. Enhancing the
capacity of the SA Revenue Service continues to be a key priority in the
Budget. Spending on public infrastructure is expected to grow by 8,8% a
year in real terms over the next three years, boosted by several public-
private partnerships, and other projects of public enterprises and
extrabudgetary Government agencies.

Following several years of consolidation, the budget deficit was brought
down to 2% of GDP last year. A deficit of 2,3% is projected for the current
year. It is anticipated that the deficit will increase to 2,6% of GDP in
the next fiscal year, before falling to 2,2% by the end of the new Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework period.

At this stage, preparatory work for Telkom's initial public share offer is
well advanced. But we recognise that the regulatory and institutional work
that needs to be completed is formidable and market conditions are at
present unattractive. For budgetary purposes, we have shifted the
anticipated proceeds to the fiscus to the next year.

Despite the moderate increase in the budget deficit expected next year,
debt will continue to fall as a share of GDP, and debt service costs will
continue to be reduced as a proportion of Government's expenditure,
releasing resources for productive purposes. Details of the revised budget
framework and the outlook for revenue and tax policy are set out in
chapters 3 and 4 of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. The new
framework provides for an increase in spending over the forward estimates
published in the 2001 Budget of R8,9 billion in the new fiscal year, and
R11,8 billion in the year thereafter. An additional R13,3 billion will be
made available to departments and provinces in the fiscal year that ends on
31 March 2005, above the baseline 6% increase over their 2003-04 estimates.

The national budget framework reflects a large part, but not all, of
Government's spending commitments. The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement
summarises the accounts of our social security funds, which fall outside
the main Budget numbers. In addition, we draw attention to a range of new
infrastructure projects that will contribute to social and economic
development in the years ahead, which will be largely self-funding, and
hence are outside of the main Budget.
These include water projects under consideration, such as the Skuifraam
Water Scheme to supplement water supply to the Western Cape, and further
developments in several other regional water schemes. Negotiations have
been completed for the ``platinum highway'' toll road concession, linking
the N4 north of Pretoria with Botswana. A substantial rehabilitation and
realignment of the East Coast road linking East London, Umtata, Port St
Johns and the Port Shepstone-Durban highway is under review. We should also
add Port St Johns to Lusikisiki. [Laughter.]

Industrial development zones being planned include the Coega port near Port
Elizabeth, Richards Bay and East London. A gas pipeline from Mozambique to
South Africa is a major investment to ensure an affordable energy source
for Southern Africa over the next 20 years. The rehabilitation of the Rail
Commuter Corporation's rolling stock is in progress. A commuter rail link
is planned for the Khayelitsha community in Cape Town. A high-speed rail
link between Johannesburg and Pretoria is under investigation.
Investment in telecommunications will be boosted by the recent issue of a
third cellular network licence, the proposed issue of a second national
operator licence and further upgrading of Telkom's network and services,
following its public share issue. New emergency call centres are being
built by the Department of Communications in Cape Town and Johannesburg.

In some of these projects, notably the toll road concessions and further
investment in telecommunciations, private investment will provide funding
through direct equity participation and public-private partnerships. In
other cases, the funds will be raised against the balance sheets of our
public corporations. Taking these investment plans into account, however,
the consolidated public sector borrowing requirement is expected to remain
modest over the next few years,  rising from an estimated 1,65% of GDP next
year, to about 2,4% in the third year of the new Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework.

Our fiscal framework also provides for a marked increase in investment in
human resources. Education remains by far the largest category of spending
on the consolidated national and provincial budgets, rising from an
estimated R58,6 billion this year to over R70 billion projected for the
third year of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. In addition, the
national Budget now includes the skills development programme funding
through a payroll levy on employers. In its first year, R970 million was
transferred to the National Skills Fund and Sectoral Education and Training
Authorities or Setas, and this year about R2 billion is expected to be
transferred out of available funds of about R3,4 billion.

The funding for skills development is now obviously in place. For grant
disbursements to accelerate, employers need to take up the opportunities
available. Our strategy rests on a vibrant partnership between Government,
employers and trade unions. The challenge here is to see skills development
not just as a tax to be paid, but as an investment in future productivity
and growth.
Adding further to this investment in people, it is proposed that the wage
incentive announced in the 2001 Budget should initially take the form of a
tax allowance to employers for learnership agreements entered into in terms
of the new skills development and qualifications framework. More details
and draft legislation will be released by Sars, the national Treasury and
the Department of Labour before the end of the year. The allowance will be
retained for the next five years to enable learnership programmes to attain
rightful place in our human development strategy, and to contribute to the
creation of new work and training opportunities.

Against the background of the substantial reforms undertaken in the past
two years, the 2002 Budget will herald a period of consolidation in tax
policy. The personal income tax structure will again be lightened.
Investment incentives amounting to R3 billion over the next four years will
take effect. Further amendments to the list of public benefit activities
will extend the range of organisations qualifying for tax exempt status.
During the course of next year, a thorough review of the tax treatment of
retirement savings will be undertaken, some of the shortcomings of the
income tax treatment of the banking sector will be addressed, and effective
tax rates in other sectors will be reviewed. Our co-operative work with
other Southern African countries on customs administration, tax incentives,
and sharing lessons in respect of tax reform and building effective tax
revenue administrations will continue. But the broad parameters of the tax
law are now in place, and taxpayers can arrange their affairs with
confidence in both the structure of the tax code and the steadily improving
capacity of the revenue authority, to ensure its impartial and effective
administration.

On the strength of a sound budget framework and robust revenue performance,
we are able to plan for a bold expansion of public expenditure over the
next few years. In shaping the policy framework for the 2002 Budget,
Cabinet has been clear that addressing poverty and vulnerability remain a
central challenge in setting budget priorities, preparing spending plans
and building on our RDP achievements over the past seven years.

Spending on social services continues to account for over half of
consolidated national and provincial noninterest spending, amounting to
R131 billion in the current year. In strengthening social service
provision, we are able to target more resources to services that directly
influence the lives of people in our communities. By spending these moneys
wisely on schools and higher education, primary health care and hospitals,
social grants, welfare services and housing, we are able to open up
opportunities for economic development and reduce the physical and economic
vulnerability of our communities.

Over the next three years, spending on social services will grow by R15
billion, with growth averaging 8,7% a year for welfare services and 8,2%
for health services. Directed largely towards provincial governments, this
money will enable us, firstly, to put money in the pockets of the poor, by
increasing the number of children benefiting from child support grants to 3
million and providing inflation-related increases in the value of all
social grants. Nobody notices this. [Applause.] Secondly, it will enable us
to build better homes for more people as we increase the size and quantity
of housing subsidies that are granted to people with low incomes.
[Applause.] Thirdly, it will enable us to strengthen our capacity to
provide health care services that respond appropriately to the challenges
of HIV/Aids, tuberculosis, malaria and other health needs of our people.
[Applause.] Fourthly, it will enable us to extend initiatives to improve
the quality of education, through strengthening early childhood programmes
and those aimed at learners with special needs. [Applause.]

Spending on economic services and infrastructure rises sharply up to 2004-
05, reinforcing the commitment we made in February's Budget, to expand the
economic infrastructure and build skills in the economy. Additional funding
will go to a broad range of programmes, including a targeted subsidy for
the Post Office, recognising its importance in providing universal access
to essential communication services, and stepping up the national funding
of the electrification programme, to expand connections in rural areas over
the next few years. [Applause.]

Funding will also go to investment in rail infrastructure and increasing
subsidisation of commuter bus services, facilitating access to safe and
affordable public transport, investment in municipal water and sanitation
services, increasing access to clean safe water and sanitation facilities,
rehabilitation and maintenance of district and provincial roads, enhancing
economic activity in rural areas in particular, and some provision for the
United Nations World Summit on Sustainable Development to be held in
Johannesburg next year.

Justice, protection and security services will see growth of about 6,7% a
year over the MTEF period. Funding will be provided to phase in an
additional 6 000 policemen and policewomen and to strengthen key court
administration functions. Physical security at courts has been stepped up
and additional allocations for vehicles, information technology and
maintenance of infrastructure have been made to the Police Service.
[Applause.]

Within the administrative services cluster, increased allocations are
proposed for Foreign Affairs, Home Affairs and the SA Revenue Service next
year, and provision is made in the outer years of the MTEF for the 2004
elections - we hope it is not sooner, but at this stage the 2004 elections.

The MTBPS sets out a division of revenue for the 2002 Budget in which an
additional R4 billion goes to provinces next year and R5,4 billion in the
year thereafter. Reorganising the critical role of provincial departments
in providing social services to citizens, the provincial share of total
allocations rises from 55,8% this year to 56,4% in 2004-05. A marked
increase in local government allocations is proposed, raising its share of
the national Budget to 4,3% in the last year of the MTEF.

The final chapter of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement summarises the
intergovernmental budgetary framework. In addition to the equitable share
allocations to provinces and local government, a range of conditional grant
programmes provide earmarked funding for priority services or
infrastructure investment programmes.

The Budget Council has advised that the weight for the social welfare
component in the equitable shares formula should be increased by one
percentage point, taking into account increased spending in this sector and
the importance of sustaining adequate funding levels for the phasing in of
the child support grant. The economic component will be decreased by a
percentage point. In addition to this change, updated enrolment data has
been used in calculating the education component of the formula. The
phasing in of the present formula will be completed in the year 2003-04.

Following a careful review of the health sector grants, it is proposed that
central hospitals and redistribution of specialised services should be
combined into a new national tertiary services grant. It will provide a
more equitable funding framework for tertiary health care and will
recognise tertiary services in 27 hospitals in all nine provinces, whereas
just 10 hospitals were included in the previous framework. [Applause.] A
new development component is also added to the health professions training
and development grant, to fund medical specialists and registrars for
underserviced provinces. I think everybody should applaud this. [Applause.]

Further steps in the rationalisation and redesign of the local government
funding framework are also outlined in chapter 6 of the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement. The equitable share will increase in the years ahead,
providing additional support for the delivery of free basic services and
ensuring that all municipalities are able to maintain sound
administrations.

Allocations for municipal infrastructure are set to increase by some 18% a
year over the MTEF period, rising to R4 billion by the fiscal year ending
31 March 2005. This will primarily go towards basic infrastructure in low-
income neighbourhoods. Transfers to support municipal capacity-building
will also grow strongly, focused mainly on financial management reforms and
development planning interventions. A discussion paper detailing the
proposals for the 2002 Division of Revenue Bill will be released this week,
providing an early framework that will allow provinces and municipalities
to plan their 2002 budgets properly and begin putting capacity in place to
implement new projects and development programmes.

As in the past, the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement is a broad outline
of a budget. It does not contain all the joints and ligaments. Within this
framework provinces and national departments still have to complete the
details of their budgetary planning and there may be further adjustments to
some of the numbers. But, members of this House will appreciate that taking
into account the slowdown in the international economy and in our own
growth rate that has been experienced this year, it is that much more
critical that our allocations should be well targeted and our spending
programmes should be effective and well managed.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement is intended to assist Parliament
and the people to understand the economic context, the policy
considerations, the constraints, the options, the plans and the spending
programmes that make up the overall budget framework. I know that in
exploring this framework and taking further its proposals and suggestions,
the brand-new Budget Committee of Parliament has a unique and most
challenging opportunity to contribute to the shape of our fiscal and
budgetary future. I know that it will live up to this challenge fully, and
I would like to thank Madam Speaker and the chairperson of the counterpart
in the NCOP for taking the lead in this exciting new parliamentary
initiative.

Finally, my thanks are due to the President, the Deputy President, the
members of the Ministers' committee on the budget, colleagues in Cabinet
and the MECs for Finance in our provinces for their many contributions
through long and robust engagement with policy choices, development
challenges and spending options that lead, each year, to this statement.

I am exceedingly grateful to the staff of the national Treasury and Sars
for their diligence and professionalism, for the quality of the advice that
the Deputy Minister and I receive. I hope that all members of Parliament
share with me in expressing appreciation for the quality of documents
prepared by our staff, to enable us to exercise our responsibilities for
decision-making. [Applause.]

Lastly, I want to thank everyone involved in Parliament's budget reform
task team, especially the hon M J Mahlangu, for the close collaboration and
for the establishment of the new Budget Committee. [Applause.] I wish the
members of the committee every strength. I know the work will be hard, but
the work will be exciting and provide an opportunity for accelerated
learning. And thank you to all members, for their patience in hearing me
out this afternoon. [Applause.]

I have pleasure in placing before the House the Adjustments Appropriation
Bill, the Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure for this year, the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, and, since it has not been done
formally previously, the Intergovernmental Fiscal Review, 2001. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! You may get more universal appreciation of the benefits
of your Budget if you gave more tangible forms of this, in the form of
apples, for example. [Laughter.]

The Bill, together with the introductory speech and papers tabled, referred
to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and report.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement referred to the Joint Budget
Committee.

                            ROAD SAFETY STRATEGY

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Speaker and hon members, Arrive Alive! On
20 November this year, that is next month, I will be presenting to the
public our new road safety strategy which is entitled, ``The Road to Safety
2001-2005''. This strategy represents an important intervention in our
country's whole approach to road safety and it is designed to address
fundamental issues relating to safety on our roads.

The strategy is a product of over 18 months of intensive consultation with
the transport sector, technical innovators and civil society organisations.
We think that the strategy is solid and it already has strong industry
support behind it. Its fundamental approach is to build partnerships and a
sense of joint ownership at every level.

In the strategy document, we started out from the absolute basics, facts
and questions. For example, it is a fact that drivers drive on roads. How
qualified are they to drive, and what are their attitudes? Pedestrians walk
along and cross our roads. How well are they trained and educated to do
these, apparently, simple things? Drivers drive in vehicles. How fit are
these vehicles to be on the road? What is the condition of our road
infrastructure? Where, when and how do most of the crashes on our roads
take place? How do we get the right combination of forces to the right
places at the right times?

Then we also asked: Where are our enforcement and regulatory systems
failing? What are the key issues that have, in the past, given rise to
public cynicism about the possibility of winning the battle for safety? How
do we fight against widespread aggression, irresponsibility and contempt
for the law amongst many of our road users? And, finally, how do we
convince our people that the battle is winnable? How do we build the
critical mass of pubic support that will lead to a new culture of voluntary
law compliance, responsibility and mutual respect?

The strategy document, ``The Road to Safety'', asks all these questions and
gives us a framework for answering them positively. It does not pull any
punches about what is wrong with the systems and structures that we have
relied on until now. It shows how they can and must be corrected and
transformed.

``The Road to Safety'' challenges all three spheres of government, the
transport industry, civil society organisations and each and every
individual South African to come to the party. It proposes a combination of
Government intervention, legislative change, technological innovation,
industry self-regulation, public-private partnerships and passenger and
community empowerment initiatives. In short, the strategy says that the
responsibility for safety on our roads belongs to all of us, and that each
one of us can make a contribution.

I want Parliament to be aware of the coming launch of ``The Road to
Safety'' strategy which will take place on 20 November 2001. In a few
words, let me give the House some highlights of the defining features of
``The Road to Safety'' strategy document. The strategy addresses driver
competency, vehicle fitness, pedestrian safety, conditions of
infrastructure and management information. ``The Road to Safety'' gives
strategic direction while the Arrive Alive campaign is the operational arm
to implement the strategy. The focus of Arrive Alive remains law
enforcement, communication and education.

As part of implementing ``The Road to Safety 2001-2005'' strategy, my
department has, for example, budgeted and commenced with upgrading of the
driver's licence, testing centres, vehicle testing stations, development of
road safety education material, streamlining of adjudication processes and
gathering of accurate management information.

What I want to say today is that from now on, ``The Road to Safety'' is our
guide to action and commitment, while Arrive Alive continues stronger, more
focused, more concentrated on its core operational functions of enforcement
and communication, 365 days a year, 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. Just as
our whole aim in the ``The Road to Safety'' is to get proposals off paper
and into real concrete, jointly-owned projects, so in Arrive Alive we want
to show members what we have already started to achieve by making a clear
separation between strategic reform and day-to-day operations.

Arrive Alive plans now have to be developed in strict accordance with the
national plan, and all key operational action plans must follow the logic
of this plan. To qualify for funding, all provincial and local traffic
authorities must submit detailed monthly reports on expenditure and
programmes undertaken.

In terms of this performance-based system, I can give members some sense of
the direction enforcement and communication took over the eight-month
period from the beginning of November 2000 to the end of June 2001: R30,6
million was spent out of the support budget provided by the Road Accident
Fund on Arrive Alive as a whole. Almost R20 million of this was spent on
law enforcement, R10,6 million on equipment and R8,8 million on officers'
overtime.

More than 1,4 million person-hours were spent on carrying out 155 586 law-
enforcement actions. Just over 2 300 000 notices for traffic offences were
issues over the eight-month period at an average of 291 000 per month.
Roughly, R11 million was spent on road safety communication programmes,
about R5 million on national campaigns and about R6 million on provincial
campaigns.

A consumer survey carried out for my department found that Arrive Alive
enjoyed a recognition rate of around 87% of all South Africans in both
urban and rural areas. A clear majority of respondents said that the
campaign had made them think significantly more about road safety issues.

I see all these results as promising beginnings, no more and no less. It
will still be some time before consolidated crash and fatality statistics
for the years 2000 and 2001 come through. Unfortunately, information on
statistics still remains a problem. These statistics will provide the acid
test of whether these actions have in fact been more effectively targeted
than in the past, and whether public recognition and approval of Arrive
Alive has begun to translate into measurably improved road user behaviour.

As I said a moment ago, ``The Road to Safety'' will have a critical role to
play in cleaning our systems from the bottom up, in a way that it is not
possible for Arrive Alive to do as a campaign. A very important issue that
the strategy addresses is co-operation with other Government departments,
different spheres of Government, communities, other institutions and the
private sector.

My department is currently engaged in a mobilisation campaign aimed at
achieving sustained co-operation and full participation of all
organisations and individuals who may want to contribute to the common
objective of ending the carnage on our roads. This mobilisation process
will continue beyond 20 November, the date of the public launch of ``The
Road to Safety 2001-2005''.
With regard to this consultation programme, I can inform the House that we
are to meet the trade unions, civic organisations, the religious, sporting
and youth sectors, women's organisations and students' organisations. All
of them will be consulted and mobilised to participate in the campaign to
achieve safety on our roads.

In concluding this presentation, let me say that, given the fact that this
House will be going into recess on 16 November and as I will not be able to
make the announcement or make available the strategy document on 20
November, I respectfully invite hon members to join hands with us by using
this time to rally the support of our constituencies across the length and
breadth of our country. I appeal to hon members that when the House goes
into recess, they should devote some time to road safety issues. This will
ensure that our people are made aware of the need for them to participate
and accept responsibility for their own safety, and ensure that we have
better respect for law and order on our roads.

I want to thank hon members in advance for their contributions in this
regard. Let me also point out that people from my department are on hand in
the foyer of the Old Assembly Chamber displaying literature. There are
young ladies there who will be only too happy to furnish members with
information and documentation. So when hon members leave this House today,
please pay a visit to the displays there and take possession of some of the
literature which is available at these displays.

These documents help us to outline some of the major things that we can do
to promote road safety. They also give a foretaste of what is contained in
the strategy document itself. So with one eye on the launch of ``The Road
to Safety'' on 20 November this year and with another on the long summer
holiday, which I hope will be a good holiday, let me invite members to join
us in this exciting new beginning for road safety in our country. Let me at
the same time wish members a safe and peaceful festive season and new year.
Arrive Alive! [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, you seem generally to be paying little
attention to the debates that have been taking place. You are talking to
each other, conducting meetings, reading books and magazines, and some
people are reading work. I will assume that the work part is all related to
the debate. I do not think the other things are. Please, would you focus on
the debate and not make as much noise as we have been enduring for the last
hour.

Mr S B FARROW: Madam Speaker, once again we have come to that time of the
year when all eyes are on the Minister to see how he can effectively bring
down the unacceptably high rate of deaths on our roads. We start weighing
up the effects of deaths and accidents on our roads and the costs to this
economy. We welcome the Minister's strategy and want to assure him of the
DP's full support for his strategy and any other initiatives that might be
introduced to reduce the carnage on our roads.

We would also like to contribute to this strategy, be it in the way he has
suggested, of talking to our constituents about safety when we go into
recess or by reinforcing a number of key problems on which we see action
taken by the Minister. The first relates to the serious disparities that he
mentioned in the strategy, as identified in our road conditions nationally.

It is common knowledge that approximately 15% of road accidents are due to
the road environment. The DP, on a number of previous occasions, has
brought this issue to the Minister's attention. There are quite a number of
issues, such as minor repairs, on which one can start to get moving now in
terms of very limited budgets and labour-intensive operations. We would
suggest that this is possibly a way forward in the next six weeks before
the Christmas traffic flow increases. If it can in any way save a few lives
and reduce the possibility of accidents, then I think the Minister must
look into this.

Further related to this, is the need to repair fences that have been
damaged or removed. Cattle, goats, sheep, horses and pigs crossing roads
are accidents waiting to happen. A concerted effort must be made to elicit
the support of rural communities and farmers in order to keep their
livestock away from road reserves during this particular period. I suggest
that we could possibly use the media, particularly radio and TV, to try to
get that message across to them. Strangely enough, this morning in the
Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, we actually dealt with a Bill which
will be passed in this House relating to the identification of animals and
cattle by certain tattoos and marks. This will start directing liability
towards those particular people that are allowing cattle to walk in the
roads.

The second issue relates to driver competence and unroadworthy vehicles.
This is also identified in the Minister's strategy document. These two
issues combined contribute to about 85% of road accidents. Both these
issues require strict traffic enforcement and I question whether we have
the capacity to deal with this, considering some 8 000 traffic police jobs
still have to be filled. It is imperative that road management co-operation
is implemented as soon as possible in order that national, provincial and
local management resources may be pooled and co-ordinated. This is what
this body was set up to do. It will not help for this to happen after the
event, so to speak. Any effect of reports emanating from the national
complaints hotline which the Minister is promoting will fail to bring
offenders to book if there are not sufficient traffic officers available to
apprehend them. As the Minister said, these culprits need to be brought to
book.

Special arrangements must be put in place to ensure visible policing on all
our main routes and safe yards identified for impounding and removing any
unroadworthy or overloaded vehicles and preventing them from continuing
their journey. The Minister's zero-tolerance initiatives which were
mentioned last year need to be put into practice and, if necessary, the
Minister of Defence also needs to be consulted to assist with the provision
of SANDF personnel to back up our traffic and law enforcement officers at
key road checks. I also wish to take this opportunity to wish all our
citizens safe travelling over the holidays and encourage them to drive
safely and arrive alive. [Applause.]

Mr J H SLABBERT: Madam Speaker and hon Minister, having listened to the
hon Mr Farrow's concerns about pigs and cattle on the roads, it is clear to
me that he lives in the former Transkei.

South Africa has a road safety problem. It is not a new problem and in fact
it has been around for as long as I can remember. It is ironic that our
road safety problem is one of the few things that all South Africans can
say is common to us all. Our road safety problem bridges race, class,
gender, political and economic divisions like few other public issues. I am
sure that virtually all South Africans have, at some point or another, been
a victim of poor road safety, or at least know somebody who has been a
victim. It is therefore encouraging to see that our Government is taking
the issue of road safety seriously, as evidenced by the strategy placed
before us by the hon the Minister.
The IFP supports the ``Road to Safety 2001-05'' strategy. The IFP believes
that there are three components that are vital to the success of such a
strategy. These are political will, law enforcement and public co-
operation. The first component is the demonstration of political will to
tackle the problem. We believe that the express political will has been
aptly demonstrated by Government since 1994. It is the Government's
responsibility and duty to face up to serious problems and challenges
confronting all its citizens. Road safety, or rather the lack of it,
represents such problems and challenges.

The second component is law enforcement. South Africa has a plethora of
laws and regulations governing all aspects of road safety. But, these laws
remain mere pieces of paper if they are not effectively enforced. Proper
and effective law enforcement requires adequate levels of staffing,
equipment, training and application.

Without these aspects being in place, no amount of political will can
succeed in addressing the problem adequately. A zero-tolerance approach to
law enforcement is what is required. And, I am especially glad that the
Minister's strategy places this aspect firmly in the spotlight. For
instance, the laws governing vehicle safety must be rigorously enforced to
remove unroadworthy death traps from our roads.

The third component is public co-operation. The South African public
represents both road users and road victims. But, if the public does not
have a healthy attitude to road safety, very little will come of the
strategy. Government can only do so much. The picture must be completed
through public co-operation. Road users must change their attitudes with a
view to compliance, co-operation and an approach of ``safety first,
destination later''.

In this respect, I want to draw attention to pedestrians. Far too many
pedestrians are killed or injured on our roads. The reasons involve both
vehicle operators and pedestrians. There is no doubt in my mind that the
proximity of built-up areas to major roads contributes to the incidents of
pedestrian deaths and injuries, but alcohol abuse also plays a major role.
In this respect, pedestrians must take responsibility for their own actions
and safety - just as there should be no drinking and driving, there should
be no drinking and walking across busy roads.

The IFP believes that if these three components are firmly in place and
adhered to, we can effectively tackle our road safety problem and decrease
the carnage on our roads. In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
Minister and his department on the issuing of this superb leaflet.
[Applause.]

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Mev die Speaker, ek is bevry van die dwingelandy van die
bywonerstatus wat ek binne die DA moes verduur. Daarvoor is ek dankbaar. Ek
is 'n man van Afrika, al is ek 'n bietjie bleek. Daarom sal ek beter oor
die weg kom met my bruin en swart broers uit Afrika as met 'n spannetjie
pienk liberaliste. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.] Ek is lief vir Suid-Afrika
en ek en my kinders wil deel hÃª aan die opbou van diÃ© land en die kontinent
waaruit ons kom.

Vervoer is 'n sleutelelement in die toekomstige sosio-ekonomiese
ontwikkeling van ons land en ons kontinent. Obstruksie en destruksie bring
'n mens nÃªrens. Ons sal die Minister steun in alle inisiatiewe wat goed en
reg is. Ons sal egter kritiseer waar dinge verkeerd loop in 'n gees van
konstruktiewe deelname aan die regering van diÃ© land. Ons sal egter altyd
poog om werkbare alternatiewe aan die hand te doen wanneer ons kritiseer.

Die padveiligheidsprojek wat ons vanmiddag bespreek, is sÃ³ 'n voorbeeld.
Die New NP wil die Minister gelukwens met 'n weldeurdagte program wat deur
al die wetenskaplike bestuurstappe gegaan het om daarvan 'n sukses te maak.
Probleme is netjies geÃ¯dentifiseer en gedefinieer. Dit het daartoe gelei
dat uitvoerbare en werkbare oplossings aan die hand gedoen is wat ook
geÃ«valueer kan word. Dit sal sekerlik tot 'n daling in padongelukke en
-sterftes bydra.
'n Mens is ook beÃ¯ndruk deur die omvangryke bewusmakingsprogramme wat
beplan word om bestuurders, passasiers en voetgangers tot 'n positiewe
gesindheidsverandering te motiveer. Die voorstelle vir die verskerping van
die toepassing van verkeerswette en -regulasies laat egter veel te wense
oor. Daar word myns insiens nie voldoende voorsiening gemaak vir die nodige
befondsing en die kweek van 'n wil by verkeersowerhede om meer en beter
verkeerslui te werf, beter op te lei en beter te besoldig nie.

Die owerheid sal op alle vlakke groter voorrang moet verleen om 'n
doeltreffende, sigbaarder verkeerskorps te vestig. Die sukses van programme
van diÃ© aard hang af van die toepassing van 'n tweeledige strategie, soos
om jou donkie vanaand betyds by die huis te kry. Ou Saartjie sal agter die
wortel aanloop wat jy voor haar uithou, maar sy het so nou en dan die lat
nodig om die nodige spoed te handhaaf om voor donker tuis te wees.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr W A ODENDAAL: Madam Speaker, I am free of the tyranny of the
``bywoner'' (share-cropper) status that I had to endure within the DA. I am
grateful for that. I am a man of Africa, even though I am a little pale.
That is why I shall get along better with my brown and black brothers from
Africa than with a few pink liberals.  [Interjections.] [Applause.] I love
South Africa and my children and I want to be a part of building up this
country and the continent from which we hail.

Transport is a key element in the future socioeconomic development of our
country and our continent. Obstruction and destruction do not get one
anywhere. We shall support the Minister in all initiatives that are fit and
proper. However, we shall criticise when things go wrong, in a spirit of
constructive participation in the governing of this country. We shall
always make an effort, however, to suggest alternatives when we criticise.

The road safety project that we are discussing this afternoon is such an
example. The New NP wants to congratulate the Minister on a well-considered
programme that was taken through all the scientific management programmes
to make a success of it. Problems were neatly identified and defined. This
contributed to the proposing of achievable and feasible resolutions that
can also be evaluated. This will certainly lead to a reduction in road
accidents and road deaths.

One is also impressed by the comprehensive awareness programmes that are
being planned to motivate drivers, passengers and pedestrians towards a
positive change in attitude. The proposals for the improvement of the
enforcement of traffic laws and traffic regulations leave much to be
desired, however. In my view insufficient provision is being made for the
required financing and fostering of a will among traffic authorities to
recruit more and better traffic officers, to train them better and to
remunerate them better.

The authorities at all levels will have to give greater priority to
establishing an effective, more visible traffic corps. The success of
programmes of this nature depends on implementing a dual strategy, such as
getting one's donkey home in time tonight. Old Saartjie will follow the
carrot one is dangling in front of her, but now and then she needs the whip
to maintain the necessary speed to be home before dark. [Applause.]]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Chairperson, the strategy announced by the Minister this
afternoon must be welcomed by all political parties. It will surely serve
to reassure many road users. Hon members can be sure that the UDM will
continue to raise road safety awareness whenever it is able to do so.

It is hoped that the co-operation of the provincial authorities will become
a reality. The festive holidays are almost upon us and it is sickening to
realise that, unless road users themselves increase their own awareness of
the need to use roads wisely and carefully, the holiday season will again
end with thousands of lives being lost, and others being disabled and
hospitalised.

Like the previous speakers, I must again draw attention to law enforcement
on the roads. The department has amazingly detailed records available of
accidents that happened in the past years. It knows, even now, where
vehicles are going to crash. Past occurrences records indicate the most
likely time of each 24-hour day during which smashes occur; roads in each
province where accidents frequently happen whether in rural or urban areas;
and that accidents involving a single vehicle are by far most likely to
occur on rural roads while head-on collisions are more likely to occur in
urban areas.

Through these records, it is known that male drivers are far more likely to
be killed or injured in accidents than female drivers and that drivers aged
between 20 and 30 have to be closely watched. The department has all this
information available and more. It is hoped that this wealth of information
will be put to good use in the planning of the Minister's future
strategies, and that it has been passed on to the Road Accident Fund for
use in its Arrive Alive plans.

The employment of the data amassed by the department in the planning and
implementation of all road safety strategies can serve to greatly enhance
the capabilities of the limited number of road safety enforcers who are
available. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, ek wil vir die agb lid dr Willem Odendaal
sÃª hy mag 'n bleek seun van Afrika wees, maar voor in die pad is 'n baie
groot slaggat. Dit is een van diÃ© slaggate wat hom in 'n groot ongeluk gaan
laat beland. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Gepraat van slaggate, die VF meen die agb Minister moet sy portefeulje se
naam verander. Hy moet nie langer die Minister van Vervoer wees nie, maar
die ``Minister van Slaggate''. Dit maak nie saak hoeveel miljoene en
miljarde rande die agb Minister aan projekte soos ``Ry Veilig'', plakkate
en pamflette bestee nie, ons paaie is in 'n uiters swak toestand. Dit is
die een slaggat op die ander. Die VF raai die agb Minister aan om
indringend na diÃ© aspekte te kyk.

'n Tweede aspek is dat die agb Minister moet vasstel watter korrupsie by
die uitreik van bestuurderslisensies plaasvind. Dit is waar die probleme
lÃª. Weens korrupsie is mense nie bevoeg om te bestuur nie. [Tyd verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I want to say to the hon member Dr Willem
Odendaal that he may be a pale boy from Africa, but there is a very large
pothole in the road ahead. One of these potholes is going to land him in
great trouble. [Interjections.]

Talking of potholes, the FF is of the opinion that the hon the Minister
should change the name of his portfolio. He should no longer be the
Minister of Transport, but the ``Minister of Potholes''. Regardless of how
many millions and billions of rands the hon the Minister spends on projects
such as Arrive Alive, placards and pamphlets, our roads are in a very poor
condition. One encounters one pothole after the other. The FF urges the
Minister to give these aspects his serious attention.
A second aspect is that the hon the Minister must find out what corruption
is taking place in the issuing of drivers' licences. That is where the
problem lies. Owing to corruption people are not competent to drive. [Time
expired.]]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, news, be it on television, radio, Internet or
newspaper, has found its contents filled with tragedies of horrific
accidents which cost lives and so much more. Even traffic reports contain
the occasional comment like, ``there has been an accident on such a road
causing traffic congestion'', etc. These are the scenes that plague one's
thoughts - whether reaching home safely is even possible.

Unlicensed drivers, driving under the influence of alcohol and many other
issues are the causes of these accidents. It is felt and supported that all
efforts to improve road safety and transport would not only put commuters
at ease about reaching their destination safely, but would also ensure the
continuity of such a safe environment.

Though these safety regulations should be ensured at both private and
public level, public transport in terms of trains, taxis and buses should
be sternly supervised to ensure the safety of those using these facilities.
The MF is confident that the department will address these issues
efficiently and effectively in order to make roads and transport safe.

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, the hon the Minister made mention of the fact-and-
question method. I want to do the same today. The fact is that the Minister
delivered his speech. The question is: Will his plan work?

We welcome this strategy of the hon the Minister. We got the impression
that sometimes Arrive Alive is too sporadic, too much of a hit-and-run
approach, and therefore a careful strategic approach to road safety in
South Africa must be welcomed. But we must remember that the golden rule is
``structure follows strategy''.

Daarom is die vraag: watter strukturele veranderinge gaan aangebring word
om by hierdie strategie aan te pas? Ons dink in die besonder aan die
toestand van ons paaie, en aan die toestand van wetstoepassing in Suid-
Afrika. Die belangrikste in so 'n debat is egter nie dat die vingers na
enige iemand anders wys nie, maar dat elkeen na homself kyk. Dit is 'n
belangrike saak: ``partnerships, joint ownership''.

Dit is ons wat die paaie gebruik. Dit is die Suid-Afrikaanse bevolking wat
dit met verantwoordelikheid moet doen. Daar is 'n toenemende tendens van
``road rage''. Kom ons wees maar net, op die pad ook, as mens tot mens
teenoor mekaar, konsidererend, en dit sal verbeter.

Ons dank die Minister en wens hom baie sterkte vir sy ``Road to Safety''
program. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Therefore, the question is: What structural changes are going to be made
to adapt to this strategy? We are thinking in particular of the condition
of our roads, and of the condition of law enforcement in South Africa.
However, the most important point in such a debate, is not that fingers
should be pointed at anyone, but that everyone should look to him or
herself. This is an important matter: ``partnerships, joint ownership''.

It is we who make use of the roads. It is the South African population that
has to do this with responsibility. There is an increasing tendency towards
road rage. Let us be considerate towards one another, on the road as well,
and this will improve.

We thank the Minister and we wish him every success with his ``Road to
Safety'' programme.]

Mr A R AINSLIE: Chairperson, as the Minister indicated, ``The Road to
Safety'' strategy is a successor to a long line of increasingly successful
road safety policy initiatives.

In 1994, the ANC-led Government inherited unco-ordinated fragments of road
safety policy. It was the RDP that began the process of formulating a
coherent approach to road safety, leading to initiatves such as Strategic
2000 and Arrive Alive, each new initiative building on the experience of
its predecessors.

``The Road to Safety'' strategy has built on the success of the Arrive
Alive campaign. It extends Arrive Alive from the focus on peak holiday
periods to a year-round road safety campaign. In our engagements with the
department recently, we have noted a new-found confidence and enthusiasm on
the part of the officials tasked with road safety. Their confidence and
enthusiasm are not misplaced. They are born of an approach to road safety
that is working. If Mr Aucamp had listened to the Minister, on this
occasion and previous occasions, he would know that the policy is working.

 In 1998 the department said that it would reduce road fatalities; they did
reduce them. In 1999 it said that they would reduce road fatalities
further; they did so. In fact I can tell Mr Aucamp that since the launch of
Arrive Alive, road deaths have fallen by an average of 7,4% per annum.
``The Road to Safety'' strategy is based on these achievements, and on a
thorough analysis of the policy to date and the data that Mr Abrahams has
referred to. Its key goals are sparing lives, preventing injuries, saving
money and valuable infrastructure, and making it safer to travel by road.

Also, another key goal is to prevent road accidents. Both Mr Farrow and Mr
Groenewald would know that one of the ways the department has decided to do
this is in fact to improve general road conditions. Extensive maintenance
has already begun on the N2 and the N1. Extensive work has been done on the
Kei Cuttings in Transkei and we invite members to see for themselves as
they travel through these areas that the work is in fact being done in this
regard.

The key goals amount, in other words, to safer and more secure roads with
better drivers, more reliable vehicles, better regulated public transport,
better educated communities and better protected pedestrians. A key
component - Mr Slabbert is quite correct - and a very important part of
this strategy is public support and participation. Government alone cannot
make our roads safer. The business sector, the religious community, NGOs,
community organisations and members of Parliament all have their part to
play.

I want to reiterate what the Minister has said today, and invite members of
Parliament to become part owners of this strategy. Members of Parliament
can play a key role in taking the programme forward. They can familiarise
themselves with road safety campaigns. They can promote road safety
awareness in their constituencies, ensure that community structures take up
the issue of road safety, identify obstacles to road safety and liaise with
appropriate Government structures.

We shall watch with keenness the implementation of the Administrative
Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Act of 1998. The Act is designed to
detect aberrant driver behaviour before it results in death or injury on
the road, and it is the key to the further and sustainable reduction of
road smashes.

Another key component of the strategy is communication. Is enough being
done to ensure that the radio stations, in particular, provide daily up-to-
the-minute road safety bulletins and also around-the-year programmes
designed to educate the public on the need for road safety. We shall be
engaging the department on these and other aspects of the programmes, but
we have no doubt that ``The road to Safety'' strategy is on the right road
to safety.

The department has invited the Portfolio Committee on Transport to be part
of the team to implement the strategy. The ANC component of the committee
accepts this invitation with enthusiasm. They can count on our support and,
I am sure, the support of all members of Parliament in bringing safety to
our roads. Remember, for the sake of your loved ones to arrive alive.
Debate concluded.

         SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) TO CONDUCT SECOND READING DEBATES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I move the
draft resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That Rule 253(1) be suspended for the purposes of conducting the Second
  Reading debates on the following:


  (1) Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Bill [B 83 - 2001]
       (National Assembly - sec 75) (introduced as Judicial Officers
       Amendment Bill); and


  (2) Criminal Procedure Second Amendment Bill [B 45 - 2001] (National
       Assembly - sec 75).

Agreed to.
     ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF MEDIATION COMMITTEE ON CULTURAL LAWS SECOND
                               AMENDMENT BILL

The Chairperson of Committees announced that the Cultural Laws Second
Amendment Bill [B 46D - 2000] had been referred to the Mediation Committee
on 25 October 2001.

In terms of section 78 of the Constitution, read with National Assembly
Rules 225 to 227, nine members of the National Assembly are to be elected
by the House to serve in the Mediation Committee. According to the formula
contained in the Rules, six members must be from the African National
Congress and one each from the Democratic Party, Inkatha Freedom Party and
New National Party.

The Chairperson of Committees accordingly called for nominations from the
respective parties.

On the nomination of the Acting Chief Whip of the Majority Party, the
following members of the African National Congress were elected: Dithebe, S
L; Lobe, M C; Masutha, M T; Njobe, M A A; Serote, M W; Tsheole, N M;
Montsitsi, S D (alt); Schneeman, G D (alt).

On the nomination of Mr M J Ellis, the following members of the Democratic
Party were elected: Opperman, S E; Gore, V C (alt).

On the nomination of Mrs L R Mbuyazi, the following members of the Inkatha
Freedom Party were elected: Cassim, M F; Biyela, B P (alt).

On the nomination of Mr J J Dowry, the following members of the New
National Party were elected: Van Wyk, A; Rhoda, R T (alt).

              NATIONAL LAND TRANSPORT TRANSITION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Mr Chairperson, Deputy President and hon
members, the National Land Transport Transition Act, which was Act 22 of
2000, was brought into operation on 1 December last year. For the first
time in our history, this piece of legislation addresses transport in a
meaningful and integrated manner.

The provision of land-based public transport must, in future, be based on
demand, with the support of transport plans. This will ensure the provision
of services in an equitable and safe manner without fear, violence and
intimidation. The taxi and bus industries are well aware of the importance
of safety on our roads and every effort will be made to clamp down on road
traffic offenders.

Transport planning is the cornerstone of this law and the planning part of
the Act was not brought into effect. This decision was taken against the
background that the three spheres of government were not ready to implement
the requirements of the Act. With planning being the key to the provision
of transport and infrastructure, the question could be raised as to why
Government could not delay the promulgation of the entire Act until all
parties concerned were ready for implementation.

The answer to that, the House will recall, is that the taxi industry was in
a great deal of chaos for most of last year. As a result, there was a dire
need for Government, both national and provincial, to formalise and
legalise the industry. In order for us to do that and do it in a proper
manner, the National Land Transport Transition Act was required, and had to
be brought into effect as soon as possible.

My department, in co-operation with the provinces, launched the ``Be
Legal'' campaign in June of this year, with the specific aim of addressing
the formalisation and legalisation of the minibus-taxi industry. I am
pleased to report to this House that the bulk of the illegal operators have
already applied for legalisation.

The proposed amendments before the House will have an impact on this
process and I therefore agreed with the nine provincial MECs for transport
that the closing date, for the adjudication of these applications for
legalisation would be extended to April 2002. This does not mean that
further applications may be submitted. Applications are not being reopened.
It is the adjudication of the applications that is being extended to April
2002.

This will give provinces ample time to finalise the processes and issue
operating licences to those operators who have met the said criteria. The
finality of this process will undoubtedly lead to a violence-free industry
as the safety of passengers is of the utmost importance. The proposed
amendments before the House today are required to assist provinces to
appoint the operating licensing boards or to authorise provincial permits
boards to deal with these applications within the framework of this Act.

I would like to report to the House, too, that for the first time in the
history of our country, the taxi industry has a national, democratically
elected representative body. We had the privilege of having the Deputy
President open the conference of the taxi industry held in Durban from 14
to 16 September 2001, where the South African National Taxi Council was
elected. The rewards of a democratic taxi industry are already being
reaped, even though we all know that there are still problems.

With regard to the support from the industry for taxi recapitalisation, the
industry realises that violence begets violence. This sort of behaviour is
driven by greed and the entire industry suffers from lack of progress. The
organised industry has condemned the violence and has agreed to fight
violence wherever it raises its head. This is the first and most crucial
step in transforming the industry. The taxi industry's co-operation will
ensure the success and upliftment of the industry and lead to a safe and
reliable public transport system for our people.

I now turn to transport planning. The planning sections of the Act did not
come into operation on 1 December 2000 due to various preparatory actions
that still needed to be taken. I am fully in support of planning. Indeed, I
insist on planning, and I am fully in support of planning being done in a
proper manner, and not planning for the sake of planning. Therefore, I am
ensuring that my department prepares a sound base for the planning to
proceed with minimum disruption. Planning must dictate the delivery of
services and development. Everyone accepts the importance of integrated
transport planning and its benefits can be seen in many examples throughout
the world.

The linkage of transport plans to the integrated development plans is
crucial. Various constraints, ranging from the funding issue to capacity,
hampered the ability of all spheres of Government to prepare the necessary
plans. At the time of the promulgation of the Act the department was in the
process of finalising the planning guidelines and is now engaged in the
preparation of the planning regulations. It is envisaged that these
regulations will be published for public comment by February 2002.

I want to thank the portfolio committee for dealing very thoroughly with
these matters. It has expressed its concern about delays and the tendency
on the part of some to avoid planning. I want to give the House the
assurance that we will not allow that kind of unnecessary delay to take
place. Indeed, I have asked the committee of transport officials, which
consists of the ten heads of departments of transport, to develop a
programme of capacity-building in all spheres of government.

So, we will proceed with the amendment. After the amendment we will be able
to finalise some of our planning, and ensure that both the subsidised bus
services and our taxi industry are placed on a proper footing. This will
also ensure that we promote black economic empowerment and small, medium
and micro enterprises in the process. [Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Chairperson, the National Land Transport Transition Bill
passed by this House last year was, to all intents and purposes just that,
a transition Bill.

The original Bill was flawed in a number of areas, which made its
implementation difficult, and I think the Minister has explained certain of
those difficulties - hence the amendments that we see in front of us today.
Having already gone through public hearings in the provinces and the NCOP,
a number of serious omissions still exist in this Bill.

However, due to the urgency of ensuring that key issues are in place to
meet the urgent commitments that he has referred to, the DP agreed to
support the Bill in the portfolio committee on certain preconditions:
Firstly, that, as he mentioned, by early next year the portfolio committee
would call on the Minister himself to report back to them on how the
amendments have impacted on those municipalities which, by virtue of these
amendments, could make provision for subsidised service contracts, despite
the absence of these transport plans, which are so necessary.

Although many of these municipalities and metros have already complied with
these plans, certain glaring anomalies still existed, the most notable
being in Gauteng. Therefore, these arrangements must be seen as an interim
measure, and the sooner they are completed the better. Without proper
transport plans it will be impossible to provide an integrated approach to
other modes of transport within our cities and towns.

In this regard clause 11, which amends section 134 of the Act, clearly has
ramifications, which could cause major disruptions if not amended. It is
paramount, therefore, that some sort of timeframe should be linked to this
process, as without this limit the transport plans could very well not be
concluded, and could result in a reduced ability by the department and
Government to regulate and please the industry.

Secondly, concern must also be expressed regarding the inclusion of
``negotiations'' in the tender process in clause 3, which amends section
47. This inclusion could allow the tender process to be sidelined and
contradict state procurement regulations. ``Negotiated tenders''
historically have been dogged by bribery and corruption, and need to be
avoided at all costs. In any tender design it is paramount that
transparency and inclusivity prevail.

Finally, let me talk about the role of Parliament in scrutinising and
overseeing executive action. This is clearly spelt out in section 42(3) of
our Constitution. The amendment in clause 5 allows for the MEC for
transport to appoint members of the Provincial Operating Licensing Board,
and determine their conditions of remuneration and services with the
concurrence of the MEC responsible for finance in the province, and we
understand the reason for it at this point.

History again proves that this could be open to all sorts of abuse,
nepotism, jobs for pals and corruption, and the DP intends putting forward
strong recommendations at the next review of this Bill, to ensure that the
MECs should at least inform their standing committees of their respective
legislatures responsible for transport in writing of the appointments made,
applications received and a short resume of the applicants appointed. This
should be done within 30 days after the said appointment to ensure openness
and transparency in the election process.

Finally, the chairperson of the portfolio committee, the hon Jeremy Cronin,
has recognised the need for these issues to be re-examined, and has assured
all parties that the Minister will be written to in order to ensure that he
complies with our request to bring this Bill back to our committee in order
to rectify these anomalies identified, and also to report on any progress
made.

The DP will be carefully monitoring the progress of this Bill, and we
hereby reflect our dissent with regard to the route the Bill took in
attempting to deal with a looming crisis in our public industry. Having
only seen the Bill on 17 October, we were advised that there was a sense of
urgency, and we appreciated that, in ensuring that the Bill went through
Parliament during this session.

Despite numerous submissions at our provincial hearings, very little
cognisance was taken of these, let us call them, changes. The Minister will
need to look at these matters in order that, when it finally reaches the
portfolio committee, adequate time is then given, before its reading, for
members to apply their minds sufficiently to these amendments.

We will be supporting this amendment, as I said, on those conditions.
[Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Chairman, Minister, first of all, let me begin by
congratulating the Minister and his Department of Transport, and also the
co-ordinator, Rev Farisani, who is the MEC for Transport in the Northern
Province, on the very successful National Taxi Conference in mid-September.
The conference launched the first-ever democratically constituted national
taxi structure in our country, The South African National Taxi Council or
Santaco.

I think we are all very well aware that this is a complicated, often
robust, and often very fragmented sector. The launch of Santaco is a major
achievement. It has required patience, flexibility, determination, and
probably the wisdom of Solomon. I would like to congratulate the Minister
on that important success of his department.

This particular democratisation of the taxi industry is not unconnected to
the amendment before us today. The original National Land Transport
Transition Act, which we are seeking to amend in small ways today, was
passed in this House last year after quite a prolonged process of public
consultation. In fact, those of us who came into the Portfolio committee in
in 1999, found a draft Bill which had been knocked about and batted back
and forth for some time prior to our engagement with it. The National Land
Transport Transition Act was brought into operation on 1 December last
year.

A key component of this particular piece of quite complex legislation is
the linking of public transport licensing for buses, minibuses and
midibuses. Operating licences for those vehicles being linked to transport
plans, and the principle position announced by the legislation which we
passed last year, is that there shall be no transport operating licence
unless the licence route for which one is getting the licence is part and
parcel of an integrated transport plan.

We have done that for good reason. The legacy of chaos and relative anarchy
that possibly still prevails in public transport in our country is at least
partly attributable to the fact that, historically, permits to operate
public transport frequently had little or no connection whatsoever to any
kind of transport planning. This has resulted in huge anomalies in our
country, including, firstly, a lack of transparency regarding the criteria
for awarding public transport permits. That, of course, leads to all kinds
of dangers of actual or perceived corruption if it is not clear why some
get operating licences and others do not.

There was also a practice of awarding lifelong permits to certain bus
companies, stifling any competition, not least from emerging, which is to
say, mostly black, operators. There has also been, and there still is to
some extent, incoherence with regard to many operators pursuing too few
commuters on some routes, and not enough transport offered at all on other
routes. There is also incoherence in the sense that there is ineffective
intermodal co-operation, which means talking together. The ideal situation
in transport is that one has, for instance, minibuses and taxis operating
over short distances, feeding into buses and train operations which operate
the more mass-density and longer routes.

But at present we often have situations where different modes of transport
are competing with each other in completely uneconomic ways, rather than re-
enforcing each other and complementing each other. Generally, because of
this lack of planning and the connection of planning to the licensing of
public transport, there has been a complete lack of proactive forward
planning in regard to changing settlement patterns, housing development,
land-use development, and so on. There has thus been no integration between
Transport and the operations of public transport and other forms of
planning.

No doubt these kinds of problems which we have inherited, with their real
and perceived anomalies and injustices, have also at least been partly
responsible for encouraging attitudes of defiance and a culture of
illegality in some quarters of the public transport sector. If I am not
mistaken, all parties in the portfolio committee strongly support this
connection being made between awarding operating licences for public
transport and transport planning.

Of course, transport planning needs to be linked to broader
infrastructural, urban and other development planning. Therefore, I do not
think that this concern for transport planning is just a communist
obsession on my part. I was pleased that Mr Farrow is also equally obsessed
with the importance of planning; it is not just a communist obsession. I
believe that it is a common concern, shared by all parties.

However, as the Minister has indicated, we have, in practice, for the
moment, not been able to go ahead with the implementation of the planning
aspect of the National Land Transport Transition Act that we passed last
year, and this has been for various reasons. There have been quite serious
funding and capacity constraints, as one might expect in different spheres
of government, especially at the critical municipal level, because that is
where the key planning needs to happen and that is where the rational,
operating licence process needs to occur. It is at the municipal level
where it is particularly required, and it is particularly at that level
that there are funding problems and human capacity shortcomings.

The Department of Transport has also taken a bit of time, frankly, to
finalise planning guidelines and planning regulations. The delays, I am
sure, are attributable to the need to consult a very wide range of role-
players, particularly provincial and local spheres of government. We are
very pleased to note, and the Minister has indicated this to us today, that
this process, from the side of the department, is near to completion now,
and that we can expect the publication of these planning regulations for
public comment in February 2002.
The above combination of challenges has meant that some problems have now
started to emerge. The fact that we have not been able to implement the
planning dimension of the National Land Transport Transition Act means that
there are some practical problems that have started to emerge on the
ground. The Act, as I have said, took the correct principled position, ie
no transport plans, no awarding of operating licences. That is correct in
principle, but because planning in a large number of localities is in
various stages of completion, or should we say incompletion, we have a
situation in which current operating contracts are starting to expire.
These contracts have either to be renewed without any plan, or public
transport will collapse entirely in many of these areas.

It is obvious what we must do. We must obviously make interim provisions to
allow for the continuation of public transport operating contracts until
such time as we can get planning in place. Mr Farrow, and the committee in
general when we debated the matter, have indicated that there is obviously
the danger that interim measures, windows of opportunity and escape
clauses, might through inertia start to become the established norms. The
Department of Transport and all the members of the committee are very
committed to ensuring that this does not become the case.

The Department of Transport, as the Minister has indicated, has committed
itself to accelerating transport planning by fast-tracking on a case-by-
case basis. Where there is capacity, and this exists in most if not all
metros, the Minister, together with the relevant provincial MEC, will move
ahead with phasing in the plans. We do not have to wait for the entire
country to complete its transport plans before we can begin to apply the
requirements of the National Land Transport Transition Act.

The Minister has also said, and we have noted this, that he has requested
his committee of land transport officials, the so-called Colto, which is
the 10 heads of departments of transport nationally and nine at provincial
level, to develop a programme for capacity-building in all spheres of
government. As a committee we are particularly excited by this. We think,
with regard to planning, that the problem is not that people do not want to
implement plans, but that there is a huge capacity problem, an inability to
do this effectively. Therefore a very key role that the national and
provincial departments can play is precisely in developing capacity at the
local government level. For our part, as a portfolio committee, this is an
area in which we intend to be active in our oversight capacity.

We have promised ourselves that, going into the next year, we will actively
assess progress made in transport planning, and we will actively assess
whether this planning is happening and whether the awarding of operating
licences to public transport operators is now being linked to planning, and
so forth. As Mr Farrow has correctly indicated, we will certainly engage
with the Minister, in the early months of next year, around these matters.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the officials of the Department of
Transport who patiently took us through the intricacies of the original
National Land Transport Transition Act, and now again they have helped us
to understand the proposed amendments. We would also like to thank our
colleagues in the NCOP who did most of the spadework in terms of the
provincial-level hearings into the proposed amendments we are considering
today. I would also like to thank the SA Bus Owners Association (Saboa) who
provided us with a thought-provoking input, in the form of a submission to
our hearing, and in discussions with them they came to support the
amendments that we were proposing, notwithstanding their reservations,
which we share with them, about the danger of the undue prolonging of the
implementation of transport planning.

Finally, thank you to all the parties in the committee who have supported
these proposed amendments. The ANC supports the National Land Transport
Transition Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mr J H SLABBERT: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy President, the 1996
White Paper on National Land Transport Policy spelt out the Government's
vision, principles and objectives regarding the public transport policy.
Last year the policy, enunciated in the White Paper, was turned into law
with the adoption by Parliament of the National Land Transport Transition
Act of 2000.

Today, less than a year since Parliament passed the principal Act, we are
amending that Act. The IFP understands and accepts that national land
transport in South Africa would be severely disrupted, if not thrown into
total chaos, if the amendments to the principal Act were not accepted.
Clearly, with millions of South Africans dependent on public transport,
such an outcome could never be accepted. The IFP will therefore support the
National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill, but we would be remiss
in our duty to our supporters if we did not raise a number of concerns
about the amending Bill.

Our first concern deals with the passage of the Bill through the
parliamentary legislative process. The Bill was adopted with amendments by
the NCOP on 16 October 2001, and was then referred to the National Assembly
Portfolio Committee on Transport on 17 October for consideration. With 2
November 2001 looming as the deadline for the finalisation of legislation,
the portfolio committee was faced with a difficult decision. We either had
to accept the NCOP amendments or we could make our own amendments, which
would have meant that the Bill had to go back to the NCOP before returning
to the portfolio committee again. In all probability the latter option
would have meant that the Bill would have stood over until the 2002
parliamentary session. Given the urgency of the situation this outcome
could have caused chaos in the transport sector.

The portfolio committee therefore decided to accept the NCOP amendments to
the Bill. The IFP supported this decision, because it was clearly the
correct one under the circumstances, but we nevertheless have to register
our concern that the lack of time resulted in a pressure-cooker situation
where the portfolio committee was essentially presented with a fait
accompli.

Our major concern is that the Bill removes the requirement for transport
plans from the principal Act. Transport authorities will therefore be able
to continue with their operations, despite the fact that transport plans
have not been drawn up. This becomes problematic in the case of
metropolitan transport services. Metropolitan services are highly complex
and require advanced and detailed planning. Without detailed transport
plans it is doubtful whether different modalities of transport services
could be accommodated in a cost-effective, integrated and structured model.
If not, it is possible that the customer, the public, may suffer through
reduced services or unwarranted cost increases.

Die IFP is bekommerd dat die wetsontwerp kan lei tot die grootskaalse
ontwrigting van openbare vervoer. Suid-Afrika se ekonomie kan grÃ³Ã³t skade
lei as werkers nie betyds by die werk kan uitkom nie, en dit kan baie
maklik gebeur as vervoerplanne nie haarfyn uitgewerk en toegepas word nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The IFP is concerned that the Bill could lead to the large-scale
disruption of public transport. South African's economy could suffered
great damage if workers cannot get to work on time, and this could happen
very easily if transport plans are not worked out and implemented
meticulously.]

The IFP is also concerned about the absence of detailed transport plans for
metropolitan areas, which may create a breeding ground for illegal minibus-
taxi operators. South Africa has witnessed too much violence and
confrontation, as a result of illegal taxi operators, and virtually always
to the detriment of the consumer. The question then arises whether the
absence of an integrated transport plan for the metropolitan areas would
not create a service vacuum that would play into the hands of the illegal
taxi operators. Can the Minister assure us that this will not happen?
Notwithstanding our concerns, as highlighted above, the IFP will support
the amending Bill, as indicated earlier.

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Mr Chairperson, the New NP supports the National Land
Transport Transition Amendment Bill. As my colleagues who spoke before me
indicated, there were two hiccups but we decided not to delay the
implementation of this important Bill. We will let it go through and we
will revisit it early next year. They have told the members what the two
issues were and we all agreed, even our communist chairperson agreed on all
these issues. Therefore, we are thankful for that and we also support this
Bill. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Mr Chairperson, several adjustments to the National Land
Transport Transition Act, which came into force last year, have become
necessary. The Act itself was designed to transform aspects of road
transport into a system devised by the department.

The UDM finds no reason to withhold its support for changes to the
transition Act - changes which obviously serve a facilitating purpose. We
have, however, the same reservations as those that have been so adequately
expressed by the IFP, through Mr Jan Slabbert.

The most important reason for our wholehearted support of the amending Bill
is that we would not like to have commuters unnecessarily disadvantaged,
even during an interim period, simply because operators are obliged to
discontinue their services due to legal technicalities. Further, while the
UDM has misgivings about the manner in which the Government plans to
transform the taxi industry, particularly, the party is acutely aware of
the need to continue to meet, undisturbed, the daily needs of the commuter,
especially during periods of change.

It is becoming clear to increasing numbers of South Africans that if our
country, our beautiful South Africa and its people, is to become a world-
class nation, we will have to work hard and do it ourselves. The growing
number of industrious and resourceful people must not be unduly handicapped
by erratic public transport.

It is hoped that the task of converting permits to operating licences will
proceed apace and that the authorities, at all levels, will at all times
keep the commuter uppermost in their mind. The role of the provinces in the
transition process is critical. Finally, I would like to thank the
officials for the sterling services that they have delivered and we wish
them every success in the implementation of this amending Bill.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, transport, be it public or private, gets
each and every one of us to our destinations daily; be it for business or
pleasure. With its vast use and infinite need, the industry requires much
planning, organisation, structuring and regulation. This Bill appears to do
just that, by addressing issues like creating appropriate institutional
bodies, planning, regulating competition and the restructuring of transport
modes, attending to sustainable funding and inculcating effective transport
law enforcement.

The MF applauds the department for the achievements made in this Bill and
hopes that both private and public entities will make their efforts where
they are needed in activating this Bill to best advantage. The MF supports
the National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, hon members, I would like to
express my appreciation to all members of the House and all those who
participated in this debate, for their support for the Bill and for the
very constructive points which were raised during the course of the
discussion.

I want to thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee and all members
of the portfolio committee. I am blessed with a portfolio committee which
is very supportive and knowledgeable. All members serving in the portfolio
committee make a very positive contribution to the transport processes in
which I am engaged. I also want to thank my officials for their work
because they have done outstanding work in this regard.

In conclusion, I just want to give the House the assurance that my approach
to the National Land Transport Transition Act is that it is a transitional
measure and we must come back to this House, obviously to the portfolio
committee, with a measure which is permanent in nature - a national land
transport Act. In due course, we will be coming to the House with such a
piece of legislation.

The department is working on this because planning for transport is
absolutely essential. That is why I am very sensitive to the concerns which
have been expressed in this House, by all members of the House, that we
must make sure that the amendment currently before the House and its
implementation will not lead to a situation where we abandon the need for
transport planning.

Transport planning is also uppermost in my own mind because I believe that,
both in respect of transport infrastructure and the provision of transport
services, planning is essential. I would like to restrict myself to land
transport, which is what we have been discussing. We have been focusing
very much on ensuring that we do develop an integrated public transport
system.

Taxis are important, our buses and our trains are important. Our focus is
to ensure that we maximise on the availability of this resource in the most
effective manner possible. For example, we would like to see more of our
people use trains. Therefore, we have a programme to improve stations,
coaches, our signalling systems and to make train transport more attractive
for our people.

At the same time, there is this limitation that our commuter train service
only serves the six metropolitan areas in our country. So, there are large
parts of our country which are not served by commuter rail. Therefore, a
large part of our country, especially in our rural areas, depends on road
transport. So, our subsidised bus service and minibus-taxi service are all
important. There needs to be an integration of these transport modes so as
to ensure that maximum transport services are available to our people.

I can also indicate to this House that, as I stand here today, already over
70 intermodal transport exchanges have been built in different parts of our
country. This is in line with good planning and we intend to extend the
intermodal transport exchanges all over the country so as to ensure that
that kind of integrated approach to transport wins the day in our country.

I can give the House the assurance that we will not allow the
implementation of the amendment to play into the hands of illegal taxi
operators. Indeed, our programme for the legalisation of the taxi industry
envisages that, once the legalisation process is complete and the industry
has been legalised, tough action will be taken against illegal operators. I
know that it is not going to be an easy matter and it is not going to
happen overnight but, in all provinces, the law-enforcement authorities are
gearing themselves up so that they can deal effectively with this kind of
situation.

We are also, in terms of planning, looking at the road development plan for
South Africa. Members of this House have expressed concern about the state
of our roads. Our national roads are good but much of the rest of our road
infrastructure does need attention. Our road infrastructure has declined.
So, our road development programme will be a matter which we will be
bringing to the House as well. So there is a great deal of planning that is
necessary. We need to come back and seek the wisdom of the House, and I can
assure members that early next year we will be back here again.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                       MEDICAL SCHEMES AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson and hon members, I wish to thank you
for the opportunity of presenting the Medical Schemes Amendment Bill. Many
members will recall that the Medical Schemes Act was passed in 1998 as a
response to significant challenges faced by the medical schemes industry.
The principal Act aimed to achieve four main objectives: firstly, to
reintroduce community rating in medical schemes; secondly, to improve
access to medical schemes of people who were previously excluded; thirdly,
to mandate a prescribed minimum benefit package to ensure that all members
have essential hospital cover; and fourthly, to improve financial
management and governance of the schemes.

At the time the Act was passed, there was considerable opposition in the
medical schemes industry. Sceptics predicted that the Act would not achieve
its objectives and would instead compromise the viability of many medical
schemes. Although the Act has been in operation since January 2000, I
believe that there are already signs that our critics overreacted. The
audited returns provided to the Council of Medical Schemes are beginning to
show the early impact of the Act.

Firstly, membership has not decreased as the prophets of doom had suggested
it would. More importantly, there is evidence that the proportion of
members from vulnerable groups such as the elderly has actually increased.
It is difficult to say precisely which features of the 1998 Act had this
effect. But, it is likely that the amnesty provision played a part. This
allowed members to join schemes at an advanced age without premiums being
imposed.

Of course the success of our legislation must be measured not only in terms
of the growth of membership, but also in the composition of membership.
Medical schemes are rooted in the notion of cross-subsidisation between
members who are young and healthy and those who are older and have a much
greater need of health care. We will be watching this aspect very keenly
over the next few years.

Secondly, analysis suggests that the greatest pressure on medical schemes
costs is not from claims, but from spending on administration. In the year
2000, income from contributions increased by 7% and claims went up by just
6%, but administration costs grew by 26%. This evidence dispels the myth
promoted by the industry that the introduction of the prescribed minimum
benefits would result in an increase in claims.

It is a matter of concern that there is a significant difference between
open and closed schemes when it comes to the level of administration costs.
The open schemes have much higher administration costs, and we need to
understand the reasons for this so that we can institute appropriate action
to curb this trend.

Furthermore, the solvency ratios of schemes have not taken a nose dive as
was predicted by those opposed to this legislation. In fact, the average
solvency level for all schemes was 20,5% in the year 2000, which is far
higher than the statutory requirement of 10%. But again we see
significantly different patterns in the open schemes from those that
prevail in the closed schemes. The solvency level for open schemes averaged
13% last year and about one third of these schemes were below the statutory
requirement. We are monitoring this situation extremely closely with a view
to possibly intervening.
Experience with the Act has not only vindicated our policy position, but
also taught us some valuable lessons. The amending Bill that I am
presenting to members today is a response to some of these lessons. The
Bill seeks to strengthen the Medical Schemes Act of 1998 in a number of
ways. It seeks to improve protection for members. It does this by
addressing the problem of reinsurance by revisiting the provision of
waiting periods, by specifically protecting members against discrimination
on the grounds of age.

It seeks to make the regulator, viz the Council of Medical Schemes, more
effective by providing a more frequent report to ensure early detection of
problems and by addressing the question of inspections. It reduces
unnecessary red tape that imposed unduly onerous conditions on medical
schemes. Amongst other things, it seeks to promote efficient administration
and good governance of medical schemes by insisting on the independence of
individuals in key positions. It also introduces mechanisms to address
problematic practices in the marketing of medical schemes and brokerage of
services.

Inevitably, amending legislation does some tidying up of definitions and
clumsy phrasing and eliminates duplication. The amending Bill is no
exception. It is impossible in the time allocated to me to cover every
detail of what is fairly technical legislation, so I am going to be
selective and highlight the thinking behind some of the provisions.

Let me first deal with the question of waiting periods. A waiting period
refers to the period between joining a scheme and enjoying the full
benefits of that scheme. They were permitted in the principal Act in order
to protect schemes against adverse selection, viz opportunistic behaviour
by some medical scheme members who may delay joining a scheme until they
require expensive medical treatment and, having had this treatment, simply
leaving the scheme afterwards.

The clause in the principal Act is flawed in that it goes beyond protecting
schemes from adverse selection. In some instances, it has resulted in
schemes imposing waiting periods on members who do not necessarily engage
in opportunistic behaviour. We have inserted two definitions of waiting
periods in the amending Bill. These stipulate the circumstances in which
general and condition-specific waiting periods may be imposed on members.

The underlying principle is to consider the member's history of membership
in other schemes and to use this as a basis for determining whether waiting
periods may apply. In addition, the Bill stipulates that members who
transfer from one scheme to another may not face a waiting period in
respect of the prescribed minimum benefits. It also provides that members
who change schemes because of a change in employment or because their
employer changes or terminates schemes may also not face waiting periods.
These provisions aim to strike a fair balance between protecting schemes
from adverse selection and protecting new members from inappropriate use of
waiting periods.
On the issue of reinsurance, I am sure that members have come to
appreciate, in the last few weeks, the heat that this issue generates in
the industry. Undoubtedly this issue has been the most contentious
provision in our Bill. We believe that the formulation that we have now
agreed on is a significant improvement on previous versions. It not only
satisfies all our policy concerns, but also addresses the concerns
expressed by the industry about the need to strengthen the powers and
responsibilities of medical schemes' trustees.

We have tried to include in the law a mechanism that will prevent
inappropriate reinsurance arrangements rather than simply seeking to deal
with the consequences of such arrangements. Accordingly, clause 5
stipulates that the board of trustees of a scheme must furnish particular
information to the Registrar of Medical Schemes before entering into a
reinsurance contract. The registrar must express any concerns he or she may
have with regard to the proposed contract within 30 days. The board of
trustees is in turn obliged to address any concerns raised and make full
disclosure of the reinsurance contract, failing which the whole contract
will be null and void.

This formulation allows the registrar to keep track of all reinsurance
contracts. Raising concerns in respect of such contracts is not in the best
interests of scheme members. However, the final decision on whether or not
to reinsure is left in the hands of the board of trustees who, after all,
must take full judicial responsibility for the financial position of their
schemes. The interaction between the registrar and the trustees is, indeed,
a process in which the two processes complement each other and where the
expertise of the registrar serves as a resource for the trustees.

The regulation of brokers was another matter which was vociferously debated
by some stakeholders during the hearings on the Bill. The portfolio
committee supported and enhanced the draft formulation which empowers the
Minister to make regulations regarding the conduct and remuneration of
brokers. This tightening up of the remuneration of brokers relates to a
growing situation where members shift between schemes without any clear
gains in terms of benefits. The question, therefore, arises as to whether
perverse incentives enjoyed by brokers are responsible for this unnecessary
movement that pushes up administration costs.

The Bill strengthens consumer protection by restricting the marketing of
medical schemes to those individuals and entities that are actually
registered as medical schemes in terms of the Act. It also prohibits the
conditional selling of medical schemes' products. The consumer is further
protected by additional powers that are assigned to the Minister in terms
of the Bill. These include the power to regulate managed health care
contracts and to impose penalties on medical schemes or administrators for
late payment of claims.

In the area of promoting good governance of medical schemes, the Bill
firmly introduces the principle of ensuring the independence of principal
officers, trustees and auditors of medical schemes. It does this by
prohibiting any broker or person employed by the schemes' administrators
from taking on any of these positions. It further promotes transparency and
ensures the independence of the trustees by requiring that trustees must
disclose, on an annual basis, any remuneration or benefits accruing to
them.

The Bill recognises that the power of the registrar to act constructively
in resolving problems that threaten the stability of schemes and assets of
the members depends, to a great degree, on effective monitoring and early
detection of problems. It is with this in mind that the Bill empowers the
registrar to request financial statements from the schemes as frequently as
once in every three months and to determine the degree of urgency that
applies in getting responses to their queries. It is also vital that the
registrar has the power to order the inspection of schemes in order to
monitor compliance with the Act. But, we recognise that the registrar's
powers in this regard must be limited in accordance with the fundamental
rights as enshrined in our Bill of Rights.
Our renewed emphasis on sound governance and fair administration carries a
certain price and sometimes creates additional work. We need to be sure
that these additional processes are indeed justified, and they are not, we
must have the courage to do away with them. I am pleased to say that, on
review, we have found a few instances in the principal Act where we have
overregulated. We have attempted to correct this in the amending
legislation. For example, the process of exempting entities from the
provisions of the Act has been simplified and medical schemes are no longer
required to get prior approval from the Council for Medical Schemes in
order to undertake a number of fairly routine activities.

I cannot conclude this presentation without thanking the Department of
Health and the Council for Medical Schemes for the sterling work they have
put into the preparation of this amending Bill. The amendments clearly show
that they have not lost sight of the ultimate goal of our health system ie
to improve access to health care while making it affordable, efficient and
effective for all South Africans irrespective of their income level.

The portfolio committee has provided essential guidance and support in
seeing this Bill to this stage, and their valuable input is reflected in
this last version that I have presented to the hon members. The passing of
this Bill would, indeed, be a reflection of the confidence that this House
places in this guidance by the portfolio committee. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, as the Minister said, it is almost three years
to the day that the Medical Schemes Act was debated in this House. The then
Minister of Health hailed it as an important breakthrough in efforts aimed
at expanding access for all people to medical schemes, and again the hon
the Minister has today said more or less the same thing.

I would like to say that the DP did not then, nor does it now, doubt that
this was an important intention of that piece of legislation. But, we did
warn, then, that the consequences of that Bill, passed as it was with
virtually no amendments despite serious concerns expressed then by, for
example, the Actuarial Society of South Africa and various other role-
players in the industry, could be very serious in terms of the negative
impact it would have on the ability of schemes to operate. And, we also
warned that the Act may, in fact, have the opposite effect on medical
schemes than was intended.

I would like to say that it is, therefore, not particularly surprising that
the Medical Schemes Act is now being amended to take in some of the very
serious problems that the industry has experienced in recent years. The hon
the Minister has highlighted some of these, but her reasons, I think, do
not always match those given by the industry - the reasons why there have
been problems. And, I think that she has chosen to underplay some of the
important problems facing the industry. However, I do want to agree with
her, to a very large extent, that the issue of reinsurance has been handled
in a satisfactory manner but time will tell how successful this Bill will
in fact be in this regard.

There do, in fact, remain serious concerns. The Life Offices Association,
for example, made the point that the amendments were presented on the
premise that the Medical Schemes Act is achieving the policy of broadening
access and reducing the costs of private health care as the Minister
indicated. But, they also made the point that, in reality, most medical
schemes' members are seeing the cost of coverage increase significantly
above the growth of their salaries and above the growth of consumer
inflation and are, therefore, being forced to reduce their level of medical
scheme coverage. Pensioners are particularly badly affected in that they
cannot afford to pay more, but also because of their age and, therefore,
their risk, they cannot really afford less medical coverage.

The number of people contacting the offices of the DP, and I am sure other
political parties as well, with problems of this nature has increased quite
dramatically in the past two years, many with extremely sad tales of how
medical scheme subscriptions have spiralled out of all proportion.
Certainly, not all amendments put forward by this Bill will address this
very serious concern.

But the DP does acknowledge that progress has been made in improving the
Act through this amending legislation. What we also appreciate is that the
department and the council were prepared to listen to the concerns of the
industry and there have been significant amendments to the Bill as a
result. The legislation before this House today, is now a great improvement
on what it was. My colleague, the hon Mrs Kalyan, will deal with some of
these matters.

I would like to say that, perhaps, one of the most significant aspects of
this Bill was the way that it was handled by the portfolio committee, and I
am sure the chairperson will be very interested in that. Never, in the past
five years, has the chairperson of that committee been as accommodating as
he was during the discussion on this Bill. He has moved a long way from the
days when he used to constantly call for the Serjeant-at-Arms to throw out
members of the committee who did not agree with his particular point or the
way the committee was working. Last week, to our great surprise and
pleasure, he was patient, accommodating and really quite pleasant. He is,
of course, due to leave us very soon as the Ambassador to Malaysia. I would
like to say to him that I am remarkably glad that he used the opportunity
that he had with the portfolio committee to hone some ambassadorial skills
before he leaves. We wish him well. This will actually be the last speech
that I make in this House while he is the chairperson of that committee
and, consequently, I do take the opportunity of five very interesting years
of working with him to say that we wish him well in his new venture.

In conclusion, while this Bill makes some important changes in the Medical
Schemes Act, the Act as a whole does remain a cause for concern and we
believe that it will not be long before it is back before Parliament with
further amendments. But, nevertheless, since this Bill does seriously
address some of the concerns in the industry and improves the principal
Act, the DP will support this Bill. [Applause.]

Dr A S NKOMO: Chairperson, health policy is acknowledged the world over as
being both complex and fraught with stakeholder interests. For this reason,
Government must play a key stewardship role in protecting the public from
unfairly losing, or being denied access to, health care. To this end, the
World Health Organisation states, and I quote:


  The careful and responsible management of the wellbeing of the population
  is the very essence of good government. For every country, it means
  establishing the best and fairest health system possible with the
  available resources.

Quite simply, it is this objective of achieving the best and fairest system
that underpins the Medical Schemes Amendment Bill which is before
Parliament today.

The old pre-1998 Medical Schemes Act was poorly designed and oriented
exclusively towards meeting the needs of a for-profit health system, which
was not interested in the needs of our people. It allowed medical schemes
to discriminate against groups of people on arbitrary and unfair grounds.
This was driven by the need to make quick profits. Clearly, no responsible
government can support or justify, or embody in key areas of legislation,
approaches to health cover that deny access to health care on the grounds
of income or state of health.

As can be expected with all new social legislation of this nature, there
was a need to test the new environment and to improve on the legislation
after its provisions were tested in practice. This new amending Bill now
strengthens the original policy environment and prepares the way for more
far-reaching reforms in the future.

Overall, this Bill significantly improves the independence of trustees, and
the governance principles create a clear and logical framework surrounding
penalties for adverse selection such as waiting periods; it improves the
oversight and use of reinsurance agreements; it strengthens and improves
complaints procedures; it eliminates the conditional selling of various
financial products with medical scheme membership; and it improves the
enabling legislation dealing with brokers. These issues are central to
maintaining the principles and objectives underpinning the original
legislation.

One important aspect of the current legislation is the maintenance of the
not-for-profit status of medical schemes. It has, however, become clear,
both before the original Act was passed in 1998 and subsequent to it, that
reinsurance has been used to circumvent the not-for-profit provisions of
medical schemes - witness the shenanigans reported in the Business Report
of The Star of Monday, 28 October. Such agreements have been used to pass
reserves of a medical scheme to a third party, such that the members lose
the ownership thereof. This happens through both the opportunism and the
ignorance of many schemes' trustees. The Registrar of Medical Schemes will
now, in terms of the amending Bill, be able to review and anticipate
problems with these agreements, prior to them presenting with a problem.

It has also been a concern for many members transferring between schemes
that they have become subjected to the unfair application of waiting
periods. These have been used less as a method of coping with adverse
selection, the purpose for which waiting periods were originally intended,
and more to discriminate unfairly against any and all individuals with pre-
existing conditions.

It has become very clear that many individuals have waiting periods apply
to them purely because they belong to a sicker group, or have a chronic
condition, or belong to a particular age group. For this reason the
amending Bill limits the application of waiting periods in cases where
transfers are not linked to opportunistic behaviour and broadens their
application where adverse selection is very likely, such as when someone
joins a scheme for the first time.
Another important area of regulation dealt with in this amending Bill
relates to provisions dealing with medical scheme brokers. Substantial
member movement, linked to commission payments instead of member choice,
have become a feature of the medical schemes industry. This is called
``churning of members''. Extensive ongoing commissions are being paid by
administrators to brokers merely to prevent them from taking their members
elsewhere. This type of behaviour is adding a new layer of unnecessary cost
and inefficiency to the medical schemes market. There is a need to develop
an entirely new framework for regulating medical scheme brokers, which
limits the commissions that can be paid by third parties such as medical
scheme administrators, and ensures that those who receive a service from a
broker pay for it.

Many of the problems relating to inappropriate reinsurance and poor
management arise from conflicts of interest between trustees of schemes,
the principal officer and parties with whom the scheme enters into
contracts. As a consequence, the Act is to be amended explicitly to exclude
all persons who may embody such a conflict. Overall, this will improve
scheme governance, and contribute to the better management of schemes.

Of great concern to many service providers is the late payment of claims
made by medical scheme administrators. In many cases this results in great
hardship for doctors and hospitals, and this needs to be dealt with in
legislation. This Bill introduces penalties which will be applied where the
payment of claims is delayed without any good reason.

Another important developing feature of the private health system is so-
called ``managed care''. Developments around managed care have to be
closely scrutinised in the future. To contain costs, many medical schemes
are beginning to use various approaches which, collectively, have become
known as managed care. Although desirable as a broad direction, managed
care holds many dangers if left unregulated. Patient care can be
compromised if appropriate measures are not introduced to ensure that
service providers are not encouraged to act in unethical ways to keep down
costs. Although such measures are not contained in the current amendments,
these issues need to be fully explored in the near future.

The Medical Schemes Act and these amendments must also be seen within the
broader context of health reform. Our inherited health system has suffered
from many flaws, maybe not in the amount of services but related far more
to the manner in which access to these services is governed. Better public
services were available to whites only, while private services were
available only to high-income earners, the young and the healthy.

Since 1994 extensive restructuring has occurred to improve access within
both the public and the private spheres. Nevertheless, there is a need to
begin to move the reform process to a new qualitatively higher level. We
have to start seeing our total health system as a national asset which
should be more effectively utilised for the betterment of all our people.
Although each movement towards a more integrated system faces opposition
from profiteers, these steps must be taken, and each move forward and each
new right that is created must be protected from reversal.

Much is changing in the health system and will continue to change over the
next few years. Ultimately, it will be through the stewardship of this
Government that a health system will evolve which can embody principles and
offer a service that will make us proud. This pride will be in what we can
and do provide, rather than in that which we deny to those who are
vulnerable and in need.

I commend this Bill to this House and I want to thank the Ministry and the
department for the sensitive and across-the-board consultation throughout
the processing of this piece of legislation. I also want to thank all the
parties for their constructive participation in the legislation when it was
being processed. I commend this Bill.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, in 1998 we introduced the Medical Schemes Act
with the intention of making medical schemes more affordable and accessible
to the masses. At the time the IFP opposed the legislation fearing that it
would have the opposite effect. We proposed the following alternative:
Introduce a social health insurance whereby the state offers a minimum
package at the lowest possible rates and allow this to compete with all the
options offered by private industry; regulate to prevent people from
joining only when they are old and sick, as this will kill off any medical
scheme; and ensure that every person who is working contributes towards
some form of medical scheme.

The fundamental principle of any kind of insurance or health scheme is for
the young and healthy to cross-subsidise the old and the sick. We also
believe it is important to regulate to protect people who are ill before
they join from being shut out of schemes. Through the creation of a high-
risk pool, a percentage of profits in successful schemes would be paid into
a pool to support both public and private initiatives for the seriously and
high-cost ill. Aids would be a classic example of such a condition. Our
proposals were rejected.

The Medical Schemes Act was adopted and the regulations attempted to
introduce waiting periods as ways of discouraging people from joining
schemes only when they were old and sick or from using the open-enrolment
provisions to hop opportunistically from one scheme to another to get the
most out of each scheme and pay less of the costs. Now we are faced with
submissions from two camps.

On the one side the Board of Health Care Funders, the Life Offices
Association of Southern Africa incorporating over 40% of the market and
most of the large insurance companies investing in medical schemes,
Parmed's own administrator for medical schemes, the Hospital Association
which wants a healthy industry and the Financial Services Board whom the
IFP has always maintained should oversee the financial aspects of medical
schemes, all opposed the amendments, the FSB saying that the Council for
Medical Schemes should regulate or supervise its members, not manage them.
In the opposite camp were the Council for Medical Schemes and its advisers
Cosatu.

Extrapolation from statistical charts of both schemes showed opposite
trends. As health specialists, we can cope with these contradictions by
seeking the advice of financial specialists and all role-players. For this
we need time, but we did not have that luxury. We can also recognise the
obvious, that contributions are increasing while benefits are decreasing.
At best, we are where we were, at worst we are sinking rapidly.

Against this backdrop we debated the amendments to the Medical Schemes Act.
Several were necessary and we support them. Three issues that were of major
importance to the industry were those of brokers, the powers of the
registrar and waiting periods. I will address, due to a lack of time, only
the issues of reinsurance and brokers. To neither of these issues, we
believe, solutions were found, not for lack of the department trying. They
brought us amendments which, unfortunately, we saw for the first time at
09:30 on the morning that the committee met.

The issue of reinsurance is sufficiently complex and contentious to earn
comment articles in most newspapers for the last few months. Here the
mischief, according to the department, is that some contracts are
inappropriate. Reinsurance is legal. Where it is inappropriate, it was
suggested in briefings, is in cases such as that of Discovery Health
Medical Scheme and Discovery Health. Through this arrangement the not-for-
profit scheme is reinsured by the Pty Ltd company in which shareholders
make a profit.

I admit it sticks in one's throat for some people to appear to benefit from
other people's pain. It is not surprising that between the registrar and
Discovery there has been much acrimony over the last few weeks. Whether or
not the financial activities of a medical scheme are appropriate is surely
the decision of an independent and objective financial specialist. I would
apply such terms to the Actuarial Society of South Africa or the SA
Institute of Chartered Accountants, not the Registrar for Medical Schemes.

An ANC amendment agreed that an independent person with the necessary
expertise must evaluate the need for the insurance contract, but the
registrar, if he believes that the contract is not appropriate and does not
serve members' interests, can require the scheme to address issues on which
he or she is dissatisfied and, if not satisfied with the response, can
declare the contract null and void. Time will tell whether the registrar's
first act will be the disbanding of the relationship between Discovery
Health and Discovery Health Medical Scheme, a decision, if necessary, we
would prefer to be made by the Financial Services Board.

If there is inappropriate behaviour, one wonders why the registrar would
not use the existing avenues for illegal or unsafe behaviour to shut down
the scheme, as was the case with Medicover 2000. The IFP prefers a positive
approach whereby a percentage of the profits of all schemes with financial
prowess could be ploughed back into a reinsurance pool for the Aids ill.

As for waiting periods, again, we do not believe that the amendments
address the issues satisfactorily. We want people who change jobs or need
to change health schemes for reasons other than illness to be entitled to
continue to receive cover without waiting periods. We said as much in our
amendments. They were rejected in favour of amendments that encourage
people to take advantage of the low costs of some schemes to slip into
others while their waiting periods are almost over or to pay for a cheap
scheme when they are young and slip over into an expensive one as they grow
older without the one-year contribution or waiting period.

There is no Midas factor in health care, and this could well be another
nail in the coffin of the fading industry and force Government to introduce
national health insurance and sink health care entirely. We were extremely
unhappy with the speed with which this Bill was processed. [Time expired.]
Dr S J GOUS: Chairperson, worldwide medical inflation is normally a few
points higher than the average inflation. This can be explained by the fact
that new innovation and technology cost more money and patients usually
insist on the latest technology and treatment.

In South Africa, however, medical inflation is significantly higher than
the national inflation, in fact, almost double. Although technology and the
demand from patients can explain part of it, and certainly the exchange
rate also plays a role, the very high rate that we experience in South
Africa is not that easy to explain. One of the reasons cited is the
relatively unstable medical scheme environment. When the Medical Schemes
Act was promulgated in 1998, the New NP warned that one of its effects
might be that it would make medical schemes unaffordable for the average
South African.

The submission of the Council for Medical Schemes portrayed a stable
environment with a small increase in access. On closer examination,
however, one finds that there has been a significant drop in benefits
offered, while at the same time there has been a major increase in
contributions. At the same time, the quality of health care in the state
sector has declined, and this has forced more patients to look to the
private sector for medical care. Administration costs of schemes seem to
have increased disproportionately. The effect of managed health care is, at
this stage, not very clear, but it is also thought to increase the total
cost with less return.

I think the point is that it would appear as if we are heading in the wrong
direction and that, very soon, medical schemes would be simply unaffordable
for the average South African. The amending Bill that we are debating today
addresses some of these issues which are thought to be cost-drivers in the
medical schemes environment.

The main issues addressed are the waiting periods, reinsurance and the
position of brokers. Waiting periods are necessary to protect schemes from
so-called adverse selection. This means that the patient waits until he
becomes ill or knows or suspects that he is becoming ill and only then
joins the medical scheme. The difficulty lies in trying to protect the
public against unfair discrimination in terms of waiting periods by medical
schemes, but at the same time, protecting the scheme against adverse
selection. One can understand that this is easier said than done. At the
moment, the pendulum seems to be slightly in favour of the patients, but
ironically, it would appear that it is simply going to cost them more at
the end of the day. So the net loser is still the patient or the member of
the scheme.

To make things even more complicated, there is a second concept which is
known as interscheme adverse selection. This simply means that the patient
can move from a low cost benefit option within a scheme to a higher cost
benefit option when required or when he realises or suspects that he is
going to need increased cover. This is probably the single most dangerous
and unpredictable cost driver as far as medical schemes are concerned.

It is even more difficult to protect schemes against this, without
discriminating against individual patients. To complicate the matter even
more, there are other triggers for which the patient cannot be held
responsible, for instance, when he changes from one job to another. The
regulation pertaining to waiting periods has now been included in the Bill,
which we welcome. Our criticism is that adequate protection in terms of
interscheme adverse selection, also known as scheme-hopping, is not
adequately addressed.

The second major aspect which is addressed by this amending Bill is the
reinsurance issue. There seems to be consensus that reinsurance is
necessary in the medical scheme environment, especially for smaller schemes
who have to insure against excessive and unexpected losses. There were
differences of opinion as to who would ultimately be responsible to
determine whether the reinsurance contract is appropriate or not. The
Council for Medical Schemes maintained that the registrar should fulfil
this function. Many others insisted that it should, at the end of the day,
be the trustees of the medical schemes. An input by the Financial Services
Board in this regard was very valuable and was taken up in amendments
which, at the end of the day, seem quite satisfactory, except for the
period of validity of current contracts.

We sincerely hope that this amending Bill will bring more stability to the
medical schemes environment and that, at the end of the day, the patient or
member benefits the most. In other words, we hope that medical schemes
become more affordable for the average citizen. Despite some of these
reservations, the New NP shall support this legislation.

Mrs S F BALOYI: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and members, allow me to
congratulate the Director-General for Halth, Dr Ayanda Ntsaluba, the
Registrar of Medical Schemes, Mr Patrick Masobe, and his colleagues, Alex
and Stephen, for a job well done in bringing these important amendments for
consideration to ensure that our policy for providing accessible, cost-
effective and efficient services is extended to the previously
disadvantaged majority of our people, who had no access to such facilities
and benefits before, as this was the preserve of some in the past.

The majority of our people now have equal opportunities to join a medical
scheme, as medical schemes may not unfairly discriminate directly or
indirectly against any person on stipulated arbitrary grounds, to prevent
unfair treatment. The ANC is delivering on its promise to our people. This
amending Bill is part of a process of finetuning legislation to ensure
transformatory legislation we have passed achieves its objective. This is
an historic test. It is not an easy task, but it is important that we do
not waver from these challenges, for it is clear that we are succeeding in
many areas in changing the delivery of our health care system and services,
and thus changing our people's lives for the better.

The Medical Schemes Amendment Bill represents another important step in
transforming our health care system. We all know the problems regarding
medical schemes which include rampant expenditure, lack of accountability
to members, and the tendency to reduce members' benefits while increasing
administrative costs. I heard the hon Mike Ellis saying that costs are
rising. Yes, they are rising because the major part of the funds are going
to administrative costs and dubious contracts such as reinsurance.

However, we also know that the Medical Schemes Act which we passed in 1998
is beginning to have the desired impact, in spite of all that has been said
by the people sitting on my left hand side. Firstly, there is now more
information and transparency, secondly, data from the registrar's office
shows that people who were previously systematically and deliberately
excluded are beginning to join medical schemes, and, thirdly, there is no
evidence, as the opposition would like us to believe, that young members
are leaving medical schemes.

We now also have a Council for Medical Schemes that is fighting on behalf
of, and protecting the rights of, ordinary members of schemes. These are
significant achievements in the face of the concerted and sometimes
recalcitrant opposition. We are now called upon to support the Bill in
order to consolidate our gains.

One of the key issues the amending Bill is addressing is that of
reinsurance, an issue which is of great concern to us and which the medical
schemes industry is trying to protect by all means as witnessed during the
public hearings. Reinsurance is a practice undertaken by an insurance
company to cover a family, in this case a medical scheme, against
unexpected high claims. The ANC supports judicious and appropriate use of
reinsurance. However, we cannot and will not sit back and tolerate the
abuse of reinsurance. To do so, would be failing the majority of our people
who voted for the ANC, and the Government will ensure that this does not
happen.

There are many indications that there are some companies which are using
reinsurance to strip the medical schemes of funds. This needs to be stopped
and this amending Bill seeks to achieve just that. Also of importance is
that there should be more transparency and openness in the process of
reinsurance. The Bill will achieve this by obliging trustees to report all
reinsurance contracts to the registrar to stop inappropriate use of
reinsurance.

The Bill clearly stipulates the following. I will go through this to try to
educate the people sitting on my left hand side and also to make the
industry understand that this amending Bill takes into consideration all
their concerns as far as reinsurance is concerned. A reinsurance contract
entered into by a medical scheme is not valid unless it has been approved
by the registrar. It is entered into with an insurer and has to comply with
any condition which may be prescribed. An amendment of the terms of an
existing contract is also not valid unless such amendment has been approved
by the registrar. A medical scheme must furnish an application for the
proposed reinsurance contract to the registrar. There is an evaluation of
the need for the proposed reinsurance contract according to directives
issued by the medical scheme.
There are specified conditions under which, unless complied with, the
registrar may not approve such a contract or an amendment to an existing
insurance contract if due consideration has not been given by the medical
scheme concerned to the need for reinsurance based upon an assessment of
the financial risk to which the scheme may be exposed, for example, if
reinsurance is not in the best interests of the members of the scheme
concerned or if there is a conflict of interest between the parties to the
reinsurance contract.

The medical scheme industry is a massive one. There is stiff competition
between schemes and membership is very high. Profits are also very high, we
are discussing a multibillion rand industry. The need and the way the
industry conducted itself show that all they are concerned with is their
profits and not the health of our people. This Bill seeks to protect that,
and we will use everything within our means to do that as well. It is for
that reason that we have this amending Bill here today.

I hope that clause 5, which amends section 20 of the principal Act, will
curb the widespread abuse of reinsurance which has resulted in significant
losses of medical aid schemes' funds. There is currently far too much money
of members that is accumulating in other financial entities that members do
not own. This leads to exploitation of members. Reinsurance is also used to
hide the true financial position of schemes and for window-dressing
purposes. As the great political theorist, Machiavelli, once said:


  ... the majority of mankind are satisfied with appearances as though they
  were realities, and are influenced by things that seem rather than those
  that are.

We should therefore not allow reinsurance to delude us into believing what
things seem to be rather than what they are. The ANC supports this Medical
Schemes Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mr J T MASEKA: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I would like to
congratulate hon members and the committee on this amending Bill.

The UDM supports this Bill. It is very important as it extends certain
rights of members to their dependants. It further explicitly prohibits
discrimination on the basis of age, and protects the interests of
beneficiaries. The Bill regulates the circumstances under which a waiting
period may be applied and further regulates the practice of reinsurance.
The UDM supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, the ACDP would
like to see free or subsidised medical attention for all who cannot afford
it, but this is not the responsibility of business. It is in fact the
responsibility of the church, but while Government takes the lion's share
of our salaries through levies and taxes, they have hijacked this
responsibility. Therefore, health care for the 82% of the population who
are not catered for through medical aid schemes should be provided for
through subsidies based on means tests, as is done successfully in Chile.

The ACDP would like to vote in favour of this Bill, which appears to offer
the public additional protection which consumers in South Africa generally
do not have. Abuse in this industry has impacted negatively on the economy
and individuals and therefore, any additional oversight is to be welcomed.

However, interference in the running of businesses is not desirable and
would be detrimental to business. It would further impact negatively on
consumers. The Bill, as it stands, creates incentives for people to join
medical schemes only when they are sick or old. In addition, without a
waiting period, people are able to move from scheme to scheme, joining low-
cost benefit schemes and moving to high-cost, high-benefit schemes only
when serious illness threatens.

The result of this will be the eroding of all benefits and increases in
costs, forcing consumers once again to bear the brunt. Obviously, where
special circumstances occur, such as retrenchment, these exceptions must be
accommodated, and this can be written into the legislation.

As the Minister of Health has a habit of unfairly accusing opposition party
members of not having attended committee meetings when they cannot respond
or defend themselves, I place on record my participation in the meetings of
the Portfolio Committee on Health, and remind the Minister that where, on
occasion, members of smaller parties are not present they are in other
committees that demand priority at that particular time.

To be fair, it should be noted that majority party members attend between
one and three committees, and smaller parties' members cover many more, for
me that number is eight. It is also relevant to note that such members also
have the ability to read and consult with role-players in and outside of
committees.

The ACDP wishes Dr Nkomo all the best in his new appointment, and we pray
that God's plan and purpose will be fulfilled in his life.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, the Bill seeks to assist
members of medical aid schemes to get value for the money they pay by
extending some of their rights to their dependants.

In keeping with the trends of the country's Constitution, which calls for
nondiscrimination on whatever grounds, the Bill calls on medical aid
schemes not to discriminate against clients, even on the grounds of age. To
ensure transparency, beneficiaries will have the right to scrutinise
records that have a bearing on them, while in the custody of the medical
schemes. Although in some cases it may be at a cost, the breakthrough is
that it will be possible to access these records.

The Bill guards against a conflict of interests. According to the Bill,
members of the boards of trustees of medical schemes should not be people
with a financial interest in the scheme. Only neutral and objective people
may be board members.

In these hard times we notice the proliferation of medical schemes, some of
which are dubious. Clause 6 therefore seeks to curb these unscrupulous
vultures by providing protection to consumers regarding the marketing of
medical schemes.

Further protection is offered to members by clause 13, which empowers the
registrar to call for the financial statements of medical schemes on a
quarterly basis, or at some other time which the registrar finds suitable.
Such a practice will encourage good business conduct on the part of the
medical scheme.

The UCDP supports the Bill.

Dr I M CACHALIA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the Medical
Schemes Amendment Bill was introduced for the protection of members and to
provide wider access to health care for all South Africans. The Government
has obvious concerns about the manner in which the private health sector is
conducting its business.

The private sector will spend an estimated R35,5 billion this year on seven
million people. In contrast, R27,2 billion was budgeted for health care
spending on 35 million people. Private health care will thus account for
54% of all health care spending, and that on only 16% of the population.
South Africa is one of only two countries in the world where health care
spent in the private sector exceeds that spent in the public sector. The
other country is the United States.

In the wake of the damning report of the World Health Organisation last
year, which rated the health efficiencies in South Africa 175th out of 191
countries worldwide, there has been considerable focus on the health care
economy. The success of countries that scored well in the WHO report was
based on the ability of the entire health sector to deliver within the
budget.

Medical aid members are being hit hard by unacceptably high medical
inflation, and consumers are being squeezed by ever-increasing medical
costs. A factor contributing to the small pool of medical aid members is
the fact that two thirds of households earn below R3 000 per month. If one
applies the simple rule that a medical aid contribution should not be more
than 10% of the income, there is nothing left for R300 a month.

The council blames excesses in the industry for most of the problems. Many
in the industry blame the laws and regulations the council has imposed on
them for pushing the costs even higher. The contentious issues between the
industry and the Council for Medical Schemes revolves around the
administration and administrative costs, reinsurance, reserve accounting
and the so-called waiting periods. The hon the Minister and some of the
other members have already addressed these concerns in the debate on the
Bill this afternoon. Broker fees should also be factored into the equation.

Another factor driving up the cost of medical aids is the controversial
issue of commissions. By law, a commission of 3% of first-year
contributions is permissible, but some administrators ignore this and
sidestep the regulations. They call further commissions ``administration
fees''. Bruce Cameron, a financial expert, states in a report ``that
commissions of 6% of annual contributions are being billed. This issue
becomes of greater concern when a medical scheme says in its annual report,
1999, that reinsurance was taken to pay commissions. This is
unacceptable.'' And I agree.

The industry is quick to blame costs on regulation, but results of research
undertaken by the Centre for Actuarial Research over the past 10 years
ending 1999, showed otherwise. The main contributors to even higher costs
were, firstly, private hospitals whose costs were up by 192%, and that had
nothing to do with the regulation. Next in line was administration, which
was up by 148%. I believe there needs to be total transparency in this
respect. Thirdly, medicines, which often carry much of the blame from the
Government's side, were up by 61%.

Questions must therefore be asked about excessive increases in hospital
costs and why scheme administrators cannot slow down these costs. Medical
aid fraud and white-collar crime have become a significant bugbear and
contribute to spiralling health costs. An estimated R50 million a year is
being stolen by schemes from members. Estimates vary from 10% of the total
value of the industry by Fedsure Health, to a high of 25% by Discovery
Health. Greed and a lack of ethics obviously play a big role. It is
estimated that at least half of all medical aid claims are fraudulent and
spent on unnecessary services. The medical schemes fraud unit recovered
R10,3 million from doctors in the year 2000.

There is a paucity of information for the consumers who are totally
confused. Pensioners are now seeing health care as an unaffordable luxury,
and cover for the poor is urgently needed. There is also an urgent need for
low-income cover to close the gap between the small percentage of the
population who are under medical care and the vast majority who use the
public health services.

Certain medical schemes have attempted to link the selling of insurance or
other products to membership of their scheme. This is often called
``conditional selling''. In some cases this is done to indirectly increase
the cost of medical scheme membership for older and sicker risk groups. In
other cases it is used to increase administration and commission fees
extracted from members. As a consequence of these abuses, the amendment of
the Medical Schemes Act aims to stop this practice by explicitly outlawing
conditional selling. If the different role-players are going to talk past
each other, consumers are going to face even higher contributions and lower
benefits. When elephants fight, the grass gets trampled.

I need to digress from the problems associated with the medical aid
industry and take this opportunity to voice my concern about services in
the public health sector. There is an urgent need for an integrated and
very efficient management system to become operational for the optimum use
of the economic resources at our disposal. We further need to fast-track
human resource development for the running of the health services. A
dedicated, honest and competent component is absolutely essential.
Furthermore, I believe it would be commendable if the private and the
public health sectors could really join hands to map out our vision of an
affordable, accessible, equitable and comprehensive health system.
[Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, medical schemes are a vital part of the
health of a nation, particularly where social benefits do not cover health
expenses. Medical schemes should be structured with the interests of the
individual as their focal point. It is to be regretted that in a country
where the vast majority of the population is poor, medical schemes are
mostly unaffordable. With the high rate of unemployment the cost of living
is very high, with expensive medical schemes the cost of health is very
high, and with expensive caskets and funerals the cost of dying is also
very high. The only salvation for the poor lies with the legislature.

The PAC welcomes this Bill, which has been extensively debated in the
portfolio committee and has enjoyed great interest in the hearings from a
wide spectrum of stakeholders. The section of the Bill on reinsurance
proved to be problematic. We believe that reinsurance is in the interest of
patients and should be provided for a reasonable period of about two years,
on condition that there is no possibility of unfair and corrupt practices
by practitioners.

The solvency level and membership size of the scheme are also important
considerations. Medical schemes are also affected by claims fluctuations,
the cost of drugs and the vagaries of our currency. All these factors
affect medical schemes and, ultimately, the victim is the customer who in
moments of ill health is most helpless and most vulnerable. The amending
Bill, we hope, will strengthen the arm of the registrar in administering
medical schemes and protecting members of medical schemes and their
dependants against abuse and medical schemes that do not have the capacity
to meet the vast needs of medical services. We support this Bill as amended
and hope that it will be well received by the House and our nation as a
whole.

Go Modulasetulo wa komiti ya rena, ke kwele ditaba tÅ¡e dibotse. Ke re
sepela gabotse e bile o ipshine, o be o dule gabotse Malaysia. O dirile ka
maatla, bjale ke nako ya go khutÅ¡a. Ke tshepha gore o tla hwetÅ¡a khutÅ¡o
Malaysia. Feela o hlokomele ka gore pula ya gona e na kudu. O tla nyaka
sekepe gore o kgone o rialo. [Lesego]. Feela kua Kuala Lumpur ga go
tshwenye le dikebeke ga di gona, ka gona o tla iketla. [Lesego.] Sepela
gabotse. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[To our chairperson of committees, I have heard the good news. I say
goodbye and enjoy yourself, also stay well in Malaysia. You worked hard,
now is the time to relax. I believe that you will find rest in Malaysia.
But be careful because it is always raining there. You will need a ship to
do so. [Laughter.] But in Kuala Lumpur there is no problem as there are no
criminals, you will relax there. [Laughter.] Goodbye.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the earlier Bill set out to institute and
organise the running of medical schemes by improved action by the
following, namely governance, administration, financial soundness in the
interests of members and via a council and office of the registrar, and
improved supervision and oversight of the medical scheme.

It is understandable that the provisions set out to manage medical schemes
would not be easy, due to its large capacity. The amendments made are,
therefore, accepted. It should always be remembered that amendments to a
Bill do not always mean that the earlier Bill had failed, but rather that
amendments may cater for an improved manner of accomplishing the central
initiative. It is especially agreed upon that there should be no
discrimination on the basis of age for, as an equal people, we are entitled
to an equal representation and are covered by law. This, certainly, ensures
compliance with our national Constitution.

Furthermore, the provision requesting more regular submission of financial
returns would certainly promote our system of checks and balances to be
accomplished in a more thorough and transparent manner. However, a proper
timeframe should be suggested so that medical schemes may have sufficient
time to do so. All amendments made to this Bill appear to inculcate a more
thorough system to oversee the division of medical schemes, as well as
offering beneficiaries of these schemes greater protection. The MF supports
the Medical Schemes Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, indeed, medical funding is a crucial matter all
over the world. It was a crucial issue in the American presidential
election. Medical inflation, year by year, exceeds ordinary inflation,
especially in South Africa.

It is an old strategy to render effective, accessible and affordable
medical service to all. Medical funds are playing a pivotal role. The
crucial requirement for a Bill on medical schemes is to balance the needs
of the consumer, practitioners and the fund. A medical fund should not be a
money-making business where the middleman walks away with the profit. On
the other hand, medical funds are not welfare services subsidising the
industry. Compared to the principal Act, this amending Bill will effect a
great improvement in this regard.

The AEB welcomes greater clarity on the position of beneficiaries. This
will enable medical funds to do more accurate actuarial planning. The
independent evaluation of the proposed contracts with reinsurers by the
registrar must be welcomed to curb the widespread abuse of reinsurance. The
reinsurer may not be a third party, walking away with the biggest piece of
the cake. This Bill will also reduce the costly red tape in administration
which results in unnecessary costs, as the Minister indicated.

The main principle underlying the functioning of a medical scheme is the
principle of cross-subsidisation. This principle could be jeopardised by
adverse selection by medical schemes, and this Bill, with the two
definitions of waiting periods, will curb this unhealthy trend, without
penalising the member unfairly.

Een aspek wat besonder versigtig hanteer sal moet word, is die verbod op
penalisasie as gevolg van ouderdom. [One aspect which will have to be
handled with great care is the prohibition on penalising someone by reason
of their age.]

The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill,
which supersedes all other legislation except the Constitution, stipulates
that differentiation according to objective factors inherent to the
relevant activity shall not be regarded as unfair discrimination. In my
opinion, differentiation according to age of entry into a medical scheme is
just that. We have to make sure that the prohibition on differentiation on
the basis of age does not result in unfair selection against certain funds.

The AEB supports this amending Bill, and hopes that it will improve the
crucial balancing of interests in this very important field.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, the Medical Schemes Amendment Bill is a
relatively new Bill, and the question why an amendment is needed so soon
after implementation begs an answer. The main objectives of the amendment,
amongst others, are purported to be to regulate the practice of
reinsurance, regulate waiting periods and expand the powers of the
registrar.

All this is supposedly in the interests of the consumer. Unfortunately, it
would appear that the service providers are going to be severely prejudiced
by overregulation. It also became quite apparent, during the hearings, that
one company appears to be the target of these amendments - a dangerous
precedent indeed, because the medical schemes industry is about much more
than the practices of one company. However, bearing in mind the increased
burden on the public health sector and that healthy private-public
partnerships are vital to a healthy nation, the DP supports the amendments
in principle, with notable objections around section 29A and section 2O.

The proposed amendments in 29A focus around the issue of waiting periods.
It prejudices most medical schemes and removes a vital protection against
adverse selection. No provision is made to curb voluntary scheme-hopping by
the opportunistic consumer. Medical schemes are held to ransom in the sense
that waiting periods have been drastically reduced, thereby raising the
risk stakes and possibly increasing the claims costs of a medical scheme by
more than 5% in any one year. Suggestions to draft specific criteria
enabling voluntary scheme changes, two-tiered benefits and the introduction
of an annual, limited open enrolment period have been ignored.

Section 2O is so prescriptive that it challenges the constitutionality of
contracts entered into legally. The council has opted to ignore warnings to
err on the side of caution and has left itself open to unnecessary and
expensive litigation. It is also unfortunate that there is very little
acknowledgement of the positive value of legitimate reinsurance to the
consumer.

The ever-growing power of the council and the registrar is of concern. One
of the amendments proposed is that a reinsurance contract entered into by a
medical scheme is not valid unless such contract is approved by the
registrar. Not only does this fall outside the ambit of his work, but it is
quite an onerous and expensive task. It is seriously doubted whether the
council has the capacity and person-power to achieve this, and the question
of who accepts financial responsibility in the case of delays remains
unanswered. Furthermore, while the rationale is sound, that is, to protect
the interests of the scheme and its members, the method of achieving this
is improper, and the general thinking of medical schemes is that this
activity falls within the ambit of the Financial Services Board.
In conclusion, the proposed amendment to the Medical Schemes Act has far-
reaching implications for all concerned. It is sincerely hoped that the
council and the Department of Health are not shooting themselves in the
foot by rushing this amendment through before having properly consulted all
the relevant stakeholders. [Applause.]

Dr S C CWELE: Madam Speaker, molweni bahlobo bami ... [Hallo, my friends
...]

Hon MEMBERS: Molo! [Hallo!]

Dr S C CWELE: Madam Speaker, in supporting this Bill, the ANC would like to
thank all the stakeholders, including the minority parties, who contributed
and co-operated in the process of public hearings and deliberations, which
resulted in this improved amending Bill before this House.

For the first time in this Parliament, everyone, including the minority
parties, except Dr Rabinowitz, is agreed that the ANC leads.
[Interjections.] The ANC leads in ensuring that the interests of the
ordinary members of medical aid schemes are always protected.
[Interjections.] The ANC leads in ensuring that we have a vibrant and
lively medical aid scheme industry that has sound and accountable
governance structures. [Interjections.]

I singled out Dr Rabinowitz because we honestly believe that she did not
represent the interests of the IFP supporters. [Interjections.] Her
behaviour during the deliberations of the committee was very disturbing.
She kept on hopping in and out of the committee and telephoning different
players in the industry. But, even that process did not help, because every
time she came back, she came back even more confused. [Applause.]

We take cognisance of the concerns raised by hon Mike Ellis and the New NP.
[Interjections.] But the core of the problem is not the instability within
the industry. We believe that the core of the problem lies in the
governance of the medical aid scheme industry by the trustees. That is why
we have increases in administration costs instead of decreases in the
premiums. That is why we have these incidents of inappropriate reinsurance.
All we need is to make sure that members of the board of trustees are
accountable to members of medical aid schemes. They should stop flying all
over the world and coming back to make inappropriate decisions on behalf of
the members.

My input will focus on the concept of waiting periods for members who are
joining a medical scheme. I will deal with the rationale behind the waiting
periods, the unintended problems that we have encountered and the remedies
that we have implemented. Members may remember that the survival of medical
schemes depends on risk pooling, cross-subsidisation and the building of
adequate reserves to ensure liquidity. The waiting periods are then the
mechanism of protecting these schemes against some members who elect to
join only when they are sick, that is, adverse selecting.

The Minister has advanced that there are two types of waiting period, that
is, the general waiting period to ensure that one builds up the reserves,
and the condition-specific waiting period for specific diseases which
normally result in recurrent and very high claims. The waiting periods, in
turn, must be carefully regulated in order to prevent discrimination and
abuse by the schemes.

The problem with the current legislation is that it waives the imposition
of waiting periods only in respect of people who join another medical
scheme because of a change of employment. This Bill now includes protection
for those members who involuntarily change medical schemes, as in the case
of retrenchment or where the decision to change the medical scheme is taken
by the employer. We are adamant that members should not be discriminated
against in those instances. The Bill also provides for protection of
members who are not adversely selecting, but want to change their medical
scheme because they are unhappy with the management or the administration
of the scheme.

The Bill was amended to ensure certainty in the industry by removing the
waiting periods from the regulations and extensively detailing them in the
Bill. In this respect, we support this Bill. We feel that this Bill is
constitutionally sound and broadly protects the interests of the industry
and, more specifically, the members of the medical aid scheme. We support
this Bill. [Applause.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Somlomo wePhalamende laseMzansi Afrika, ngisukumela
ukubonga ukuthi nalabo ababenokukhononda kancane nje ngalo mThetho nezinto
esizenenezela kuwo ukuze sikhusele izidingo zalabo okwakukudala
becindezelwe, benganakekelwe futhi bexhashazwa, nokho-ke nabo
sebeyavumelana nathi ngalo mbono wokuthi kukhona izinto obekufanele
sizifake kulo mThetho ukuze phela senze lokho esavotelelwa khona uma siza
lapha ePhalamende.

Kodwa nje okungimangalisile, okusangithusile namanje - ngiyethemba ukuthi
ubaba uShenge ulalele - hawu, umbono kaRabinowitz, ungithuse ngempela!
Angicabangi nje mina ukuthi njengoba silapha, lokhu abekusho bekungumbono
we-Inkatha Freedom Party nalabo abayilandelayo. Usimangalisile-ke thina
ngoba ikakhulukazi ukhulumele onxiwankulu kanti thina sicabanga ukuthi into
okufanele siyenze ukuthi sikhusele abantu bakithi. Mhlawumbe into iqembu le-
IFP elizoke liyibhekisise leyo.

Mayelana nodadewethu-ke uDudley, cha impela anginakho engingakusho ngoba
phela angeke ngiphume ngiyomkhankasela ukuze athole amalunga amaningi azoza
lapha ePhalamende ukuze akwazi ukuya kuwo wonke amakomidi. Nakho lokho
akushilo ukuthi uHulumeni uthathe umsebenzi wabo ngokunakekela izidingo
zabantu balapha, nalokho angikwazi nami ukuthi kusho ukuthini. Mhlawumbe
uzoke athi ukungichazela uma sesisuke lapha. Ngiyabonga kakhulu ukuthi
ngempela, ngempela lokhu esikwenzayo kuzowasimamisa ama-medical aid scheme.
(Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker of the South African Parliament, I
would like to say thank you even to those who complained about this Bill
and the things we amended in it to protect the needs of the people who were
previously oppressed, not cared for and even abused. They now accept the
idea that there are things we should have included in this Bill so that we
can fulfil those things we were voted in for, as we came to this
Parliament.

What has surprised and still shocks me - I hope father Shenge is listening
- Hey! Rabinowitz's opinion has really shocked me! I do not think that as
we are here, what she said was the opinion of the IFP and its followers.
She surprised us because basically she spoke on behalf of the capitalists,
while we think that what we need to do is protect our people. Maybe this is
the thing that the IFP will take another look at.

Concerning my sister Dudley, I have nothing to say, because I cannot go out
and campaign for her so that she can win many seats in Parliament that will
enable her to be represented in all committees. I do not know what she
meant by saying that the Government has taken their job by caring for the
needs of the people of this country. Maybe she will explain to me after
this meeting. I am thankful for the fact that what we are doing, will
improve medical aid schemes.]
Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                           MENTAL HEALTH CARE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker and hon members, today we reach yet
another milestone in our quest to provide a better life and better health
for all our South African citizens. Before us we have a piece of
legislation which takes a further step towards realising our people's
constitutional and human rights - especially the rights of people with
disabilities - and which promotes a full and comprehensive approach to
health and health care.

I must emphasise at the onset that mental health is as important as
physical health to the overall wellbeing of individuals, communities and
societies. I view improved mental health as one of the central objectives
of our work, and I know this view is widely shared in the Department of
Health.

It is most appropriate and even fortunate that we are discussing this piece
of legislation at this point in time. Even though it has taken over four
years of consultation, drafting and redrafting to reach this stage, the
timing is excellent indeed. Through the advocacy of the World Health
Organisation, the year 2001, as we all know, has been observed as a focus
year for mental health and this aspect of health has received the highest
international priority. By passing this legislation as 2001 draws to a
close, we will capture, for years to come, a practical embodiment of the
spirit and values that underpin this focus on mental health.

Members may recall that on 7 April this year, South Africa joined countries
around the globe in celebrating World Health Day with its theme of mental
health and its message, which was ``stop exclusion, dare to care''. Many
members will also remember how bells all over the country tolled at noon on
that day to help us to ring out hope for mental health. In May I attended
the World Health Assembly and participated in the round-table discussions
dealing with mental health.

On 4 October, the World Health Organisation report for the year 2001 was
released. The theme of this year's report is indeed mental health. This
report, under the title Mental Health: WHO understanding, WHO hope, puts
mental health under the microscope. It concludes that, given the massive
burden of suffering resulting from mental health problems, and given the
extent of our knowledge about preventing and treating mental illness,
countries of the world have not done nearly enough. Sadly, this is
especially true of developing countries.

With regard to legislation, the report notes that nearly a quarter of
member countries have no mental health legislation at all. A further one
fifth have legislation dating back over 40 years. Though our current
legislation is only 20 years old, I know that members will agree that it is
way out of date and change is therefore urgently needed. Fortunately, I can
confidently say that the Bill before us captures all the main
recommendations of the World Health Organisation report in terms of service
provision and human rights. This legislation indeed cements a truly
memorable and remarkable year for the promotion of mental health in our
country.

The primary objectives of this Bill are, firstly, to ensure that
appropriate care, treatment and rehabilitation are provided at all levels
of the health service. Emphasis has changed fundamentally from the
custodial approach of the past to one that encourages the community care of
people needing mental health services. We have taken the view that,
wherever possible, mental health services should be integrated into general
health care.

A second major objective is to safeguard the rights of people with mental
disabilities. Members may suggest that we already have a Constitution which
does just this and therefore we are merely duplicating the law. However, if
we were to examine each clause on human rights in the Bill, members would
see how the basic constitutional framework is expanded upon and used to
entrench specific rights of people with mental illness and intellectual
disabilities. At the same time, we are legislating the main principles of
the UN General Assembly Resolution of 1991 on the protection of persons
with mental illness and the improvement of mental health care.

It is important to note that we are entrenching rights not only through the
clause dealing explicitly with patients' rights, but also through special
administrative procedures which must be followed when dealing with people
who do not or cannot provide their consent to care. From a rights
perspective, the Bill is somewhat complex because we have to balance two
sets of rights. On the one hand, we have to ensure the protection of people
with mental disabilities, but we also have to protect the rights of the
public in instances where their safety may be compromised by a person with
mental disability.

Let me emphasise that the vast majority of people with mental illness are
not aggressive and not a danger to anyone. However, the law must deal with
the exceptions. I do not wish to deny that some people with mental
disabilities can and do become aggressive and dangerous. I believe the
required balancing of rights is successfully achieved in this legislation.

Let me now outline some of the main differences between the existing Act
and the Bill before us. In doing so, I will try to illustrate why it has
been necessary to draw up totally new legislation rather than merely
introduce amendments.

This Bill is termed the Mental Health Care Bill, in contrast to the current
Mental Health Act. The reason for this is that there are many aspects of
medical health that are not dealt with in this legislation. For example,
the prevention of mental illness and the promotion of mental health are not
covered. Of course, this was also true of the existing Act which has, in
our view, always been misnamed.
Secondly, we have introduced a chapter on patients' rights. I have talked
about this already so I will not dwell on it. I do need to make the point
that even today people with mental illness are badly discriminated against,
stigmatised and abused. This legislation is an essential element in our
ongoing efforts to change attitudes towards mental illness.

Thirdly, this Bill provides a new professional category, the mental health
care practitioner. We need to do this in order to make optimal use of all
suitably qualified personnel in our country. By eliminating some of the
fallacies and distinctions between the health professions, we can create
better access to mental health services, especially for the poor and the
historically disadvantaged, particularly those in the rural areas.

Fourthly, we have moved responsibility for clinical decisions away from the
judiciary to the clinicians. In doing this, we have also made provision to
set up mental health review boards that would protect patients against
arbitrary and unnecessary committal and retention in institutions. Each
board will consist of between three and five people, including a mental
health care practitioner, a person with knowledge of the law and a person
from the community.

Fifthly, the Bill introduces a 72-hour assessment period that must be
utilised prior to involuntary committal. This can take place at a general
hospital and will avoid a number of unnecessary admissions. It will also
help overcome problems of stigmatisation.

Sixthly, provisions are made for involuntary community care. This will go a
long way towards meeting one of the Bill's objectives, which is to provide
care in the least restrictive environment, while at the same time ensuring
that care is provided where a person needs treatment but is unable or
unwilling to give consent.

The seventh major difference from the existing Act is the period for
reviewing the continued hospitalisation of involuntary patients, state
patients and mentally ill prisoners. The new periods for review will be
after the first six months and then every year following this. At present
in certain instances the period between reviews can be as long as five
years.

The differences between this new Bill and the existing Act lie not only in
what has been added, but also in what has been discarded. Some clauses have
been excluded simply because they are redundant. More significantly,
however, there are provisions that we have scrapped because they are
blatantly unconstitutional. For example, the infamous section 66A, which
cloaked psychiatric hospitals in secrecy by virtually prohibiting the media
from reporting on them, has been removed. This does not mean that patient
confidentiality can now be infringed upon, but rather that we recognise the
right to information and believe openness about the running of institutions
will help to improve the situation for mentally disabled people.

At the international level this has been the year of advocacy for mental
health. In South Africa I believe that we have more than played our part in
helping to raise the issues and profile of mental health. But we still have
a most significant step to take, a step that will change the lives of
people with mental disabilities and help to improve our country's mental
health status. It is our collective responsibility to pass this legislation
and, in so doing, to advance human rights and better health for our nation
and our citizens. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, mental health has acquired the label of
being the poor relative of health services in South Africa. One of the main
reasons for this has been that mental illness has been poorly understood
and that the domain of care lay with highly specialised individuals.

The Mental Health Care Bill has been long overdue and it is quite ironic
that we debate this Bill in this month of October, which is deemed to be
mental health awareness month. Mental health should be integral to a
generic health service. If we can integrate it as such, then there will
really be no need to set aside a month to raise awareness around the issues
of mental health.

The title of the Bill goes a long way to destigmatise mental illness. The
main aim of the Bill is the care, treatment and rehabilitation of persons
with mental illness. It also offers such persons good protection of their
human rights and we welcome the move to deinstitutionalise rehabilitated
individuals and to provide care for them in family settings. The provision
to establish review boards is beneficial to both the mental health services
user and his family.

It is well known that many of the apartheid concepts were spawned by the
German nationalist psychiatric philosophy that ``life devoid of value'' or
``inferior stock'' justified the mass oppression and killing of
individuals. Tens of thousands of black South Africans were incarcerated in
the so-called special psychiatric institutions where they were subjected to
ECT against their will. They were treated so atrociously that the media,
decades later, dubbed these actions ``mental genocide''.

When apartheid ended, in 1994, a full inquiry into malpractice and racism
in psychiatric hospitals was held. The report, published in 1996, found
that a gross violation of human rights had occurred. Death certificates
were falsified to camouflage the real cause of death as being the result of
the inhumane practices of ECT. It is sincerely hoped that this new
legislation will never again allow people to have ECT against their will,
nor be subjected to deep sleep therapy or have unnecessary drugs
administered to them outside the parameter of consent. To this end, it is
hoped that this will be one of the main functions of the proposed review
boards.

Mental health has been shrouded in fear and hostility. It is my considered
opinion that the paradigm shift is happening too slowly, especially in view
of the impact that crime, violence and HIV/Aids are having on the daily
lives of ordinary South Africans.
While this piece of legislation is welcomed, there are some areas which
need attention. Firstly, the Mental Health Care Bill does not make adequate
provision for community mental health. In view of the recent terrorist
attacks in the USA, this is a serious area for consideration. Many of the
persons who viewed the television footage will, in all probability, suffer
from post-traumatic stress disorders, perhaps develop a fear of flying, or
a fear of enclosed spaces or heights, or some related illness. These kinds
of mental illnesses are curable and preventable and an ongoing awareness
and prevention community mental health programme will address them. Funding
of prevention and treatment programmes needs to be prioritised and budgeted
for.

It is all very well to have the Bill, but for it to be translated into
action, police personnel need to be trained to handle a mentally ill
patient who may be in their care and custody. Provision for the transport
of these patients from one facility to another has to be made. Presently,
many mentally ill patients are transported in a rather inhumane manner - in
the back of police vehicles.

Psychiatric facilities and care and rehabilitation centres need to be
upgraded and made user-friendly. Some of them are so neglected, they look
like prisons. Furthermore, a national postdischarge support programme needs
to be implemented. Patients who are discharged from a psychiatric
institution, where all their choices have been made for them, into the
community where they can live as free agents, are vulnerable, and they are
in need of ongoing support to ensure successful transition. Above all,
strengthening the capacity of provinces to translate the Mental Health Care
Bill policies into workable strategies is the starting point, with the
ultimate goal being to merge mental health with general health.

In conclusion, persons with mental illnesses have high levels of
unemployment, reduced self-esteem, a lower income and fewer social
networks. Education of employers and the community at large will go a long
way to reduce the stigma, fear and hostility towards people with mental
illnesses. The DP supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Dr A S NKOMO: Madam Speaker, the ANC supports this Bill because it
transports us from the primitive chaos of the pre-industrial era, described
so vividly by Charles Dickens, to the caring ethos of the period after Alma-
Ata. In other words, it moves us from cruel incarcerative management to
caring compassion.

I am delighted to report that this Bill was widely canvassed and accepted
by all stakeholders. I am even happier to report that the Bill was accepted
unanimously by all the parties. This was a first for our committee, to have
this kind of unanimity. I do not know whether it was ``good riddance'' or
``farewell'' because, inshallah, when members next meet here yours truly
will be on distant shores.

The committee convened hearings and received favourable inputs and
suggestions from experts, men and women, on how the committee could further
strengthen the Bill. As a result, various technical and a few substantive
amendments were made. For example, the committee felt very strongly that
persons who are mentally ill and can harm themselves and others, and as a
result are taken into custody by the police for protection, should be
transferred to a designated health facility within 24 hours, to reduce the
risk of injury or possible human rights violations.

Mental health has been the Cinderella of health, requiring more attention,
more resources and more appropriate legislation. This Bill is therefore not
legislating for some obscure and minor disorder, but addresses the needs of
millions of people. It has huge individual, social and economic
consequences. Therefore, it becomes essential that we see health as a state
of physical, mental and social wellbeing, as without this approach, we will
never deal effectively with illness, disease and disability.

Science now shows us conclusively that poor mental health impacts on poor
physical health and vice versa. The World Health Organisation estimates
that around 450 million people around the world suffer from some mental or
behavioural disorder, yet only a small proportion receive even the most
basic treatment. This is exacerbated because people are victimised and
stigmatised for their illnesses, as the Minister and the hon Sandy Kaylan
have attested just now.

Mental health problems are not restricted to class, race, economic status
and so on. Estimates show us that around 10% of adults are suffering from a
mental health problem at any one point. During an entire lifetime around
25% of people develop one or more mental or behavioural problem. Studies
done on people attending primary health care centres, including in South
Africa, have found that around 20% to 30% of attendees were suffering from
a mental disorder of sufficient severity to warrant professional
intervention.

I am pleased to say that the Medunsa School of Public Health is currently
one of the sites being used in a worldwide epidemiological study to
establish the prevalence of mental disorders. Once this research is
completed, we will be able to say with much more confidence exactly what
the problem is in South Africa and plan accordingly.

Having said that mental health problems are universal, it would not be true
to say that all problems affect all groups in the same way. There are
obvious vulnerabilities and risk factors which result in fairly significant
differences. Poverty, with its related problems of unemployment, low
educational levels, deprivation and homelessness, is a major risk factor
for the development of mental disorders, especially disorders such as
depression and anxiety. The increased risk in poor areas results in twice
as many disorders as in richer areas. The cost of the disorders is also
related to socioeconomic status. This has a lot to do with the ``treatment
gap'' between rich and poor.

Two particular additional risk factors for mental health in South Africa
are violence and HIV/Aids. Both as a result of past violence which happened
during the apartheid era and ongoing violence, many South Africans suffer
from post-traumatic stress disorder, which results directly from both
physical and emotional trauma. HIV/Aids has a huge psychological effect on
the people infected, their families and their communities as a whole.

Given the rising prevalence, it is difficult to estimate the economic cost
of mental health problems in South Africa. Research needs to be done here
or in other developing countries to inform us. Mental illness is a massive
problem. We have to stop exclusion, we have to dare to care.

The committee has carefully considered this legislation and concluded that
we are dealing with a very important area of health care which will be
significantly assisted by passing this Bill. I commend this Bill.
[Applause.]

Dr O BALOYI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon members, the Bill we are
debating today will repeal the Mental Health Act, 1973, now considered to
be outdated and in part unconstitutional.

The role of the state in providing mental health services is outlined in
this Bill. It provides for accessibility and integration of mental health
services at the various levels of health care provision. The Bill enables
equitable and efficient provision of care, treatment and rehabilitation for
the population, making this affordable within available resources.

The Department of Health's annual report for 2000-2001 provides some
information with regard to mental health, for example that five out of ten
chronic disabilities are mental disabilities, 1% to 3% of any population
will need hospitalisation for mental health problems, eight out of ten
countries devote less than 1% of their health budgets to mental health and,
in South Africa, there are 17Â 000 psychiatric hospital beds in the public
sector.

It is clear that other fundamentals must be in place in order for this Bill
to have the intended impact. We are encouraged to note that the Department
of Health has set itself a goal of integrating mental health into general
health care wherever possible and treating as many people as possible
within the communities where they live, working together with NGOs.

With better deployment of health personnel who are appropriately trained in
mental health through all the levels of care, it should, for example, be
possible to move certain patients from psychiatric hospitals to community
daycare centres. With the support of health professionals, some patients
may even be moved to their families for better care.

Notwithstanding the good Bill that the Mental Health Care Bill is, I think
adequate human resources are required to provide all the services envisaged
in this Bill. The challenge for the provision of psychiatric specialists
for instance, in this country, is identified in the August 2000 report on
postgraduate training of medical doctors in South Africa. Here, in this
document, we learn that there are 474 specialist psychiatrists in this
country. Only 163 of them are in the Public Service, the rest being in the
private sector. This gives the country a norm of 1,18 psychiatric
specialists to a population of 100 000. Another factor of importance is
that specialisation of nurse-training in psychiatry is a welcome move, and
as will be seen in this mental health care document, mental health care
practitioners are fully supported in this Bill.

The IFP supports this Bill and, in particular, we support the formation of
mental health review boards and what they can achieve closest to the
people. It is encouraging to note that the section in the old Act which
prohibited reporting on conditions of psychiatric institutions, has been
omitted. This leaves room for transparency. In other words, the performance
of psychiatric hospitals can be monitored and evaluated in a transparent
manner. All in all, this is a very good Bill, and the IFP supports it.
[Applause.]

Dr S J GOUS: Madam Speaker, our Constitution places an obligation on this
state to provide access to health care. This would naturally and obviously
include mental health. Our Constitution also prohibits unfair
discrimination against any person and this would include mentally ill
patients.

Historically, mental health, and for that matter illness, calls up a very
negative perception and image. One can think of mentally ill patients
chained like animals in the Middle Ages, incarcerated, isolated,
malnourished and mistreated. We can even recall incidents where mental
illness has been misused for political purposes.

Despite all these negative perceptions, there have been significant
advances in the treatment and handling of patients with mental illness. All
these issues had to be taken up in a new Mental Health Care Bill, and what
the hon members see in front of them today is the result of this process.

Firstly, a mentally ill patient must always be treated with the necessary
respect and human dignity. In other words, his human rights have to be
respected. At the same time, the right of the community and society must
also be addressed. The mentally ill patient also has to be integrated into
the primary health care system, backed up by the secondary, tertiary and
specialist mental health institutions.

The legislation also had to conform to international standards and all the
aforementioned, which led to the significant new definitions and changes in
the approach to mental health care as we know it. In this regard, the care
of mentally ill patients within society, as opposed to long-term
hospitalisation, also had to be accommodated. As an overriding principle,
one can state that mentally ill patients must be treated as normal patients
with all the rights any normal human being has, and his illness must be
treated in the least restrictive and intrusive manner. We believe that, for
the first time, all these issues are being addressed and, in fact, there is
a whole chapter in the Bill that deals with the rights of the mentally ill
patient.

Another new concept is the so-called mental health review board. These
boards have to act in the interests of the patient and have to consider
aspects such as compulsory hospitalisation and detention and balance them
with the patient's rights to treatment and to have control over their own
destiny.

There are many new definitions and concepts which mental health care
providers will have to get used to. Many other issues such as the voluntary
mental health care user, the role of the SA Police Services, especially
regarding emergencies, transport, custody, constraining measures available
to them, the respect of human dignity and unfair discrimination, as well as
confidentiality, are all addressed in this legislation.

In conclusion, we believe that this legislation must realise the promise of
transparency and an improved process of decision-making. It must further
the public's understanding of mental illness, control the scope of the
state's powers, promote proper discretion in policy creation and provide
for accountability for source allocation. After all, it will not matter how
good or bad the legislation is that we produce. If it fails
administratively, and there are far too many examples of this, it will be a
total waste of time and effort.

We must also accept that this is new and groundbreaking legislation. Of
course, there will be some unintended consequences and mistakes. We
therefore urge that if any of these should materialise, we should bring
this legislation back for amendment sooner rather than later so that it can
be finetuned.

Lastly, we must also accept that the affordability of this legislation
might put a damper on all our good intentions. Despite these reservations,
we think it is an honest attempt on the part of the Government to regulate
the sphere of mental health.

Our appreciation must be extended to Prof Freeman and his team, whose
tireless efforts and hard work resulted in this legislation. It has been a
positive experience and a pleasure to be part of this and we shall support
the Bill.
I just want to conclude with a quotation:


  There is no genius without a touch of madness.

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Mr Chairperson, I cannot agree more with Comrade Gous
when he said that ``indeed mental health patients were treated like
animals''. This is what we are trying to rectify here. With regard to hon
Kalyan - is she in the House? -I think what we are doing here this
afternoon is that we are sending a message, and a very strong one, of
awareness to the people out there. Are we not doing that? Definitely we
are.

The past ideological framework for mental health has been a combination of
racial discrimination, paternalism and institutionalism. Mental health
services have been vertical, fragmented and have over-emphasised curative
services. But this is all going to change. Why? Listen to this. This is
because of this Government which has given ... [Interjections.] Yes, why
are they saying ``ha''? [Interjections.] It is because this Government has
given mental health more attention, due to the wider awareness amongst
activist politicians who came up with an ANC health plan, and the more
articulate lobbying by mental health professionals. The department and Prof
Freeman, the man over there, must be congratulated on tabling a sterling
piece of legislation that is progressive and will stand the test of time.
[Interjections.]

The old Mental Health Act has been criticised for not protecting the rights
of patients who are detained involuntarily and for protecting mental health
institutions from public scrutiny. There has been an acute lack of mental
health promotion and psychiatric therapeutic programmes in prisons - I have
experienced that - this in spite of evidence of a number of prisoners with
mental health problems in prisons. Normally only individuals complaining of
psychiatric problems were referred. This Bill makes it compulsory for the
head of a prison to ensure that a prisoner who may be in need of mental
health care receives the necessary treatment, care and rehabilitation
services.

The Bill also provides for the mentally ill prisoner to receive the
appropriate training in the appropriate facility. Appropriate measures are
in place to ensure that prisoners who abscond are taken into custody by the
police - the hon Kalyan should listen to me - who are empowered to use the
necessary precautions to apprehend the prisoner. Another first is that of
the treatment running concurrently with the sentence. Once a prisoner's
sentence has elapsed, he is then entitled to be released or receive further
treatment in an appropriate facility.

In the past, state patients were detained in psychiatric hospitals for an
unduly long period of time with many of these patients not being in any
therapeutic programmes. This changes to every six months, with the
introduction of periodic reports on the mental condition of an
institutionalised patient through review processes. These reports are to
stipulate the full treatment programme, merits for granting leave, and the
discharge of the state patient. To ensure transparency, these reports must
be made available to the relevant parties.
Facts show us that persons suffering from mental illness can improve and
contribute to society. To prepare state patients for integration back into
the community, provision is made for leave of absence to be provided from
the health facility. I want to assure hon members that leave will only be
granted once the review panel is of the opinion that a state patient has
made the necessary recovery. Terms and conditions for leave are to be
determined by the director-general, and not as it used to be in the past
where it was done by a magistrate with no medical background. Those days
are gone. Where the terms are violated, a state patient has to return to
the health facility immediately.

The most difficult part of the Bill relates to interventions by the SA
Police Service. It was difficult for us to deal with this section given our
background, that is, detention without trial, abuse while in custody, and
so on. Where a mentally ill person is in danger of causing harm to himself
or to others, the police can be called upon to intervene and ensure that
that person reaches a designated health facility within 24 hours. The
committee insisted on a timeframe of 24 hours to reduce the risk of injury
or human rights abuses.

In this regard, I want to urge the Ministers of Health and of Safety and
Security to collaborate to ensure that members of the police receive the
necessary training to deal with people with mental illness within a human
rights framework. I also want to suggest that the Minister should consider
Canada as an example of a country with the best practices in this regard.

I want to say goodbye to Dr Nkomo and thank him for the sterling work that
he has done, especially within the last two weeks, in processing these two
pieces of legislation. He has done a good job. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Because of the special
circumstances surrounding the hon Dr Nkomo, I allowed 10 extra seconds.

Mr J T MASEKA: Chairperson and hon members, this Bill very importantly
promotes and safeguards the human rights of people with mental disabilities
and balances these rights with those of the public in circumstances where
their rights may be infringed. It also ensures that appropriate care,
treatment and rehabilitation services are made available to people with
mental problems.

It is important to note the role of the state in providing mental health
care services. This Bill correctly provides for much greater accessibility
and integration of mental health services at the various levels of health
care provision than is presently the case. These rights and duties include
the right to respect and human dignity. This impacts on the consent to
care, treatment, rehabilitation and admission to health establishments, and
prevention of unfair discrimination, exploitation and abuse, as well as the
determinations concerning mental health status.

It is important to note the confidentiality limitations on intimate adult
relationships, their right to be represented and to have full knowledge of
their rights. Furthermore, the Bill rehabilitates the mental health care
environment, providing for the best possible health care, treatment and
rehabilitation.

The inclusion of a chapter dealing with patients' rights is critically
important, as people with mental disability are still discriminated
against, and not protected sufficiently by the law. The introduction of
mental health care practitioners, far greater accessibility to various
mental health services and the addition of mental health review boards also
protect patients from arbitrary or unnecessary committal and retention.

The Bill rightly protects ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order, hon members.

Mr J T MASEKA: Chairperson, the UDM therefore supports the Bill.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairman, hon Minister, colleagues, this legislation which
seeks to ensure that appropriate care, treatment and rehabilitation
services are made available to people with mental health problems, in line
with the primary health care approach, appears to have practical relevance
to everyday clinical decision-making and promotes greater transparency. For
these reasons, the ACDP would have voted in favour of the Mental Health
Care Bill. We are, however, aware that communities have very real concerns
which have not been addressed in this legislation.

Although the Bill promotes the human rights of people with disabilities,
which is commendable, its efforts to balance these with the rights of the
public are unsuccessful. When it comes to state patients, communities are
expected to take the full risk of patient rehabilitation, in that their
safety and wellbeing is given no consideration whatsoever.

One mother, for instance, whose son was murdered in cold blood, faces the
situation where the murderer, who did not even have to stand trial as his
use of drugs ensured that he was not in his right mind at the time of the
murder, can be granted leave of absence, or even discharged, at any time
without prior notice to herself or anyone else. This mother believes that
not only is her life, and the lives of her family, in danger, but also the
entire community. She lives daily with the worry that this conman and
murderer will be allowed back into the community without any warning.

The ACDP moved amendments which addressed these concerns in the portfolio
committee, but in spite of broad support in the committee, especially from
those who have actually worked with mentally ill patients, and know first-
hand the deception involved, even the agreed minor concession with regard
to leave of absence has been left out. Therefore, this Bill was not
accepted unanimously; the amended version was.

We call again on the Minister and the department seriously to consider the
need for the families of victims to be given the opportunity to appeal the
leave of absence and discharge of state patients who pose a threat to
society, or, at the very least, be informed of such decisions. This is of
great concern to the community and the ACDP.

Ms S K MNUMZANA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, we are replacing
the old Mental Health Act, because it was repressive and discriminatory
against our people. Therefore, we are introducing new legislation which
promotes care and treatment, and recognises the rights of patients.

This Bill protects the rights of mentally ill patients, within the context
of a human rights framework and the Constitution. The Bill briefly outlines
various objectives, such as the regulation of the mental health care
environment; provides for the best possible mental health care treatment
and rehabilitation that available resources can afford; promotes equity,
efficiency and best practice; co-ordinates access to provide mental health
care within general health care services; and crucially stipulates the
rights and obligations of mental health care users and the obligations of
health care providers.

One of the problems our mental health care institutions have been burdened
with is the large numbers of people that must be seen at tertiary level,
and this results in pressure. Therefore, Chapter II, clause 4 of the Bill
clearly outlines the implementation of policies and measures to be taken by
the state to address this issue.

The Bill states clearly that the Minister and provincial heads must provide
designated health facilities to ensure the provision of mental health care,
treatment and rehabilitation services at primary, secondary and tertiary
levels and at health establishments referred to in clause 5(1), which one
of my colleagues will be dealing with. Also in the Bill is a move towards
treatment and rehabilitation services in communities.

The Bill emphasises the rights and interests of mental health care users.
Our mental health care professionals must be trained within the human
rights framework to recognise that not only should medical treatment be
considered a basic right for people with mental illness, but also that
these people should be protected from potential dangers.

The legislation encourages transparency by the institutions and allows for
public scrutiny, which was not the case in the old Act. Users will be
protected from exploitation and from the abuse of degrading treatment,
because the heads of health care facilities must take the necessary steps
to ensure that abuse does not occur. Also, all mental institutions are now
required by law to submit periodic review reports on the mental status of
their users, their long-term and short-term treatment goals, and
discharges. These are practical steps to prevent the abuse we have
experienced in the past.

The controversial aspect in the Bill is the limitation on intimate adult
relationships. Sexual contact may only be prohibited if the user's ability
to give consent is diminished. This is in line with international policy.
Another first is the right of the user to legal representation, and the
state must provide the necessary legal services, especially in the case of
discrimination.

This Bill deals with these complex issues in a very substantial manner. The
department has introduced an excellent piece of legislation that this
Government can be proud of, and I think we need to acknowledge that. We
say: ``Health for all, mental health care for all'' within the context of
the Bill of Rights and the Constitution.

Ha re di otle mohatla' kgwiti hona mona, hobane nako e se e lekane
motinyane. ANC e tshehetsa Molao ona. [Ditlatse.] [Let us stop right here
because time is no longer on our side. The ANC supports this Bill.
[Applause.]]

Dr M S MOGOBA:  Chairperson, mental disability, like physical disability,
is part and parcel of all nations. The way a nation treats a mentally
disabled people reflects the level of civilisation of that nation. All of
us have experienced the problem of mental disability in our homes,
communities and places of work. Although we could all be well today, we
could get ill tomorrow.

I have vivid recollections of Dimitri Tsafendas, who assassinated the prime
minister of South Africa in this very House. He was declared white, and
thereafter black; normal, and thereafter insane. I personally had a glimpse
of him on Robben Island when he had lost his whiteness, and later also his
sanity. He ended his life in a mental institution.

The aim of this Bill is to provide for the care, treatment and
rehabilitation of persons who are mentally ill. It prescribes procedures
for diagnosis and admission of people who are mentally afflicted, and
ensures conditions of proper care for these people and their property.

In accordance with our Constitution, the Bill ensures that mental health
services are provided without any form of discrimination. A complicating
factor is the cultural and religious diversity in our country. Traditional
healers have cared for people with mental disabilities for centuries. Many
people today strongly believe in traditional healers. Even if they cannot
consult them during the day, they would consult them at night.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Please carry on, hon member. I
was just trying to quieten the House. [Laughter.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, I was still talking about consulting
traditional healers at night. It is our strong view that the Bill does not
go far enough in recognising the role of traditional healers and
prescribing that all Western institutions such as hospitals should be
integrated and co-ordinated so that traditional ways of life can also be
accommodated. The holistic approach is necessary in order to remove the
label of inferiority and to destroy the stigma associated with mental
illness. [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, we are all aware of the complexities that
accompanied the drafting of this Bill. The five years taken should not be
viewed as incompetence on the part of persons appointed to draft the Bill,
but rather as the working years it took to achieve the most efficient Bill
to deal with mental health.

Mental disabilities present themselves within our population. Because
mental patients are part of society, they too are represented by the
national Constitution and therefore entitled to the appropriate care,
treatment and rehabilitation services that this Bill sets out to provide.
Carefully structured and upholding our Constitution, the Bill also sets out
to promote and safeguard the rights of people with mental disabilities.

The provisions put in place to regulate the mental health care environment
appear to deal with the above adequately, and it is now hoped that these
provisions will be strictly adhered to in order to attain these goals. The
differentiation of rights and obligations of mental health care users and
providers certainly provides for direction and clarification as to their
position, powers and authority. Further, the regulations regarding access
to and provision of mental health care will provide for a system detailing
the allocation of these services. However, it would be interesting to note
the criteria used in establishing this regulatory system.

Noting the incompetence of some mentally ill persons to manage their
estates, it is comforting to note the provisions made that govern the way
these are to be dealt with by a court of law. The MF supports the Mental
Health Care Bill. [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, persoonlik is ek met groot dankbaarheid
vervul toe ek hierdie wetsontwerp bestudeer het. Die lot van mense met
geestesiektes is 'n saak waarmee ek uiteraard in 22 jaar in die bediening
heelwat te doen gekry het. Dit is 'n lot wat 'n mens aangryp, veral omdat
daar in die samelewing veel groter deernis bestaan vir mense met
liggaamlike siektes as vir diÃ© wat geestelik siek is. Hierdie soms
uitgeworpenes in ons samelewing verdien inderdaad spesiale aandag.

Die doelwit om te verseker dat gepaste sorg, behandeling en
rehabilitasiedienste aan hulle verskaf word, is bewonderenswaardig, asook
die doelwit om hul menseregte, maar veral hul menswaardigheid, te beskerm.
Uiteraard kan 'n wet van 1973 nie meer aan bogenoemde behoeftes voldoen
nie, en die AEB is van oortuiging dat hierdie wetsontwerp juis dÃ¡Ã¡rin slaag
en wil dit van harte steun. Die volgende innovasies word veral verwelkom.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairman, I personally was filled with great gratitude
when I studied this Bill. The lot of people with mental illnesses is a
matter with which I obviously had much contact during the 22 years that I
was in the ministry of religion. It is a fate that touches one, especially
because in society there is far greater empathy for people with physical
diseases than for those who are mentally ill. These people who are
sometimes outcasts in our society indeed deserve special attention.

The objective to ensure that they are provided with appropriate care,
treatment and rehabilitation services is admirable, as is the objective to
protect their human rights, and especially their dignity. Naturally an Act
dating back to 1973 can no longer fulfil the aforementioned needs, and the
AEB is convinced that this Bill will succeed in doing precisely that and
wants to support it wholeheartedly. The following innovations are
especially welcome.]

Firstly, we welcome the mental health review boards to protect patients
from arbitrary or unnecessary committal and retention. This is not a mere
legal function that could be performed by a magistrate, but a professional
function requiring a holistic approach. The introduction of a 72-hour
assessment period prior to certification and involuntary admission at a
psychiatric hospital in order to minimise the possibility of unnecessary
trauma, is also welcomed. Accompanying this is the reduction in the period
of review to prevent unnecessarily lengthy retention. The inclusion of the
chapter on patient rights to minimise discrimination against these people
is also welcomed.

The AEB also welcomes the transparency that will be effected by the lifting
of the prohibition on reporting of conditions in psychiatric institutions.
This will help in preventing institutions from acting like detention
barracks.

The AEB calls on the Minister and the department to accompany this
milestone legislation with a campaign to promote greater sensitivity and
awareness on the part of the public for the mentally ill. Let us live
together in such a way that we care for each other, and prevent external
factors that can so easily lead to these diseases being contracted.

The AEB congratulates everyone involved in the preparation of this Bill.
[Time expired.]

Dr E E JASSAT: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the culture,
civilisation and value system of a country and its people can be measured
by the way its inhabitants care for their most vulnerable and powerless
members of society, such as children, women, the aged and the physically
and mentally disabled.

Our own Constitution adopted in 1996, in Chapter 1, which deals with the
``Founding Provisions'', speaks of affording human dignity, achievement of
equality and advancement of human rights and freedoms for its people. In
Chapter 2, the Bill of Rights affirms that the state may not unfairly
discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone, on one or more grounds
including, amongst others, disability.

The ANC, soon after coming into power in 1994, released the Reconstruction
and Development Programme, which advocated that the RDP must provide for
improved community care, rehabilitation and education for all disabled
people, particularly the mentally challenged, moving away from the
custodial and institutional care that was suggested in the Mental Health
Act of 1973.

The SA Health Review, published by the Health System Trust in 1997
commented:


  The past ideological framework to mental health care has been a
  combination of racial discrimination, paternalism and
  institutionalisation. Mental health services have been vertical,
  fragmented and overemphasised curative services.

It further went on to state:


  There is no parity in the standard of care in psychiatric institutions.
  The standard of care in formerly black institutions is below that of
  formerly white institutions.

The 1999 Health Review mentions that the key strategic aim to advance
equity in the public mental health service is the transformation of the
service to one that is comprehensive, community-based and integrated with
the other health services in this country. Existing public sector mental
health services are least accessible to the most vulnerable sectors of the
population and are concentrated in psychiatric institutions, as opposed to
other levels of care. To address this, they suggested a completely revised
Act, which we now have in the form of the Bill before hon members this
afternoon, namely the Mental Health Care Bill.

Further impetus to scrap the Mental Health Act 18 of 1973, also came about
as a result of a report titled ``Human rights violations and alleged
malpractices in psychiatric institutions'' commissioned by the former
Health Minister, Dr Dlamini-Zuma, in January 1996. This followed horrifying
press reports of widespread abuse, assault and neglect at some institutions
in this country.

After four years of painstaking work and intense consultation with various
stakeholders, we have a very humane and compassionate Bill before us. The
portfolio committee wishes to record its appreciation to Prof Mervyn
Freeman and his team for the superb work they have done in crafting this
Bill.
The critical difference between the Mental Health Act of 1973 and the
present Bill before this House has been captured in the preamble to the
latter. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, please, when you
do speak to each other, do so in a manner that does not disturb the speaker
at the podium. You are shouting to each other across the floor and that is
totally unacceptable.

Dr E E JASSAT: Chairperson, whereas the 1973 Act was passed ``to provide
for the reception, detention and treatment of persons who are mentally
ill'', the preamble to the present Bill under discussion aims ``to provide
for the care, treatment and rehabilitation of persons who are mentally
ill''. What a difference! More in consonance with our newfound democracy
and Constitution we, in the ANC, support this Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I think that everything has been said.
Ngabe ngiyayona indaba uma ngingaqala ngiphindaphinde konke osekushiwo ...
[I will be messing up the whole story if I repeat what has already been
said.]

... except to note, of course, that this is the first time in the history
of the Portfolio Committee on Health that there has been unanimity on a
piece of legislation. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: The Minister feels better about it.

The MINISTER: I feel good. [Interjections.]

Engikushoyo ngukuthi, ngokukhumbula kwami, kuyaqala ngqa ukuthi sivumelane
sonke ngomThetho. Lona-ke, njengoba sazi, ngumThetho wokunakekela labo
abakhubazeke ngokwengqondo. Bekufanele ukuthi ngempela ngempela sibakhusele
laba bantu ngoba kudala benganakekelwa.

Mangithi nje ukuphawula into eyodwa noma ezimbili ngibhekise elungwini
elihloniphekile uKalyan. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)
[What I am saying is that as far as I can remember, this is the first time
that we agree on a Bill. This Bill, as we all know, is about caring for
people who are psychologically disturbed. We must really protect them,
because in the past they were not protected.

Let me say one or two things to the hon Kalyan.]

Of course, it is not ironic that we are discussing and debating this Bill
this month. I think, in fact, it is appropriate that we do so, if indeed it
is mental care awareness month. I would have thought that she would have
actually appreciated the fact that this Bill is being discussed and debated
during this month. I do not see any irony in doing so.

To the hon member Mrs Dudley I just want to say that perhaps she needs to
read my input and also to read Mrs Malumise's speech because all the
concerns that she has raised were actually covered in both those speeches.
Ngicela ukubonga ikomidi ngendlela eliqhube ngayo size sifike kuleli zinga
nalo mThetho. Ngicela ukubonga uSihlalo wekomidi namalungu onke eKomidi
lezeMpilo ngokubambisana kwabo baze bafike kulesi sikhathi. Ngicela futhi
ukubonga uSolwazi Freeman. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[I would like to thank the committee for the way it worked until we came up
with this Bill. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee, and
all the members of the Health committee for working together up to this
point. I would also like to say thank you to Prof Freeman.]

I also want to thank Prof M Freeman. I know how hard he worked with his
team to ensure that we have this excellent piece of legislation that
addresses the needs of people with mental disabilities within the framework
of human rights.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, before I put the
Bill to you, on behalf of the House, I want to wish Dr Nkomo everything of
the best. Go with our best wishes. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                               POINT OF ORDER

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, before we proceed
to the next order, I need to give a ruling. During the debate on the Land
Affairs General Amendment Bill on Thursday, 25 October 2001, the hon Dr C P
Mulder raised a point of order about remarks made by the hon the Deputy
Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs.

I did rule, at the time, that the Deputy Minister, in my view, was speaking
in general terms and not referring specifically to the hon member Mr P J
Groenewald. However, at the request of Dr Mulder I undertook to study the
Hansard and to rule on the matter at a subsequent sitting of the House.
Having now had the opportunity to study the relevant Hansard transcript, I
wish to rule as follows.
The contested remark is contained in the following paragraph, of which the
Afrikaans parts have been translated, and I quote:


  We are not talking about these hon members, but we are talking about the
  people. What I heard when the hon member Groenewald was talking was that
  he used words I have heard before when he said: ``These people who want
  to come and bury their fathers and forefathers and afterfathers.'' This
  is the same tone I hear from people saying: ``Oh, it is once again the
  black people who want to have funerals and stay away from work.'' This is
  a racist attitude that must be eradicated in this country.

Using words such as ``these people'' is, in itself, disparaging and was
clearly perceived as such by the hon the Deputy Minister. He is saying that
the hon member Mr Groenewald is repeating a general perception about race
and culture that exists in a certain segment of the population, and that
his remarks have a racist undertone.

However, one cannot say that the hon the Deputy Minister, by pointing that
out, is necessarily implying that the hon Mr Groenewald is a racist. One
cannot curtail members to the extent that they cannot challenge anything
another member has said, but there has to be a constructive element to it,
as was the case here. What the hon the Deputy Minister said is, therefore,
not unparliamentary. [Applause.]

                    CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:


  That the House, in terms of Rule 272(4)(c), pass the original Bill as
  approved by the House on 11 May 2001 without incorporating the proposed
  amendments from the National Council of Provinces.
Agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed again without further amendment.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr N M DUMA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes reports that six men were arrested for raping a nine-month-old
       baby in Upington;


  (2) believes that this is the worst form of child abuse, barbaric
       behaviour and an evil which must be uprooted in our society;


  (3) further believes that families and communities must work together in
       ensuring that the rights of the girl child are protected;


  (4) condemns the raping of this infant; and


  (5) calls for a possible maximum sentence to be imposed on the
       perpetrators of this heinous act.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with appreciation the remarks of Mr Marthinus van Schalkwyk on
       30 June 2001 that:


         The DA must succeed because without a strong, united and
         successful DA the ANC will be free to abuse its power unchecked.
         If, after only seven years of ANC rule, things are this bad, how
         bad will they be in fourteen years, or in twenty one?;


  (2) concurs with these sentiments; and


  (3) endorses all efforts to strengthen the DA.

Mr J H SLABBERT: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the Minister of Transport's effort on the development of the
       strategy called The Road to Safety - 2001- 2005 to be launched on 20
       November 2001;


  (2) further notes that this is an integrated strategy working from the
       bottom up and involving many Government departments in the different
       spheres, communities, the private sector and other institutions;


  (3) appreciates that this is the missing component in the Arrive Alive
       programme; and


  (4) calls upon all drivers and all communities to give this new effort
       their fullest support.
Rev A D GOOSEN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that 18 people were killed whilst attending a church service in
       Pakistan;


  (2) believes that the killing of Christians is a serious assault on
       freedom of religion and worship;


  (3) is of the opinion that the United States air strikes against the
       Taliban government cannot be used as an excuse for religious
       intolerance;


  (4) condemns the brutal killing of Christians in Pakistan; and


  (5) calls on the Pakistan government to act swiftly in bringing the
       perpetrators of this barbaric action to book and to start working to
       engender respect for freedom of religion and worship.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) agrees that a realignment of the South African political landscape
       has become inevitable after the 1994 democratic elections;


  (2) agrees that a typical Westminster democratic model is neither suited
       to Africa nor to South Africa;


  (3) notes that the New NP has recommitted itself to the principle of co-
       operative government as confirmed in its election manifesto in 1999;
       and


  (4) also notes that the New NP would like to be part of solutions instead
       of ending up in a political dead-end street.

[Applause.]

Prof L M MBADI: Chairperson ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Prof L M MBADI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock and dismay the confirmed leak of South Africa's
       first nationally set science matric exam paper;


  (2) further notes that this travesty of confidentiality will affect
       thousands of matriculants, as they have to rewrite the paper;
  (3) calls on the Department of Education to -


       (a)  ensure that all measures are taken to protect the legitimacy of
           nationally set exam papers; and


       (b)  bring the perpetrators to book;


  (4) cautions all matriculants to avoid the temptation of engaging in
       unethical and criminal behaviour by buying leaked papers; and


  (5) wishes all matric candidates the very best for the remainder of the
       exams.

Mrs L MALONEY: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the disturbing reports that the US air strikes against
           Afghanistan are likely to continue into the holy month of
           Ramadan;


       (b)  the mounting evidence of high casualties among noncombatant
           civilians;


       (c)  the evidence that Red Cross/Crescent Hospitals, relief storage
           facilities and ordinary homes have been targets; and


       (d)  mounting public concern in this country and elsewhere that this
           bombing campaign is more likely to produce a massive
           humanitarian disaster in Afghanistan than to flush out the Al
           Qaeda network; and


  (2) calls upon the governments of the US and Britain to reconsider the
       bombing campaign and to respect Ramadan, a month that is holy to one
       of the world's great religions.

[Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) observes with interest the cracks within the DA caused by the
       secession of the New NP;


  (2) notes that this was a marriage of convenience which has collapsed
       because of incompatibility and not because of the minor Peter Marais
       debacle;


  (3) further notes that there are a few more alliances of this type in
       this House which certainly await the same fate; and


  (4) recommends that the open door of the PAC be considered by all who
       seek to build a new nonracial Africanist South Africa which affirms
       loyalty and dedication to Africa and the primacy of the needs of the
       poor.

[Interjections.] [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITEES: Order!

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the MF:


  That the House:


  (1) notes the devastating killing of seven innocent Afghan children by
       the United States military attacks over the past weekend:


  (2) calls for peace talks to stop this aimless taking of innocent lives
       and that the price paid for one innocentlife should not be the life
       of another innocent victim;


  (3) further notes the Islamic celebration of Lailatul  Baraa on the 15th
       Shabaan, a night when an individual's good and bad deeds are taken up
       for record; and


  (4) wishes all Muslims well on this great night of repentance.

[Applause.]

Mr E M SIGWELA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a women-driven project of tomato farming in Umtata is
       registering success beyond expectations;


  (2) believes that the success of this project lies in the determination
       and the commitment of the women participating in this project to
       eradicate poverty and work for a better life for all; and


  (3) commends the women participating in this project for their
       determination in fighting poverty.
Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Interjections.]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi. [The name of women.]

Mr R J HEINE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that according to the influential magazine Institutional
       Investor, bankers blame Zimbabwe directly for impacting negatively on
       South Africa's credit rating;


  (2) further notes that -


       (a)  Zimbabwe's credit rating dropped 13,5 points over the past 30
           months - the biggest drop of any country worldwide; and


       (b)  South Africa's credit rating dropped 5,6 points in the past 12
           months; and


  (3) therefore urges the ANC Government to use its influence in Zimbabwe
       to correct those things which are impacting negatively on South
       Africa's economy instead of complaining about events in the Middle
       East over which South Africa has no influence.

[Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
       Environmental Affairs and Tourism on the role she and her committee
       have played in monitoring the use of genetically modified organisms
       (GMOs) in South Africa;
  (2) also congratulates the farmers of the Makatini Flats in KwaZulu-Natal
       on the effective use of genetically engineered cotton;


  (3) notes that the sale of genetically modified seeds by large private
       companies could result in their monopolising seed production and
       sale, thereby hurting small-scale and organic farmers;


  (4) further notes that there could be serious consequences to the use of
       GMOs if they are poorly monitored, to the extent that no less a
       person than Stephen Hawking has warned that humankind will probably
       be destroyed by an engineered virus; and


  (5) therefore calls on the Ministers of Health, of Agriculture and of
       Environmental Affairs and Tourism to better co-ordinate the work of
       regulating GMOs and to prevent the technology advancing faster than
       our ability to cope with it.
Ms H M MPAKA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) believes that the enlightened education of our children on the basic
       facts of human biology and sexuality is essential for an informed,
       responsible and humane society;


  (2) further believes that such education in our public schools has a
       special urgency in the context of the Aids epidemic;


  (3) condemns the cheap attempt by the ACDP in this House last week to
       suggest that educational diagrams are pornographic; and


  (4) deplores the hypocrisy of this action which was underlined by the
       evident glee with which the ACDP members displayed these so-called
       pornographic diagrams in the House and before the TV cameras.
[Applause.]

Mr J J DOWRY: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House notes that -


  (1) the hon Mr Leon has failed to build a strong, constructive and
       effective opposition and to build bridges between all communities;


  (2) due to his autocratic leadership style and poor advice from his spin
       doctors he was unable to give substance to this ideal, putting
       posture and spin above substance, soundbite above patriotism and
       photo opportunities above delivery;


  (3) the hon Leon accused Mr Peter Marais, mayor of the Unicity of Cape
       Town, of failing to lead in a manner that unites, rather than
       divides, and therefore expelled Mr Marais in a political kangaroo
       court, but this is the very task that he himself could not master;
       and


  (4) the DA's slogan ``a party for all the people'' has become an
       illusion, because in truth the DA is a party for a small group of
       people and cannot accommodate the needs of all the people of South
       Africa.

[Applause.]

Mr S ABRAHM: Chairperson ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr S ABRAM: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the alarming spectre of religious intolerance which led to the
           massacre of Christian worshippers at a church in Bahawalpur,
           Pakistan;


       (b)  the regularity with which US missiles continue to miss their
           mark in Afghanistan, resulting in the deaths of innocent
           civilians and the destruction of a Red Cross warehouse; and


       (c)  what Indian novelist, Arundhati Roy, recently wrote:


              While perpetrators of the September 11 attacks have to be
              hunted down, bombing will only create a new generation of
              terrorists. Will burning the haystack find you the needle, or
              will it escalate the anger and make the world a living hell
              for all of us?;


  (2) therefore calls for understanding and religious tolerance amongst
       mankind and condemns all dastardly acts and unnecessary loss of life;
       and
  (3) requests our Government to call on the US and its allies to
       reconsider their ill-fated bombing campaign and to pursue a
       diplomatic course in bringing perpetrators to book.

[Applause.]

                       CONGRATULATIONS TO SA SPORTSMEN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the US Open Golf Champion, Retief Goosen, on winning
       the Spanish Open in Madrid and thereby becoming the European Order of
       Merit Player for 2001;


  (2) congratulates the South African Protea Cricket team on their
       resounding victory over India in the Tri-Nation series last Friday
       and wishes them well in their impending tour of Australia; and


  (3) congratulates the Western Province Rugby team on winning the Currie
       Cup and commends both Western Province and the Sharks for the
       exhilarating final and the fine spirit in which it was played.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 18:56.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           MONDAY, 29 OCTOBER 2001

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:
1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     Lotteries Amendment Bill [B 81 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 26 October 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the subject of the Lotteries Amendment Bill [B 81 - 2001]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 81A - 2001].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
     Amendment Bill [B 68 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 74), dated 23
     October 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the subject of the Constitution of the Republic
         of South Africa Amendment Bill [B 68 - 2001] (National Assembly -
         sec 74), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism as a section 74 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments
         [B 68A - 2001].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Second
     Amendment Bill [B 78 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 74), dated 23
     October 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the subject of the Constitution of the Republic
         of South Africa Second Amendment Bill [B 78 - 2001] (National
         Assembly - sec 74), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 74 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 78A - 2001].

                          TUESDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The following member has been appointed by the National Assembly Rules
     Committee as Chairperson of the Subcommittee on Delegated Legislation
     in terms of Rule 182 of the National Assembly:


     Masutha, M T (ANC)

2.    The Speaker:


     Bills passed by National Assembly on 30 October 2001: To be submitted
     to President of the Republic for assent:


     (i)    National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill [B 39B - 2001]
         (National Council of Provinces - sec 76).


     (ii)   Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 8B - 2001] (National
         Assembly - sec 75).
TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Adjustment Appropriation Bill [B 82 - 2001].


     (2)    Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2001 [RP 178-2001].


     (3)    Adjustments Estimates of National Expenditure 2001 [RP 181-
         2001], which includes:


         1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "Presidency", Adjustments Estimates,
              2001-2002;


         2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments Estimates,
              2001-2002;
         3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local Government",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Government Communication and
              Information System", Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Enterprises", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service and Administration",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         10.     Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service Commission",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         11.     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "South African Management
              Development Institute", Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         12.     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Statistics South Africa",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         13.     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Arts, Culture, Science and
              Technology", Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         14.     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Education", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         15.     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Health", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         16.     Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Housing", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         17.     Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Social Development",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         18.     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Sport and Recreation South
              Africa", Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         19.     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Correctional Services",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         20.     Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Defence", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         21.     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Independent Complaints
              Directorate", Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;
         22.     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Justice and Constitutional
              Development", Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         23.     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Safety and Security",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         24.     Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Agriculture", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         25.     Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Communications", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         26.     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism", Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         27.     Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Labour", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         28.     Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         29.     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Minerals and Energy",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         30.     Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Works", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         31.     Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Trade and Industry",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002;


         32.     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Transport", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2001-2002;


         33.     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2001-2002.

2.    The Minister of Transport:
     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for
         1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 1999-2000 [RP 141-2000].


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
         Safety Authority for 1999-2000, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 1999-2000.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Rules and Regulations in terms of the Promotion of Administrative
     Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the Unemployment
     Insurance Bill [B 3 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 26
     October 2001:


     The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having considered the subject of the
     Unemployment Insurance Bill [B 3 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
     section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 3A - 2001].


     The Committee, having heard and considered evidence, further wishes to
     report as follows:


     A.     Introduction


         1. The Committee extended an invitation to interested and affected
              parties to submit written and oral representations on the
              Bill, by placing and advertising in the media during the
              weekend of 11 March 2001.


         2. The public hearings were scheduled for 19 and 20 March 2001.
              Submissions were received from the following parties:


              (a) Mrs B Bird (written)
              (b) Black Sash (written and oral)
              (c) Business South Africa (written and oral)
              (d) Centre for International and Comparative Labour and Social
                  Security Law (written and oral)
              (e) Commission on Gender Equality (written and oral)
              (f) Community Constituency (written)
              (g) Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) (written
                  and oral)
              (h) Disabled People South Africa (DPSA) (written and oral)
              (i) Pan African Lawyers for Human Rights (written)
              (j) Payroll Authors Group (PAG) (written and oral)
              (k) South African Catholic Bishops' Conference (written and
                  oral)
              (l) South African Council of Churches (written and oral)
              (m) South African Domestic Service & Allied Workers Union
                  (SADSAWU) (written and oral)
              (n) The Federation of Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA) (written
                  and oral)
              (o) Women on Farms Project (written and oral)


         3. The Committee reiteriates its commitment to continue working
              with all stakeholders to ensure that Parliament remains
              accessible, transparent and accountable.


         4. The Committee expresses its appreciation to the parties who
              contributed to the process of the public hearings.


     B.     Findings


         During the public hearings, concerns were raised about the
         exclusion of public servants, set out in clause 3(1)(c) of the
         Bill. After consultation with the government on this matter, the
         majority of Committee members agreed that, given the urgency of
         finalising this draft legislation, the provisions in the Bill
         should remain. However, the Committee sympathises with the view
         that public servants should be covered.


     C.     Recommendations


         Because of the concerns raised during the public hearings, the
         Committee requests:


         1. That the Minister of Labour, in consultation with the Ministers
              of Finance and of the Public Service and Administration,
              investigate the possibility of including public servants as
              well as the financial implications thereof under the
              Unemployment Insurance Fund. This investigation should be
              completed within nine months and a report should be presented
              to the Committee on the outcome of the said investigation.


         2. That the Minister of Labour, in consultation with the office of
              the Presidency and the Commission on Gender Equality (CGE),
              investigate the current formulation of maternity rights as set
              out in section 24 of the Bill, in order to ensure full
              coverage for the most vulnerable workers, as well as the
              financial implications thereof under the Unemployment
              Insurance Fund. This investigation should be completed within
              nine months and a report should be presented to the Committee
              on the outcome of the said investigation.


     D.     Conclusion


         Political parties represented in the Committee and parties that
         appeared before the Committee were unanimous about the need for
         this legislation to be passed by Parliament.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
     the Animal Identification Bill [B 49 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
     75), dated 30 October 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
         considered the subject of the Animal Identification Bill [B 49 -
         2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
         Bill without amendment.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Judicial Officers Amendment Bill [B 72 - 2001]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 30 October 2001:


     A.     The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development, having considered the subject of the Judicial
         Officers Amendment Bill [B 72 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
         75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         as a section 75 Bill -


         1. recommends that, because of the delay with the introduction of
              the Bill in Parliament after the deadline of 17 August 2001,
              and pursuant time constraints, some of the provisions of the
              Bill be held in abeyance until the 2002 session of Parliament;


         2. presents the Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment
              Bill  [B 83 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75); and


         3. regards the classification of the Judges' Remuneration and
              Conditions of Employment Bill [B 83 - 2001] as a section 75
              Bill.
     B.     The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


         1. The Committee -


              (a) having been briefed by the Department of Justice and
                  Constitutional Development on the Judicial Officers
                  Amendment Bill;


              (b) having received written submissions on the Bill and having
                  held public hearings thereon;


              (c) having considered the scope of all the issues dealt with
                  in the Bill, most of which involve comprehensive and
                  fundamental changes to existing laws;


              (d) having pointed out that the Bill was only submitted to
                  Parliament after 17 August 2001, the deadline for the
                  submission of draft legislation to Parliament for
                  consideration during the 2001 session of Parliament; and


              (e) having taken into account the limited time remaining to
                  deal with issues of this nature during this 2001 session
                  of Parliament, which is drawing to a close,


              was of the opinion that it should present its own Bill, in
              terms of the Rules of Parliament, in order to deal with only
              those urgent matters contained in the Judicial Officers
              Amendment Bill which cannot be held in abeyance until the 2002
              session of Parliament.


         2. The Committee was consequently of the view that it would be
              expedient to deal with those issues in the Judicial Officers
              Amendment Bill which emanate from the Republic of South Africa
              Constitution Amendment Bill, 2001, which relate to courts and
              the administration of justice, as contemplated in Chapter 8 of
              the Constitution, namely the constitutional amendments
              relating to -


              (a) the offices of Chief Justice of South Africa and Deputy
                  Chief Justice and President and Deputy President of the
                  Supreme Court of Appeal; and


              (b) the terms of office of Constitutional Court judges.


         3. Whilst confining itself to the issues referred to in paragraph
              2 above, which entail amendments to virtually every section of
              the Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act,
              1989 (Act No. 88 of 1989), the Committee came to the
              conclusion that, rather than to present cumbersome and
              cluttered amending legislation, it would be more appropriate
              to recommend an entirely new statute to regulate the
              remuneration and conditions of employment of Constitutional
              Court judges and judges. This would, at the same time,
              rationalise the laws regulating this important aspect of the
              administration of justice, hence the inclusion of provisions
              in the Bill which purport to make the legislation applicable
              throughout the Republic and which envisage the repeal of the
              Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 1989,
              and the corresponding legislation in the former homelands,
              which is still applicable in those geographical areas.


         4. The Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Bill,
              2001, presented by the Committee, largely encapsulates the
              principles contained in the Judges' Remuneration and
              Conditions of Employment Act, 1989. The main differences
              between the existing legislation and the proposed legislation
              are to be found in the provisions which deal with the offices
              of Chief Justice of South Africa and Deputy Chief Justice and
              President and Deputy President of the Supreme Court of Appeal
              and the terms of office of Constitutional Court judges, the
              latter category in particular requiring comprehensive
              adaptations to the existing legislation.


              During the course of revisiting the provisions of the existing
              Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 1989,
              to bring them into line with the constitutional amendments,
              the Committee has also suggested amendments of a technical
              nature in an effort to streamline and improve the legislation
              as a whole.


         5. As indicated in paragraph 1 above, the Committee intends
              finalising the issues not dealt with in the Judicial Officers
              Amendment Bill during the 2002 session of Parliament, when
              those important issues and principles can be debated without
              any time constraints.


         6. During its deliberations on the Bill, the Committee's attention
              was drawn to the fact that the Judges' Remuneration and
              Conditions of Employment Act, 1989 (Act No. 88 of 1989), which
              regulates the remuneration and conditions of employment of
              judges, is silent on the position of a judge who is removed
              from office in terms of section 177 of the Constitution
              (impeachment). The question was raised whether a judge who is
              so removed from office should receive any benefits, and if so,
              what benefits.


              The Committee consequently recommends that the Department of
              Justice and Constitutional Development be requested to
              investigate this aspect and to submit appropriate legislative
              proposals regarding the matter to the Committee at the
              beginning of the 2002 session of Parliament, when it considers
              those provisions of the Judicial Officers Amendment Bill which
              have been held in abeyance until then.


         7. The Committee was also at pains to point out that -


              (a) both the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
                  Amendment Bill, 2001, and the Judges' Remuneration and
                  Conditions of Employment Bill, 2001, save for Clause
                  16(4) of the latter Bill, do not contain commencement
                  provisions; and


              (b) it is consequently imperative to ensure that the
                  Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Amendment
                  Bill, 2001, is enacted into law before the Judges'
                  Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Bill, 2001, but
                  not later than 20 November 2001, since, as mentioned in
                  paragraph 2 above, some of the provisions of the latter
                  Bill emanate from provisions contained in the said
                  constitutional amendments.


         8. Clause 16(1) provides for the continuation of regulations made
              in terms of the Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of
              Employment Act, 1989 (Act No. 88 of 1989), the Judges'
              Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 1989 (Act No.
              27 of 1989 (Bophuthatswana), and Decree No. 19 (Judges'
              Remuneration and Conditions of Service (of 1990) (Decree No.
              19 of 1990) (Transkei). In the interests of legal certainty,
              the Committee requests the Department to address this issue
              and to prepare and promote one set of regulations in terms of
              Clause 13 as a matter of urgency, but within three months
              after the adoption of this Report.


     Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Criminal Procedure Second Amendment Bill [B 45 -
     2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 30 October 2001:


     The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
     having considered the subject of the Criminal Procedure Second
     Amendment Bill [B 45 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to
     it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
     reports the Bill with amendments [B 45A - 2001], and endorses the
     classification of the Bill as a section 75 Bill.


     The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


     1.     In terms of the new section 105A(11), which is inserted in the
         Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No. 51 of 1977), by clause 2 of
         the Bill, the National Director of Public Prosecutions is required
         to issue directives regarding all matters which are reasonably
         necessary or expedient to be prescribed in order to achieve the
         objects of that section. However, in terms of clause 3 the Bill
         will commence on the date of publication in the Government
         Gazette. Hence some time will elapse between the commencement of
         the Bill and the issuing of the directives. As the provisions of
         the new section 105A will have limited application without the
         required directives being in place and in order to avoid any
         practical problems with the application of those provisions until
         such time as the directives have been issued, the Committee
         requests the National Director of Public Prosecutions to -


         (a)     authorise only senior members of the prosecuting
              authority, for example the Directors of Public Prosecutions,
              in terms of the new section 105A(1) to apply the provisions of
              that section during the period concerned; and


         (b)     give his immediate attention to the issuing of the
              required directives, in particular those dealing with offences
              referred to in the Schedule to the Criminal Law Amendment Act,
              1997 (Act No. 105 of 1997), or any other offence for which a
              minimum penalty is prescribed in the law creating that
              offence.


     2.     The Committee further wishes to draw the attention of the
         National Director of Public Prosecutions to the provisions of -


         (a)     the new section 105A(11)(b)(iv), requiring the prosecuting
              authority to keep comprehensive records and statistics
              relating to the implementation and application of that
              section; and


         (b)     the new section 105A(12), in terms of which he is required
              to, at least once every year, submit those records and
              statistics to Parliament.


         The Committee further requests him to ensure that those provisions
         are complied with diligently so as to enable the Committee and the
         Department of Justice and Constitutional Development to evaluate
         the efficiency of the new provisions and to amend those provisions
         to enhance their efficiency, if necessary.
     3.     This Report must be forwarded immediately to the National
         Director of Public Prosecutions for his attention.

Report to be considered.

