---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 March 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-03-01
---

THURSDAY, 1 MARCH 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  baby Rosita celebrated her first birthday; and
       (b)  baby Rosita was rescued by the SANDF after her mother gave birth
           to her in a tree in the flood-stricken  countryside of
           Mozambique; and


  (2) wishes baby Rosita a happy birthday.

Mr J SELFE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the outstanding and splendid victory of the DA in the municipal
           by-election in Mitchells Plain yesterday, in which the DA
           received nearly 80% of the vote, and the crushing and
           humiliating defeat of the ANC, which received less than 15% of
           the vote ...

[Interjections.]


       (b)  the performance in Secunda, where the DA increased its support
           by almost 13% while support for the ANC dropped by 7%;


  (2) congratulates the DA on its performance in Khutsong and Sherwood,
       where the DA showed good growth in ANC-held wards; and


  (3) accepts that the DA's performance must be ascribed to inspiring
       leadership and its commitment to delivery for all the people of South
       Africa.

[Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) commends the Speaker on introducing the members of the health
       committee to Dion von Tonder, the courageous young cyclist who,
       sponsored by Liberty Life, is travelling through the country,
       highlighting Aids awareness at schools and colleges;


  (2) requests all Ministers who play a role in Aids prevention and
       treatment to take note of his wise injunction to promote openness by
       -


       (a)  offering incentives in the form of lifestyle support programmes;


       (b)  promoting a culture of discipline among youth; and


       (c)  increasing access for the vast majority of people to free HIV
           testing; and


  (3) establish more partnerships with the private sector and the
       international community to enhance awareness in novel and practical
       ways.

Mr P J GOMOMO: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  today marks the 15th anniversary of the assassination of the
           former Swedish Prime Minister and founder member of Socialist
           International, Mr Olof Palme;


       (b)  Mr Olof Palme stood for international peace, justice, equality
           and solidarity;


  (2) acknowledges the role he played in isolating the apartheid regime and
       supporting the struggle for the liberation of the people of South
       Africa;


  (3) joins the people of Sweden in commemorating this martyr and vows to
       fight for the ideas he lived and died for;


  (4) declares: ``Long live, the memory of Olof Palme!''

Mr C M MORKEL: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock the ANC's display of political intolerance in the
       Langa and Crossroads areas against members of the DA who are actively
       working and winning support in these areas ...

[Interjections.]


  (2) expresses outrage at the behaviour of ANC city councillors and
       members of the ANC who threaten and intimidate DA members and office-
       bearers in these areas;


  (3) accepts that the ANC does not hold any historical claim to or
       ownership of these areas and that other parties whom voters trust
       have an equal right to work and campaign in these areas; and


  (4) calls on the ANC and its members to undertake that it will refrain
       from political intolerance and that it will respect the basic
       principles of democracy and the Constitution of the Republic of South
       Africa.

[Interjections.]

Ms ANNELIZÃ© VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the courage displayed by a foreign tourist who was recently a
       victim of gang rape in Hermanus;


  (2) commends her on her willingness to come back to South Africa to
       testify, in order to see that justice is done and that the rapists
       are removed from society;


  (3) acknowledges that through her brave action she is contributing
       positively towards the fight against crime and preventing more women
       from being raped by these criminals;


  (4) commends the Department of Safety and Security for budgeting in such
       a way that those crimes committed against women and children remain a
       key priority for the SA Police Service; and
  (5) calls on the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development and
       the Department of Justice to improve on their role in the criminal
       justice system and to ensure a higher conviction rate of the
       perpetrators of these crimes against humanity.

Mr B MTHEMBU: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the DP and New NP walked out of the Scopa meeting yesterday
           because of their failure to understand and abide by the Rules of
           Parliament, which were adopted by this House; and


       (b)  Rule 137(4) does not allow for a minority report to be brought
           out by any committee of Parliament; and


  (2) expresses grave concern and alarm that the DP and New NP use silly
       misinterpretations for political mileage, at the expense of the
       integrity of Parliament.

[Applause.]

Mr G E BALOI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House notes that -


  (1) the Reserve Bank governor, Tito Mboweni, said yesterday that the
       political turmoil in neighbouring Zimbabwe was still affecting South
       Africa's economy through its adverse impact on investor sentiment;


  (2) Mr Mboweni further told foreign journalists that he hoped the coming
       visit by President Mbeki to Zimbabwe would help stabilise the
       situation; and


  (3) the governor also said he was not unduly concerned about the recent
       rise in the inflation rate from 7,6% to 7,7% and that indications
       were that the inflation target of between 3% and 6% for the next year
       would be met.

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Department of Labour and the National Skills Authority
       have successfully launched our Vhutsila National Skills Development
       Strategy on 22 February at Gallagher Estate;


  (2) recognises that all Nedlac social partners support this initiative in
       line with their commitment to a skilled and productive economy with a
       highly skilled workforce; and


  (3) commends the Minister of Labour for his commitment to a skills
       revolution, being instrumental in developing a culture of high
       quality and lifelong learning which will support the formal economy,
       while stimulating the development of small business, addressing
       inequality and assisting new entrants to the economy.

Ms R TALJAARD: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  ministerial involvement in the pre-plenary activities kof the
           Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) poisons the
           constitutional separation of powers and compromises important
           sections of the Constitution ...

[Interjections.]


       (b)  Scopa was muscled into rubberstamping the executive's decision
           to exclude the Special Investigating Unit  (SIU) from the arms
           probe in its first vote in nearly eight years - compromising
           section 55(2)(b) of the Constitution; and
       (c)  the Nel Committee failed to sanction Minister Penuell Maduna for
           violating the Constitution; and


  (2) expresses its concern at -


       (a)  the flagrant disregard for the Constitution; and


       (b)  the erosion of Parliament's oversight and accountability
           functions by means of a party-political power grab by the
           governing party, despite section 57(2)(b) of the Constitution.

[Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that there are many imperatives requiring the SA Police Service
       to win full public support and acceptance;


  (2) expects and the country demands that police personnel are well
       trained and ready for every eventuality;


  (3) nevertheless expresses its criticism at the way in which a valuable
       and necessary training exercise at Wonderboom Airport was allowed to
       become a total debacle of claims and counterclaims and denials; and


  (4) therefore calls on the Minister to examine what could be done to
       achieve greater finesse in handling public communication and keeping
       public trust.

Ms N S MTSWENI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Human Rights Watch has commended the work done by the
       Human Rights Commission;


  (2) believes that this positive response confirms that the Government and
       the people of South Africa are on the right track in building a
       culture of human rights; and


  (3) calls on the Human Rights Commission to continue with its  important
       work of ensuring that human rights are upheld in our country.

[Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the ANC's Umlazi subregion called a public demonstration
       to take place at the Mangosuthu Technikon, which would have resulted
       in the disruption of the campus and incited violence ...

[Interjections.]


  (2) further notes that the DA made an urgent appeal to Minister Kader
       Asmal to use his influence to prevent this demonstration from taking
       place and the ANC from politicising and destabilising the situation
       on campus;


  (3) acknowledges that due to this intervention, the demonstration did not
       take place, but that a few ANC members entered the campus with flags;


  (4) expresses its gratitude to the DA and the Minister for preventing a
       catastrophe from happening; and


  (5) calls on the ANC to discipline their undisciplined cadres who acted
       irresponsibly.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr L C MOTHIBA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with disgust and dismay the controversy and confusion caused by
       the Northern Province government amongst traditional leaders in that
       province concerning their participation in the municipal councils;


  (2) abhors with contempt the actions of the MEC for local government and
       housing and the MEC in the office of the premier to entice
       traditional leaders with big salaries as a condition for their
       participation in the municipal councils;


  (3) condemns the actions of the Northern Province government of
       nicodemously issuing letters of appointment confirming participation
       of some traditional leaders in the municipal councils behind the back
       of Contralesa;


  (4) considers the actions of the Northern Province government as a
       deliberate and continuous attempt to deprive traditional leaders of
       their legitimate powers and functions ...

[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired. Hon members, there
is too much noise, too much movement and far too many private meetings
going on!

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the ``Saamtrek: Values, Education and Democracy in the 21st
       Century'' conference which was held in Kirstenbosch under the
       auspices of the Department of Education;


  (2) further notes that this conference called for a policy to introduce
       African languages in schools, the setting up of units to deal with
       racism and the convening of a national conference on HIV/Aids and sex
       education;


  (3) believes that this conference was of historic significance in that it
       passed resolutions that will accelerate education transformation; and
  (4) commends the education department for having organised this
       conference and calls on the Minister to ensure that the resolutions
       of this conference are implemented.

[Applause.]

                           FIRE ON TABLE MOUNTAIN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C H F GREYLING: Mevrou die Speaker, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Huis-


  (1) kennis neem van die verwoestende brand gister teen die hange van
       Tafelberg wat in bloedige hitte deur helikopters, bosbouspanne en
       brandweerpersoneel onder beheer gebring is; en


  (2) verder kennis neem van soortgelyke brande wat vroeÃ«r in die Wolseley
       omgewing deur gesamentlike brandbestrydingsoperasies geblus is;
  (3) dank betuig aan alle individue wat in lewensgevaarlike omstandighede
       help om brande te bestry; en


  (4) hulde bring aan diegene wat met hulle lewens boet in die uitvoering
       van hul belangrike pligte;


  (5) aanvaar dat die droogte in die Wes-Kaap 'n bydraende faktor is; en


  (6) daarom 'n beroep op die regering doen om alles in sy vermoÃ« te doen
       om sulke brande te voorkom en te bestry.

[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr C H F GREYLING: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the devastating fire against the slopes of Table Mountain that
       was brought under control in extreme heat yesterday, with the aid of
       helicopters, by forestry teams and personnel from the fire
       department;


  (2) further notes that earlier similar fires in the vicinity of Wolseley
       were extinguished through joint fire-fighting operations;


  (3) expresses its gratitude to all individuals who help to fight fires in
       life-threatening circumstances;


  (4) pays tribute to those who have lost their lives in the execution of
       their important duties; and


  (5) accepts that the drought in the Western Cape is a contributing factor
       to these fires; and therefore calls on the Government to do
       everything in its power to prevent and fight such fires.

[Applause.]]

Agreed to.

          EXTENSION OF TRIAL-RUN PERIOD OF QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That, with reference to the resolution adopted by the House on
  13Â February 2001, the period for the trial run of questions for oral
  reply be further extended until 6 April 2001.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, the DP will not be supporting this particular
motion.

An HON MEMBER: Why?

Mr M J ELLIS: It is, of course, a year ago that the new system of questions
came into being as a trial run under the set of trial rules. That trial run
has been extended several times now. We made it clear last year that we
would not be party to ongoing extensions, and by voting against this
extension this afternoon, it gives us the opportunity to express our
concern over the way the entire matter has been handled.
It also gives us a chance to show again that we do not support the trial
rules. We believe that voting continually in favour of the extension of
these trial rules creates the impression that we may be in support of these
trial rules, and we want to avoid this - I direct this to Mr Momberg - at
all costs.

Whenever the issue of question time has been raised at either the Chief
Whips' forum, the subcommittee formed by that forum or in Parliament
itself, we have always made the point that we are opposed to this change in
Rules, and that the new system is boring, unwieldy, cumbersome and
expensive. It does not work as a free-flowing exchange of information that
question time in Parliament should be.

Part of the problem is that Ministers have not co-operated properly,
leading to an enormous backlog in questions that simply have not been
answered. The ANC knows this as well as I do. Furthermore, we have pointed
out time and again that the system of clustering Ministers simply has not
worked. After all, the purpose of question time in Parliament is that it
creates an opportunity for MPs to put questions to Ministers, in order for
them to obtain information on matters relating to their portfolios, their
constituencies or to matters of national importance.

When one is able to ask questions of Ministers only once every three weeks
because of the cluster system - quite frankly, it often works out that it
is once every four or five weeks only, because Ministers do not turn up -
that free flow of information dries up and question time becomes little
more than a ritual. Add to this the fact that all too often Ministers do
not appear on their cluster days, and it is clear that question time has
become somewhat farcical.

Now, we have appealed, time and again, for the old Rules to be brought back
while a new system is properly, constructively and conclusively thought
through and made ready for application. But, quite frankly, we have been
ignored by the ANC and certain gentlemen sitting there.

Mr J H MOMBERG: You never said so.

Mr M J ELLIS: We have said it a hundred times and Mr Momberg knows it.
[Interjections.] So the DP and the DA do not support this trial system. We
have, as I said, made this clear time and again. [Interjections.] We did so
at a meeting of the subcommittee on Tuesday evening this week, both in
writing and verbally, and Mr Momberg knows that that is true.
[Interjections.]

In return the ANC have made it clear - and this is an important point -
that they will change the Rules of Parliament and make these trial rules
permanent even if they have to use their majority to do so.
[Interjections.] Mr Momberg has certainly said that often enough.
[Interjections.] This, of course, is typical of what is happening in
Parliament: the way the ANC has used its majority in Scopa, its handling of
the Maduna committee, and, in general, the way it is just turning the
legislature into a body without bite and very little bark, totally
subservient to the executive. That is what the ANC is doing to this
Parliament. [Interjections.]

As a result of this, we have been left with little option but reluctantly
to agree to participate in a process ... [Interjections.] I want Mr Momberg
to listen. We have reluctantly agreed to participate in a process of trying
to make these rules better in the interests of both Parliament and
individual MPs. This is what we agreed to do on Tuesday evening. We agreed
that this could be achieved by the end of March, if we all applied our
minds. [Interjections.] This is what we agreed to. It is, of course, an
enormous concern that this process that we have now agreed to was not
undertaken a month ago so that the trial rules would not have to be
extended today.

Let me make it clear to the ANC that the DP has not reneged on its
agreement on Tuesday evening despite what the hon Mr Momberg says. We will
participate fully and constructively in doing everything we can to improve
the trial rules, because they are so bad and we recognise the fact that
they need to be improved. [Interjections.] We will do so in the interests
of our members and members of Parliament in general. Neither are we
reneging on our promise last year that we would not support continual
extensions of these trial rules.[Interjections.]

How else, Madam Speaker and Mr Momberg, do we show the ANC that we mean
what we say? [Interjections.] They certainly do not listen. Mr Momberg,
certainly, as part of the ANC, never means what he says. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon members, let me
state our case as we understand it. We understand that the system is on
trial and that all parties, including the IFP, have something against the
new system as we are using it. We also have something in favour of the
system, but, as we understand it, the debate today is not about the merits
or the demerits of the system. It is about the extension of the trial-run
of this system. On this score, I just want to submit that we want to
postpone our judgment against the defendant. When the time comes to pass
judgment we will do so, so we support the motion. [Applause.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Madam Speaker, after having been installed as MPs, the UDM
members were keen to pose questions to the Ministers, for both written and
oral reply. Very soon, however, members noticed that the Rules simply did
not work in a way that allowed for their questions to receive attention.

Similarly, the allocation of opportunities for the UDM members to make use
of interpellations was suspect. While each of the three largest parties had
an interpellation slot every single Wednesday, the UDM had to share one
slot with nine other parties. Over a period of six months, it had only two
opportunities for interpellations.

Clearly the system had to be overhauled, and a subcommittee was appointed
to make recommendations. An important decision was taken by this
subcommittee, which was briefed to recommend the changes. Rather than
recommend changes to the Rules and then let it run, it was recommended
instead that any changed system be given a trial run. The trial run, which
has been extended twice before, has to be extended further because the
proposed system has proved to have drawbacks. These drawbacks must receive
further attention from the subcommittee.

In essence, the subcommittee is asking for more time. We have no problem
with this and I am so glad that Mr Momberg agrees with us. We will be
supporting the further extension of this trial run. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP is in agreement with this motion as we
believe that although the interim question procedure should be made
permanent, the flaws in the system must be identified and rectified before
the new system is drafted into the Rules.
The main issue for the ACDP is that questions must be answered. We are not
in favour of questions falling away or being held over. The time period of
four weeks for questions to be answered seems to us to be reasonable.

We agree that questions on the Order Paper should be limited and that
excess questions should be treated as written questions. But we would not
like to see the questions appearing on the Order Paper being limited to
under 50. We are in favour of the proposal that the order in which parties
pose questions to Ministers should not start from scratch each question
day, but should run on in clusters as is done with questions to the
President and Deputy President. Very importantly, we propose that parties
be allowed to precede questions with a comment, to enable a political
statement to be made on follow-up questions.

Unlike the DA, we believe that this system can work to facilitate a
multiparty democracy and it is our experience that question time has, in
fact, improved in contrast to the previous process. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I want to agree with my colleague from the
IFP that we are not discussing the merits of the system today but the
extension. Because Mr Momberg has been so good to the opposition parties,
we want to support him. We support the extension. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the trial period of questions in the House
has proved that there has been participation and interaction with
Ministers. It has given smaller parties an opportunity to ask supplementary
questions.

I do agree that there have been delays in the questions and answers, but we
have to give it another trial. Therefore, the request for the extension of
the present trial-run period is most welcome and supported by the MF.
[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, dit breek my hart, maar in hierdie debat
moet ek teen wil en dank die ANC ondersteun. [Applous.] Die AEB hou nogal
van die huidige formaat van vrae en opvolgvrae. Deelname deur alle partye
word hierdeur verbeter. Ek weet daar is klagtes dat lede hande opsteek,
maar nie raakgesien word nie. Hulle moet maar wakker wees: ``If you snooze,
you lose.''

Ons is in Suid-Afrika 'n multipartydemokrasie en nie 'n tweepartydemokrasie
nie en die feit dat elke stem hier gehoor word, dra by om die waarde van
hierdie instelling te verhoog. Hierdie voorstel vra bloot vir 'n uitstel
van die datum van beslissing tot 6 April. Ons het nie die DP se voorstel
gehoor nie en daarom kan ons nie op hierdie stadium enige steun gee om
vandag dringend te besluit nie. As ons nou al vyf jaar lank wag vir 'n
artikel 185-kommissie, dan is 'n maand se wag om oor hierdie saak
duidelikheid te kry, nie te veel gevra nie. Die AEB steun hierdie mosie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, it breaks my heart, but in this debate I have
to support the ANC in spite of myself. [Applause.] The AEB quite likes the
present format of questions and follow-up questions. Participation by all
parties is improved by this. I know there are complaints about members
putting up their hands but not being noticed. They simply have to be alert:
``If you snooze, you lose.''

In South Africa we are a multiparty democracy and not a two-party democracy
and the fact that every voice is heard here, contributes to enhancing the
value of this institution. All this motion does is to ask that the decision
on this matter be postponed until 6 April. We have not heard the DP's
motion and therefore we cannot, at this stage, support a decision being
taken today as a matter of urgency. If we have waited for five years now
for a section 185 commission, surely it is not too much to ask to wait
another month to get clarity on this issue. The AEB supports this motion.
[Applause.]]

Mr Q G M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, our nation faces many challenges ... Dougie
should not walk out. Our nation faces many challenges that we have come to
this House to attempt to solve. Our job as politicians is, surely, to
tackle these challenges, to ease the suffering of the poor and to transform
a nation torn apart by the ravages of history into one united, productive
and creative society.

It is alarming when this House becomes so polarised that the simplest
procedural change becomes a contested battlefield, and, unfortunately, the
DP is alone on this. It is alarming when the Official Opposition goes back
on its word and breaches the agreements reached for the sake of scoring
political points; when it fails - and I would say intentionally - to
understand or abide by the Rules of this House and the rules of honour, as
happened yesterday in Scopa. [Interjections.] We know that the DP and New
NP have made a strategic decision to oppose anything and everything put
forward by the ANC. [Interjections.] Their marketing experts tell them that
it is a good strategy. Maybe it increases their profile, but what harm is
it doing to the country?

Instead of dealing with the problems that we should be solving, we are
quibbling here. The issue of questions is just such a matter. The DP has
consistently opposed changing the question system, ignoring the fact that
the new system was less open to manipulation or flooding the question paper
by their band of researchers, who have nothing better to do than to score
cheap political points.

Rather than encouraging or engaging on matters of policy, as is the task of
those who are committed to transformation, the New NP supported the new
system of questions when it was introduced. Can we then expect yet another
rift in this troubled marriage over this issue? Or will the heavy hand of
the Leader of the Opposition prevail?

Earlier this week the subcommittee of the Chief Whips' forum, which deals
with the matter of questions, met to resolve the finalisation of the
questions procedure. According to the minutes taken by the parliamentary
officials, it was agreed that the interim procedure should be made
permanent and that the weaknesses in the system should be identified and
rectified before the new system is drafted into the Rules. It was
recommended that the subcommittee be given more time to engage on how to
streamline the interim questions procedure and make it permanent.

It was further agreed, with no objection from the two representatives from
the Democratic Alliance, Mr Ellis from the DP and Caroline Knott from the
staff - the New NP was not there, unfortunately - that in the meantime the
interim questions procedure should be extended until the end of this term
by resolution in this House. I repeat, there was no objection to this. But
the next day the DP back-tracked, as they so often do, and said that they
would not support this resolution by the House.

They are wasting our time. Let us stop wasting time on this issue. Let us
in this extension period resolve the matter, taking into account the
weaknesses of the interim system that have been raised, and at the end of
this period include in the rules a new system of questions that works for
our party in this House and for the people of South Africa. We will take on
board the positive contribution from all members who have debated.
[Applause.]

Debated concluded.

Motion agreed to (Democratic Party, New National Party and Federal Alliance
dissenting)

                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Division of
Revenue Bill goes to the heart of co-operative governance and
intergovernmental fiscal relations. It is measured not only by the quanta
of resources transferred, but, perhaps more importantly, by how the
decisions are reached. It is important just to cover this ground again.

Firstly, the fiscal envelope is approved by Cabinet and then, having
approved that, Cabinet agrees on the vertical division of resources between
the three spheres of government. Cabinet does not do this on its own but
invites the nine premiers and the MECs for Finance to a discussion with
itself. The vertical and horizontal divisions among the nine provinces are
approved by the Budget Council, and also by the Budget Forum which
represents both Salga and the provincial local government associations. It
is in the method of how we resolve these issues that, ultimately, the test
of the application of section 214(1) of the Constitution lies.

In the Bill itself, Schedule 1 deals with the overall allocation of R258,3
billion, of which R104 billion goes to the provinces. Local government
gets, as an equitable share, R2,6 billion, and national government, after
the deduction of debt servicing costs and the contingency reserve, has
R84,3 billion. Schedules 3 to 6 deal with conditional grants and
specialised grants, and from these schedules it is clear that local
government receives a further R3,9 billion.

What is important about the Division of Revenue Bill, giving the indicative
allocations for the next three years, is that there are significant
increases in the allocations to both provincial and local government. These
sectors both grow faster than the anticipated inflation rate, with the
provinces growing at 7,5% and local government at 11,1% per annum.
Ultimately, it is these increases that stand as a test of Government's
commitment to service delivery.

This Bill is similar to the one we tabled here last year. It is a timebound
piece of legislation that will remain operative until 31 March 2002, if
passed by Parliament. This time around it is considerably more user-
friendly.

It also needs to be read alongside Annexure E of the Budget Review, in
which we deal with the proposals of the Financial and Fiscal Commission,
the assumptions we use and the formulae that were applied in order to
arrive at the division. This year Annexure E1 is added to provide a lot of
detail on the conditional grants.

The information available in this piece of legislation goes way beyond what
is required by both the Constitution and the Statutes. The objectives of
the Division of Revenue Bill, 2001, are predictability, transparency and
accountability, but it also allows for users to understand the
consolidation of funding, as in the case of local government, and because
of the way in which these issues are set out, it enhances monitoring and
the flow of funds.

I move the Bill, but I also move that perhaps Parliament should go to Camps
Bay this afternoon and sit on the beach. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! I will not take a vote on that at the moment.

Mr B TUROK: Madam Speaker, legislation about finance can be dealt with in
one of two ways. We can deal with it, first, as an exercise in number-
crunching, add a little here, subtract a little there, or alternatively, we
can deal with it in policy terms. I prefer the second approach, and I shall
try to look at the policy reasons for some of the measures proposed in this
legislation.

Most important is to ask the questions: Why? What lies behind a particular
measure? What are the reasons? What are the policy implications? I would
call that the ``Ben approach''. There is another approach, the number-
crunching approach, which I shall call the ``Ken approach''. When the hon
Ken Andrew comes to address members after me, members will hear many, many
complaints about the data that has been provided. Members will hear many
complaints about the 6% growth target, many complaints about the lower
provincial ratio of spending and so on. [Interjections.] I ask the House to
pay more attention to the policy measures in this legislation than to the
nitty-gritty number-crunching that they will hear about in a minute.

What are the policy implications of this legislation? The first most
important thing is that this is an exercise in good governance. I think the
House must pay attention to that because there is an enormous amount of
interest in the country as a whole about good governance and what we are
going to do about it. The Bill allows a new style of governance to be
introduced in South Africa at national, provincial and municipal level, and
this will create a great deal of confidence in the country, which is vital
for prosperity.

The House will forgive me, for I have a slight throat irritation. Cheers!
[Interjections.]
Secondly, the vital matter of the performance of the provinces is addressed
in the legislation. I started off my political life in 1994 in Gauteng. We
were faced with the enormous problem of shifting from the old Transvaal and
TPA to the new province of Gauteng. We had to move premises and staff, and
enormous restructuring had to take place. Of course, that province is still
reasonable new, as so many of the other provinces and provincial structures
are.

Therefore the question we have to address - and this Bill asks that
question - is: Can these provinces do the work? Can they do the work well,
since they have major new financial responsibilities and new financial
systems, and the municipalities have an increased role which is dealt with
in the Bill?

I want to say that the House must be clear about the role of each sphere of
government. I think there is an enormous amount of confusion on this
question. I want to quote from the Budget Review, because it sets out this
matter very clearly and very carefully. It says:


  While the Constitution confers significant autonomy on provincial
  governments to determine provincial priorities and allocate provincial
  budgets, national government retains responsibility for policy
  development and for monitoring implementation within concurrent
  functions. Although the equitable share allocations and other transfers
  allow provinces and local government discretion, national policies create
  mandates that must be accommodated.

On page 241 the review says that there are three spheres of government
which have concurrent or joint responsibilities. It continues to say that,
in practice, this means that national government determines policy and
regulates compliance, while provincial governments are responsible for
implementation.

I have made this point because I live in the Western Cape, where the
provincial government often forgets about these constitutional
requirements. I hope that the provincial government will read the
legislation carefully because it delineates their role and functions. Too
often the provincial government in the Western Cape, under the leadership
of the members on this side of the House, forgets that it is a province.
What does it do? It blames national Government for all sorts of things, and
sometimes behaves as if it were an independent republic of the Western Cape
- banana republic. [Interjections.]

What is the role of each sphere of government? I want to set out just very
briefly what the role of each sphere of government is and where it gets its
funds from. Firstly, the national Government has a huge revenue capacity. I
do not need to deal with that in detail for we shall be discussing it in
the Budget next week. Half of that revenue is spent on protection services
and the rest on policy, regulatory functions and administration.

The provincial governments, on the other hand, are quite different. They
have a small revenue capacity, but a huge programme of delivery on public
goods, such as social services and roads. Delivery is the key, and that is
why they get very large national allocations, as is set out in the
legislation.

The municipalities are also different. They have a revenue capacity which
is quite substantial, and two-thirds of that revenue is spent on services
which have user-charges attached. They are able to cope with their needs by
raising their own revenue. A third is spent on public goods, such as
health, cleaning services and so on.

We can see that each sphere of government operates in quite a different
manner. Therefore we need legislation like this to set out those
differences clearly. We need this Budget Review and the statements in it to
guide us.

The Bill sets out some supplementary allocations to provinces, which amount
to something like R2 billion. Those carry certain conditions, such as
compliance with the Public Finance Management Act of 1999. They have to
have realistic budgets; they have to have proper allocations for education,
health, welfare and infrastructure; they must overcome the inequalities of
service provision, especially in relation to the poorer communities; and
they must ensure an equitable distribution of resources.

One of the most important elements in the Bill is that noncompliance with
the Act becomes financial misconduct - a very important principle which I
am sure is going to be implemented in a serious way. This will help the
Public Service and all spheres of government to perform very well.

I want to raise one last issue, and that is the question of foreign donor
funding. This issue is not dealt with in the legislation, but it is an
aspect that needs to be looked at. I have ascertained from the Office of
International Development Co-operation that these funds from foreign donors
are additional to the Budget, and that they are located in the RDP fund in
the Reserve Bank. Funds flow from the Reserve Bank to provincial bank
accounts for particular projects. Those moneys are supposed to flow very
speedily and they usually do, but there are occasions when there are
delays, and there are occasions when there may be a danger of the funds
being diverted because they are not being looked after adequately.

The point is that those funds are handled by the officials who also handle
national transfers and national projects, and so there is sometimes a
danger of confusion between the two kinds of activities. It seems to me
that we need to look into that. We need to ensure that the donors who audit
their own project funding are also working in parallel with the attorney-
general and his or her activities to ensure that those funds flow properly.

The question I would like to put to the House therefore is: Can we tidy up
this process a little? A major adjustment was made last year. Perhaps we
need another look at this, and I would ask that this be taken account of at
some stage.

To conclude, this is an exercise in good governance; it is an exercise in
financial accountability; it is an exercise in good Public Service
performance; and, therefore, the ANC supports the Bill very
enthusiastically. [Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, I am sorry that the hon Mr Turok is so
nervous that we may deal with some numbers this afternoon. I think it is
rather interesting, when one is dealing with the Budget, that the main
speaker on behalf of the Government, who often explains to us that he
cannot understand numbers and figures, is the person to deal with the
Budget.

There is a Big Ben in London, and we have a little Ben in Cape Town. They
have one thing in common and they have one major difference. The one thing
in common is that about every hour they each make a big noise. [Laughter.]
The difference is that the noise made by Big Ben in London is precise and
useful, whereas the noise made by Little Ben in Cape Town is normally
imprecise and of little use. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] I also wish to
disappoint the hon member in that despite trying to think up figures in the
last minute or two, I do not happen to have one figure in my speech this
afternoon. So he might even understand it. [Interjections.]

The Portfolio Committee on Finance played the role in respect of this Bill
of a general overview. We had a hearing for a morning from various groups,
and we had a look at this Bill in general. The National Council of
Provinces has taken on the responsibility of undertaking a detailed
examination of this Bill next week. The Democratic Alliance's opinions are
therefore, in some respects, provisional and subject to further
perspectives and information arising from the NCOP's hearings and
discussions.

We welcome a number of aspects within this Bill. First of all, there is the
new clause 8, which provides for a new framework for all grants, which will
enforce better planning. These should, in the future, be done in advance of
the Budget as some of them have been, and not after the event, as applies
to many of them.

Secondly, we also welcome clause 21, which is a new provision according to
which the Auditor-General will report on compliance in respect of the
allocations and the conditions attached to them. I hope the hon members in
the ANC will actually accept those reports and treat them on their merits
and not in other ways.

Thirdly, in terms of clause 27 - and this is very important - there is the
requirement that funds follow the transfer of functions or obligations.
This should help to reduce the problem of unfunded mandates which have
plagued our multisphered government system until now. These three measures,
we believe, will improve transparency, provide greater capacity for
effective oversight in all spheres of government and should also facilitate
faster delivery of services to those who need them.

We do, however, have certain concerns. They all, in essence, relate to
delivery. I would like to address three of them. We recognise that there
have been substantial percentage increases in allocations to local
authorities, but this is off a low base. Given the importance of local
government in service delivery, one must ask: ``Is it enough, particularly
given the massive infrastructural backlogs confronting local authorities?''

Our second concern is the lack of delivery because of lack of spending of
budgeted funds. It is one thing for us, or the Minister, to allocate money
to various spheres of government and various provinces, but it is another
thing altogether for ordinary people to receive the benefits that were
intended. This applies to all spheres of government. We need only recall
from recent times the R500 million of welfare money that was unspent over a
period of two or three years, and the small proportion of the Health
HIV/Aids budget that was spent.

Finally, our concern is that taxpayers' money is being wasted because of
poor planning and management. One need consider just two examples of
programmes which have been running for a couple of years, and I refer to
page 266 of the Budget Review on which programmes relating to education are
set out. This particular programme concerns education grants, financial
management and quality enhancement. The transferring department is
Education.
The purpose of the programme is to improve the financial management of the
education system and the quality of education in schools. The measurable
outputs are still not available and are to be submitted on 30 April.
Although this programme has been in place for a couple of years, the reason
it is not incorporated in the equitable share is also to be submitted by 30
April. The monitoring mechanisms, not even in place after a few years, are
to be submitted by 30 April. As regards past performance, it says that in
the current year reports still reflect that spending is very slow. Finally,
capacity and preparedness of the transferring department also have to be
submitted by 30 April. This hardly gives one the impression that this
department, despite the programme existing for a couple of years, is in a
position to use the money effectively and deliver services.

If one looks at the Department of Health's integrated nutrition programme,
the purpose is to feed primary school children, and facilitate nutrition
education and health provision. The reason that it is not incorporated in
the equitable share is to be submitted by 30 April and the monitoring
mechanism is also to be submitted by 30 April. Regarding past performance,
it states that there has been significant underspending of this grant since
1998-99. Capacity and preparedness of the transferring department are also
to be submitted by 30 April.

It is quite clear that this lack of planning, this lack of understanding of
what is going to happen to the money and how it is going to be measured,
must result in wasted resources and wasted taxpayers' money. This needs to
be tackled with vigour and as a matter of urgency if people who need the
services are going to get those services and get the money we allocate.

Despite our concerns, however, the DA will be supporting the Division of
Revenue Bill in the National Assembly. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Speaker, I was unable to attend the Portfolio Committee
on Finance's briefings due to an overlap in committee commitments, so I
will limit my observations more to the general than to the specific. In
going through the Bill and in particular Schedule E of the Budget Review, I
think it is important to reflect on a number of developments and issues
over time.

In a number of countries intergovernmental fiscal relations are contentious
and even conflictual. There are other countries with these type of internal
relations, yet they experience few problems. In South Africa's case,
notwithstanding the newness of our arrangement, we appear to have achieved
very harmonious and functional intergovernmental fiscal relations between
our three tiers of government. The Treasury must be given credit for their
role in this achievement, particularly at the provincial level.
Transparency, participation and the development of rational revenue-sharing
methodologies must be largely behind this success.

A noteworthy issue is that the constitutionally motivated Financial and
Fiscal Commission, the FFC, has not played a significant role in this.
Their researched recommendations on more than one occasion, including the
recent costed norms approach, have not been taken up by Treasury. I think
it must, therefore, be approaching the time when we are going to have to
reconsider the role of the FFC.

With regard to the Division of Revenue Bill before us, we as a party are
satisfied that the division of the forecasted national revenue for 2001-02
is sufficiently equitable, with even KwaZulu-Natal telling us that they
believe they are receiving a fair share.

We wish to make just a few other observations to voice our approval.
Firstly, there is the increased allocation to the local government level,
that is essential and I am sure that nobody would contest that. There are
also the increased attention to the duties of transferring and receiving
funds by accounting officers and the tightening up of the conditions and
controls pertaining to conditional grants. As indicated, we are satisfied
that the Bill meets all the requirements of section 214(4) of the
Constitution and, therefore, we give it our support.

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy Minister, hon Minister, hon
members, the purpose of this Bill is to provide for the equitable division
of revenue raised nationally among the national, provincial and local
spheres of government for the fiscal year 2001-02. Another key variable is
that specific mention is made of reporting requirements for the allocations
as well as the withholding and delaying of payment and liability for costs
incurred in litigation.

The Division of Revenue Bill must be seen within the context of a broader
macroeconomic environment, with the ultimate aim of fostering sustained
economic growth, lowering our present unacceptably high levels of
unemployment, reducing the spiral of violence and crime, and contributing
to a more efficient Public Service to serve the public and private sectors.

Another variable of this Bill is that a number of programmes cut across all
three spheres of government, namely national, provincial and local,
stretching across a broad spectrum of Government departments.
Prioritisation of programmes is usually determined by means of an equitable
share formula based upon income and demographic empirical data furnished by
the 1996 census, Statistics SA and a number of NGOs.

Another major shortcoming at present is that our database is highly
questionable, and the FFC decisions are often benchmark assumptions. The
Financial and Fiscal Commission recommended that a new radical approach be
taken, namely the costed norms approach. Basically, the FFC's costed norms
approach draws finer distinctions between target beneficiaries and relies
on more parameters being used than the current approach applied by
Government.

It is of the utmost importance that our very limited financial resources be
allocated in a responsible and judicious manner. The Division of Revenue
Bill provides for extensive programmes relating to education, health,
social welfare, nutrition, housing, municipal infrastructure, rural
development, poverty alleviation, HIV, etc.

However, the present position regarding an incomplete empirical database
must be addressed timeously, because time is of the essence. I call upon
all the respective role-players in all departments to conduct a
representative census in 2002. Proper planning and good governance require
accurate empirical data. The present state of affairs regarding our
available data is clearly untenable.

Tax Bills, in general, relate to fairness. A sound tax morality can only be
cultivated if sound performance measures are taken. If timeframes regarding
all government expenditure are met, local, national and provincial
officials will have to report on measurable outputs in future.
There is ample room for further improvement. Today poverty, HIV/Aids and
crime affect all South Africans, rural and urban, to an increasing extent.
Increased government spending will not necessarily solve our problems. All
departments must put norms and standards in place that can be applied to
evaluate their outputs. Attainable incentives for targets reached and
penalties for failures must also be implemented. I am afraid this should
apply to political office-bearers as well.

Today we find ourselves in a global economic order. Tax reforms in other
emerging markets are increasingly drawing skilled South Africans away, a
fact which is reason for serious concern regarding potential revenue. To
cite one example, the tax burden on households has increased alarmingly. In
the 1960s personal tax collected stood at below 10% of GDP, by 1990
personal income tax and VAT had amounted to more than 21% of GDP. The net
tax burden, tax paid less services, has increased even further. This is the
reason why present households debts are of grave concern to all responsible
South Africans.

The DA support the Division of Revenue Bill.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Bill before us represents
the sharp end of the national Budget in so far as it empowers the three
spheres of government to implement policy and deliver services to our
citizens. Any possible nonspending of amounts allocated, corruption, misuse
of funds, maladministration and incorrect allocations will nullify the good
intentions contained in the national Budget.

The real test of Government's policies will be in effective service
delivery, particularly in the next 12 months, but also during the MTEF
period. An interesting tendency emerging from the Bill relates to the
vertical division of revenue, in which the provincial share decreases from
57,6% to 56,7%, putting it at a lower end of the MTEF than in 1999-2000. If
this tendency is projected over a longer period, provinces may find
themselves sandwiched between increased spending at national and local
government level. The Minister may wish to confirm whether this is, indeed,
the intention of national Government.

Related to this relatively decreased allocation to provinces is the issue
of possible provincial taxes or increased own revenues. The FFC indicated
that they will make recommendations in this regard during April 2001. We
appeal to the Government to handle this matter with caution, as people
already carry a heavy tax burden. It may also be also to re-examine the
Katz commission proposals on provincial taxation and provincial own
revenues.

A major deficiency in the Bill before us is the gaps in allocations. A
number of allocations have not yet been gazetted and are only going to be
gazetted after the beginning of the new financial year. This issue will
obviously create a lot of uncertainty, especially regarding the recurrent
grants to local government, for instance spending on local or municipal
infrastructure and basic water services, and also the indirect grants to
public entities and NGOs, for example the spending on the land reform
programme.

Therefore we are in a sense voting blindfolded for allocations of which we
have no details as to who exactly will receive these allocations. We do not
know whether provinces will receive these allocations and what amounts have
been allocated to the various provinces. A glaring example is the fact that
a few provincial allocations exist in Schedules 5 and 6 of the Bill. No
amounts have been allocated for HIV/Aids for the MTEF period in the years
that it has been allocated.

Overall, the UDM supports the Division of Revenue Bill.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, as has been pointed out, section
214 of the Constitution requires that the Division of Revenue Act be
enacted by Parliament on an annual basis. This Act determines the equitable
division of the nationally raised revenue amongst the three spheres of
government and the horizontal division between provinces.

During last year's debate, the hon Hogan stated that this Bill could quite
happily be amended by Parliament because it was not a money Bill. That
being so, I want to pose a question to the hon the Minister of Finance: Is
Parliament merely a rubber stamp for the Division of Revenue Act? The
reason I raise this concern is that certain provincial parliaments have
already tabled their provincial budgets prior to the approval by this House
and the NCOP of the Division of Revenue Act.

I appreciate the requirement of a parallel process, as well as the need for
three year rolling spending plans for national and provincial departments
under the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. Furthermore, I accept that
section 27(2) of the Public Finance Management Act requires that the
provinces table their budgets no later than two weeks after the tabling of
the national Budget, subject to the Minister extending this period on
application.

However, does this process not assume acceptance by Parliament of this
Bill? Is this what was envisaged when section 214 of the Constitution was
drafted? My colleague in the NCOP, Mr Durr, has raised this concern and I
understand that this Bill will only be considered next week by the NCOP
select committee. This underscores our concern of Parliament merely being a
rubber stamp of the Division of Revenue Bill.

We are also concerned that provincial allocations have decreased. This
situation results in provinces seeking alternative ways to boost their
earnings. In this regard it is unfortunate that gambling levies are being
considered by the Financial and Fiscal Commission as a means of boosting
provincial revenue.

In conclusion, whilst we have expressed our reservations regarding the
process and certain aspects relating to gambling income, the ACDP supports
this Bill.

Mr G E BALOI: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and the hon the Minister of
Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel, first and foremost the aim introducing this Bill
is to provide for the equitable division of revenue raised nationally among
the national provincial and local spheres of government for the 2001-02
financial year; reporting requirements for such allocations; the
withholding and delaying of payments; liability for costs incurred in
litigation in violation of the principles of co-operative governance and
intergovernmental relations; and to provide for matters connected
therewith.

We in the UCDP applaud the hon the Minister of Finance for a very
sophisticated, well-balanced and increased Budget tabled on 23 February
this year. According to the Budget allocation, every department got its
rightful share to allow it to deliver to the needy. However, I want to
inform the hon the Minister that our national Government can deal with this
division of revenue and divide revenue equitably among the provincial and
local spheres of government, but it cannot follow this up to see whether
the funds have been utilised correctly.

In our province, the North West, misappropriation of funds is sky high.
This brings the name of the province and the Government into disrepute,
because funds are being channelled into the wrong parastatals.

According to section 214(1) of the Constitution, an Act of Parliament must
provide for, firstly, the equitable division of revenue raised nationally,
secondly, the determination of each province's equitable share, and
thirdly, any other allocations to provinces, local government or
municipalities from the national Government's share. We say that follow-ups
and report-backs must be made by the relevant MEC.

The President said in his speech, and I quote:


  We want to root out corruption in the Government and its departments.

Let those sabotaging the Government of the people be removed, as they want
to see its downfall. The UCDP is very concerned about what is happening in
some spheres of government. We accept the concept of the Bill at all costs.

Ms F B MARSHOFF: Madam Speaker and hon members, the Minister is to be
congratulated on presenting us with a Budget that builds on our policy
framework, ie delivering services more efficiently and effectively. The new
reform process, development of service delivery, investment in human and
physical infrastructure, and initiatives focused on HIV/Aids and special
needs is a positive step towards achieving equity.

Various measures such as the Budget reform process, the Public Finance
Management Act and the new Public Management Framework are aimed at
improving the quality of spending. The new format of the Estimates of
National Expenditure, which tracks service delivery performance, enhances
accountability towards Parliament and the public. The move towards
increased expenditure on infrastructure, prioritising water and sanitation,
is very encouraging. Expanding these programmes is crucial in the light of
economic growth and stimulation.

In 1996, a facility order was carried out and revealed that a third of our
facilities, by value, needed replacement. It was further estimated that it
would need R12 billion over an eight year period to address this backlog in
infrastructure maintenance. To this effect, the Cabinet has approved a
major revamp of the hospital infrastructure. Through this effort, we hope
to reverse the decades-long impact of apartheid planning by rescheduling
our hospital portfolio. New facilities will be built in certain instances,
while others will have to be scaled down or closed down completely.

The Minister must be applauded for allocating a major chunk of the
provincial and conditional grant amounting to almost R5,9 billion to the
health sector. This is mainly for central hospitals, training,
rehabilitation and nutrition programmes. A glance at the Budget also
reveals that the health grant will have increased to R6,3 billion by the
year 2003-04. This constitutes about 47% of the total conditional grants to
provinces. As hon members are aware, the health grant includes five
hospital grants, which I will not mention now, a nutritional grant and one
for HIV/Aids. These grants support reform in their health care delivery
system. The allocation to the hospital rehabilitation grant amounts to R500
million for 2001-02, increasing to R543 million in 2003-04.

There is an urgent need to further develop and improve the provision of
hospital services throughout the country. This includes guidelines for the
number of beds at different levels that are required and affordable for us
as a country, including planning options for the provision of tertiary and
highly specialised services, as patients often need to be transferred from
one province to another.

The redistribution of the specialised health services grant has a
significant capital component. The grant is used for the acquisition of
specialist equipment, specialist training and an incentive for specialists
who relocate to poorer provinces. In part, this will also correct the
skewed distribution of health facilities and personnel, especially in the
rural areas.

This year provinces continued to receive conditional grants which are
transferred from the national Budget to subnational governments. The
Division of Revenue Bill spells out crucial monitoring and reporting
requirements for all conditional grants. A new grant to facilitate the
support and construction of a new epidemic hospital in Pretoria has also
been introduced. This is in line with our policy of providing health care
for all. The allocation of this grant amounts to R210 million over the
three year medium-term framework.

We have learnt over the past three years that the HIV/Aids epidemic, which
is rising sharply, requires a holistic and integrated multisectoral
approach to enable us to withstand the sharp increase. We know that
HIV/Aids is not only a health concern, it is everybody's concern. To this
end the 2001 medium-term allocation for HIV/Aids builds on the total
allocation of R75Â 000 million made to the welfare and education sectors to
finance a more effective and integrated response to HIV/Aids. These focus
areas of note are: Rolling out life skills in all primary and secondary
schools, increasing counselling and testing services, as well as public
campaign and community mobilisation.

In keeping with political changes, over half of the additional resources
have been allocated to provinces in this Bill, in recognition of the
changes that face delivering social services, building and maintaining
economic infrastructure and so on. Therefore, local government, which has
to manage the amalgamation of various local authorities and provide free
basic service gets the largest slice of revenue. This increase includes
major increases to the equitable share and the addition of new conditional
grants to assist municipalities with the once-off transition costs arising
from the demarcation. In total, the national transfers to local government
increase from R5,7 billion to R7,8 billion over the three-year period. This
is an average increase of 11%.

The district health system provides the health sector with a management
framework that can deliver health care in a cost-effective and integrated
manner. Once this district health system's development can be anticipated
and once local government restructuring is complete, the challenge in the
health sector is to consolidate gains in health care provision and to
participate in the establishment of the district health system, governed by
local government where they have the capacity to render these services.

We know that the major factor that has impacted on service delivery has
been the lack of effective financial management, planning and project
management capacities by municipalities. This Government is committed to
reducing the gaps between the provinces and our people in general, and
although this budget goes a long way towards ensuring that we reduce these
disparities - which are historical - we must ensure that we keep our
Government and our officials accountable in every way. The Public Finance
Management Act, for example, must be used effectively. We must compel
departments and provinces to comply with the requirements, and we must come
down hard on those departments and provinces which fail to spend their
allocations due to capacity problems or because of a lack of planning.

To this effect I would like to say that this Budget is testimony to the
fact that South Africans are now enjoying the fruits of their hard labours.


Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the main purpose of the Bill is to provide
for the equitable division of revenue raised nationally among the national,
provincial and local spheres of Government for the 2001-02 financial year;
reporting requirements for such allocations; the withholding and the
delaying of payments; and liability for costs incurred in litigation in
violation of the principles of co-operative governance and
intergovernmental relations.
The improvements in the Division of Revenue Bill contribute towards a more
effective management of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. The Bill is
in compliance with section 214(1) of the Constitution and section 10 of the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997. Trade liberalisation can
interact with the domestic tax system and the macroeconomic environment,
with implications for economic growth, revenue and the overall budget.

The objective of the change in the Bill is to mobilise a system that
constantly strengthens intergovernmental financial relations. This places
emphasis on the reprioritising of the allocation of funds, which has the
potential to make an impact on the delivery of services to the most needy.
Thus, this automatically recognises the administrative weaknesses in
certain municipalities.

Overall, the Bill provides equality of opportunity to access development
for each province and municipality. The MF compliments the Government on
allocating R1,5 billion a year to poverty relief programmes and allocating
funds for projects such as water supply and sanitation, particularly in
cholera-affected areas and where national departments have suffered damages
to their infrastructure. The MF supports the Division of Revenue Bill and
congratulates our Minister on introducing such a comprehensive Bill.
[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Agb Speaker, tydens dieselfde debat 'n jaar gelede het ek my
kommer uitgespreek oor die feit dat munisipale owerhede 'n te klein deel
van die begrotingskoek kry om effektief te funksioneer. Ek het verwys na
die R1,8 miljard wat volgens die gelyke-aandeelformule aan derdevlak-
owerhede toegeken is.

In sy repliek het die Minister, in sy unieke en treffende Afrikaans, soos
volg geantwoord:`` Die toewysing aan plaaslike bestuur beloop om en by R6,5
miljard, want daar is allerlei toekennings bo en behalwe die bedrae wat
ingevolge die gelyke-aandeelformule toegewys is.'' Die bedrag wat volgens
hierdie wetsontwerp, volgens die gelyke-aandeelformule aan munisipaliteite
toegeken is, is wel verhoog na R2,6 miljard. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Hon Speaker, during the same debate a year ago, I voiced my
concern about the fact that municipal authorities do not get a big enough
slice of the budget pie to be able to function properly. I referred to the
R1,8 billion which, according to the equitable share formula, was allocated
to third tier authorities.

In his reply the Minister responded, in his unique and striking Afrikaans,
that ``the allocation to local government amounts to approximately R6,5
billion, because there are various allocations over and above the amounts
which have been allocated in accordance with the equitable share formula.''
The amount allocated to municipalities in this Bill, according to the
equitable share formula, has indeed been increased to R2,6 billion.]

According to Schedule 1 the local government conditional grants amount to
R3,88 billion, which gives us, together with the equitable share amount, a
total of R6,5 billion, the same amount that the Minister mentioned in his
reply last year.

Kan die Minister asseblief aandui of dit wel die geval is? Is daar iewers
'n verdere toewysing aan plaaslike owerhede, want dit kan nie dieselfde bly
nie.

Volgens artikel 214 van die Grondwet, is een van die redes vir die
toewysing en verspreiding van fondse om te verseker dat provinsies en
munisipaliteite in staat is om basiese dienste te voorsien. Ons staan in 'n
nuwe bedeling ten opsigte van derdevlakregering. Groter verantwoordelikhede
word op munisipale owerhede geplaas. Die twee grootste partye het tydens
die plaaslike verkiesing mekaar oorbie met beloftes van gratis basiese
dienste. Die vraag, soos Johannes sÃª, is: ``Wie zal dat betalen?'' Die nuwe
belastingbedeling, waarvolgens plaaslike owerhede belasting kan hef op
verbeteringe en nie net grondwaarde nie, lÃª en loer. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Can the Minister please indicate whether this is indeed the case? Is there
a further allocation to local authorities somewhere, because it cannot
remain the same.

In terms of section 214 of the Constitution, one of the reasons for the
allocation and distribution of funds is to ensure that provinces and
municipalities are able to provide basic services. We have a new
dispensation with regard to third tier government. Municipal authorities
have greater responsibilities. During the local elections the two largest
parties outbid one another with promises of free basic services. The
question, as posed by John, is: ``Who will pay for that?'' The new tax
dispensation, according to which local authorities can levy tax on
improvements and not only land value, is around the corner.]

In his Budget Speech the Minister announced tax relief of more than R8
billion. I am afraid that we may experience a situation of ``What Trevor
gives, the mayor takes'', and even more.

Ek wil vir die Minister sÃª dat ons derdevlakregering nie mag afskeep nie.
Dit raak ons mense op die mees direkte wyse. Ek wil pleit vir 'n groter
afwenteling van fondse daar waar dit saak maak, derdevlakregering. Die AEB
steun nietemin hierdie wetsontwerp. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[I want to say to the Minister that we must not neglect third tier
government. It affects our people in the most direct way. I want to plead
for a greater devolution of funds to where it is needed, namely third tier
government. Nevertheless, the AEB supports this Bill.]

Mr M K LEKGORO: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, the objective of the Bill
before us is to divide nationally raised revenue between the different
spheres of Government.

The provision of equitable resources to the different subnational levels of
Government is an important function because provinces and local government
have a strategic developmental role to play in our society. The subnational
governments, whilst independently established and have autonomous
existence, are bound by national policy and our different national
objectives. It is for this reason that in addition to the performance of
the traditional subnational functions, they have to implement national
programmes that seek to improve the quality of life of the people.

In addition to the equitable share of nationally raised revenue, national
Government allocates additional resources to the subnational governments
for the implementation of specific programmes. The Division of Revenue Bill
does this by allocating a variety of conditional grants for different
purposes. Conditional grants are designed to support specific government
programmes that are aimed at addressing specific developmental needs that
are not budgeted for by provincial and local government.

The equitable distribution of nationally raised resources in this manner
makes it possible for provincial and local governments to execute their
constitutional mandates. The bulk of the activities of these governments
are service-delivery-based. They range from road construction to the
provision of clean water and sanitation.

The provision of these services not only requires huge amounts of
resources, but also has serious socioeconomic implications for the entire
country. One can imagine what would be the economic effects of a failure to
keep any part of our economy-enhancing infrastructure, such as roads, in
working condition.

To date, conditional grants have played an important role. They focus the
provinces and local government on national strategic priority areas. There
are, of course, isolated instances in which these grants cause
administrative inefficiencies, but these are being resolved.

This year's Division of Revenue Bill builds on the experience of previous
years and improves on the controls and management of the resources provided
to the subnational spheres of government. The duties and responsibilities
of transferring and receiving officers and the reporting mechanisms are
better detailed and tightened in line with the Public Finance Management
Act.

On the other hand, the Bill supports the national drive for economic
growth. It allocates R5,3 million to the provinces to repair infrastructure
damaged by the floods and to supplement growth-enhancing infrastructure
projects in the economic sector. These will include roads and schools.

It is important to note that the labour absorption capacity of the primary
and secondary sector of our economy has diminished tremendously. The only
sector that is capable of absorbing labour is the tertiary sector. This
requires new and qualitatively different skills. Our country has no
alternative but to enhance the quality of our education system in order to
produce high-calibre people who are highly productive and globally
competitive.

In line with this, the Budget has allocated R213 million in grant funds to
enhance the quality of the education system for the year 2001-02. This
figure will gradually increase throughout the medium-term period. The
increase in the social budget makes it possible for us to address the needs
of the masses of our people. It is for this reason that the ANC supports
the Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, let me express
appreciation to all the parties for their support for the Division of
Revenue Bill. A few brief comments might, I think, be in order.

Firstly, the hon Andrew raised the fact that local government would be
increased off a low base. The key concern is, of course, the risk of
opening a huge moral hazard. That is why in the Budget Speech - and it is
worth repeating today - our emphasis is actually on building capacity, and
this has to be the testing ground.

The hon Woods raised the question of whether we should not reconsider the
role and the responsibilities of the FFC. That, of course, is entirely at
the hands of Parliament because it would require a constitutional
amendment. The hon Rabie, I think, spoke on tax issues which we will deal
with when we deal with the Main Appropriation. Dr Koornhof raised issues
relating to Schedule 6. The reason why there are not any funds in Schedule
6 for a number of the issues is that there are indirect transfers that need
to be resolved.

One of the key areas relates to land transfers in order to provide housing.
But before one can provide housing, one needs to provide municipal
services. A lot of this is still work in progress and therefore one cannot
allocate resources that would park against a particular allocation when, in
fact, the detail would be resolved sometimes through negotiations, willing
buyer-willing seller, and sometimes in court as a consequence of the
implementation of the expropriation legislation.

The hon Swart raised the issue of the tabling and in regard to that, there
will always be a catch-22 situation. Before we can divide the revenue we
have to appropriate the total sum. This is a difficulty that does confront
us. Thus, we have tried to have an ongoing presence through the process of
the Budget Council which includes the chairs of both the portfolio and
select committees. The provinces and local government, of course, are very
directly involved in the Budget Forum stage. But there is an informal
arrangement that needs to be approved by Parliament. We have not been able
to find any alternative. In the NCOP there has been a suggestion that we
table the Division of Revenue Bill much earlier, but that would tend to
create a contradiction because one does not have a total envelope approved,
which is something that Parliament will actually only do when it votes on
the Main Appropriation.

The transfers to provinces are not decreasing. They are increasing, as I
indicated earlier. However, in respect of gambling revenue, let us be very
clear about this. The Constitution makes it abundantly clear that we cannot
decrease the transfers to any province, because they have the ability to
raise their own revenues. There is, in fact, ringfencing. What they can
raise through motor vehicle licensing, hospital fees, gambling and whatever
else within their power, is additional to what we have to transfer. We
transfer on the basis of a formula that does not take any account what the
provinces can raise for themselves.

In respect of the question by the hon Ds Aucamp, Table E12 on page 251 of
the Budget Review sets out the total transfers to local government. Whilst
the equitable share is R2,618 billion the total is R6,507 billion, thus
increasing by 14% on what it was in the past year. The issue is how much
capacity we can build and I think that some local authorities will need a
different kind of support. It is a capacity in which some have no ability
at all.

I made mention the other day of some newly established local authorities
close to where the hon member comes from, like Louis Trichardt, which has a
town with some revenue-raising ability, but where there are all those rural
areas around there which are actually under tribal trust and, therefore,
have no revenue-raising ability, while services need to be provided to all
the inhabitants there. Those are special cases that need to be dealt with,
not as part of the general provisions. Thus, rather than first have a
formula by which we allocate, we need to test this and understand it a lot
better. I am sure that the allocations next year will be far more focused
than we have been able to do in the short period between the elections and
the present.

I would like to thank all members and parties for their support.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

             THE CHALLENGE OF OVERCOMING POVERTY AND INEQUALITY

                          (Subject for discussion)

Mr A J FEINSTEIN: Chairperson and colleagues, as we enter the new
millennium in the hope of a century more civilised, just and caring than
the 100 years that have recently passed, we must acknowledge that almost
half of the world's people live on less than US$2 per day and that 1,2
billion of our fellow human beings live on less than a dollar a day.

In addition, our millennial world is characterised by massive inequality
between countries and amongst people within countries. The average citizen
of the First World has a standard of living seven times greater than that
of the average citizen of the Third World. To put this in a more practical
context: in India more women die in pregnancy each week than in the whole
of Europe each year.

In South Africa about 19 million people can be described as poor in terms
of international benchmarks. Almost 10 million of these people are
ultrapoor, living on less than a dollar a day. What exacerbates the extent
of this poverty is, as the World Bank noted in 1994, that South Africa
exhibits the most bitter of social outcomes - destitution amid plenty.

The figures bear this out. The poorest 40% of households account for only
11% of income, while the richest 10% receive 40% of income. For many years
the extent of inequality in South Africa was the highest in the world.
Today it is second only to Brazil.

From Khayelitsha to Mayela, millions of South Africans face a daily
struggle just to survive. We all know that, because of the lunacy of
apartheid, this inequality remains cleaved along racial lines - 61% of
Africans are poor, compared to 1% of whites. In addition, inequality within
the African and white groups is also substantial and growing. Seventy per
cent of South Africa's poor live in rural areas. Three in every five
children live in poor households, because the poverty rate amongst female-
headed households is 60%, considerably higher than the rate of 31% in male-
headed households.

While surveying this frightening picture we should, however, also take
heart from the fact that since the Second World War there has been a
substantial reduction in global poverty. Worldwide malnutrition and infant
mortality rates have been reduced, adult literacy raised and the purchasing
power of large numbers of very poor people significantly increased.

This has been accompanied, though by ever-increasing inequality. The
effects of poverty manifest not only in the material sphere, but also in
the psychological and social spheres. The erosion of self-esteem, the
undermining of dignity and the oppression of passivity have affects that
may be almost as damaging as the lack of adequate nutrition, health care,
schooling or shelter.

In addition to the alleviation of absolute poverty, any progressive project
must be committed to a fairer society in which the disparities between rich
and poor are small, in which the paradox of poverty alongside prosperity is
nonexistent. These are the momentous challenges that face us; to create a
society where none shall want for their basic needs and where the rich and
the poor inhabit the same planet, rather than live in different galaxies.
This is required of us, not only for reasons of common humanity, decency
and justice, but for hard-nosed economic reasons as well.

Prof Iraj Abedian, chief economist of the Standard Bank, is of the view
that unless poverty is addressed prospects for the South African economy
over the medium term remain uninspiring. Stephen Gelb of the Development
Bank of Southern Africa suggests, on the basis of a recent study, that low
investor confidence in South Africa is linked to firms' insecurity over the
high degree of polarisation and inequality in society. Thus, while
increased domestic and international investment is essential to growing
this economy in creating jobs which will, in turn, contribute massively to
alleviating poverty, the attraction of this investment itself requires
interventions to alleviate poverty and inequality.

This is the ultimate chicken-and-egg scenario, and it can only be addressed
by a range of parallel interventions by various sectors of our society.
Firstly, it is the challenge of creating life-long training and learning
that will enable people to flourish in our restructuring skills-driven
economy. This requires interventions, both at formal school and postschool
levels, and an intensification of sectoral vocational skill development.

The building of greater trust between Government and business, the more
rapid winding down of the forward book, restructuring of appropriate state
entities and a range of microeconomic interventions will contribute to a
faster-growing and more stable economy. However, the reality of our
economic structure is such that higher growth, which will be driven by the
capital skill intensive sectors, will exacerbate inequalities during this
generation, as those with limited skills will continue to remain outside
the formal market.

To address this unfortunate likelihood requires significant increases in
public works programmes, especially around fiscal and service
infrastructure, programmes that provide limited income for a temporary
period, at least, but most importantly, transfer skills and training that
will be useful for future employment. In addition, the growth of a lower
entry level sector such as tourism and various forms of household services
becomes critical.

This structural reality of our economy further requires that our welfare
system is able to support those who fall outside the formal sector. This
social spending will contribute not only to improving the quality of life
of the poorest of the poor, but to the potential for greater investment and
growth.

A comprehensive rural development strategy premised on measured
constitutional land reform that increases incomes in this sector will play
a critical role in addressing the poverty under which 70% of rural dwellers
live. This House has heard over the past few weeks that, together with the
strengthening economy, Government either has launched, or is about to
launch initiatives in each of the areas mentioned. This must be loudly
applauded. What would add greatly, both to the perception and the practical
implementation of these initiatives, is one coherent strategy that reflects
how these elements work together towards the objective of a more prosperous
and just society.

Clare Short, the widely respected Minister for International Development in
the UK, suggests that ``good government makes globalisation work for
people''. For our multidimensional strategy to achieve its objective,
therefore, requires that Government continually strives to improve the
quality of governance in our society. The Public Service must become an
adaptable, learning and accountable entity in which service and integrity
are paramount.

The challenge for us as parliamentarians is to ensure that the Public
Service is results-driven, accountable to the needs of the people and above
reproach in dealing with public money. We must become intolerant of
underperformance and resolute in our determination to fight corruption,
wherever it may be found.

The challenge for us as a nation is to ask ourselves how we can contribute
to the achievement of a more prosperous and equal society. Those of us who
have benefited from the racial oligarchy of the past have a special
responsibility in this regard.

Let us reignite the spirit of unity of the early days of our democracy. Let
us unite - the rich and the poor - in slaying the evils of poverty and
inequality. Let us unite - black and white - to build a prosperous, just
and safe South Africa of which we can all be rightly proud. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and hon
members, listening to the previous speaker, I nearly usurped powers from
other people's vocation. I nearly said: ``God bless you, my son.''

The other day the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs aptly quoted
from Scotts's Different Drum - Building Community. But what she omitted
quoting from the same source was that, and I quote:


  Prophets are almost invariably bearers of bad news. They proclaim
  something is wrong with their society. But people do not like to hear bad
  news about themselves, which is why prophets are often stoned or,
  otherwise, scapegoated, and in our South African context people
  marginalised and vilified. Let these sins be forgiven, however.

The subject at hand, ``The challenge of overcoming poverty and
inequality'', cannot really be detached from the other socioeconomic and
political strands of society. Development or empowerment, entitlement or
dependency, social engineering via the allocation of resources and the
crafty chaff of rhetoric masquerading as reconstruction and development
cannot escape public scrutiny.

The material condition of people seems to remain the same despite what the
new ruling elite may want us to believe. The critical issue, although it
may be correct, is no longer so much the clichÃ©, ``legacy of the past'',
but the current Government's competency and efficiency regarding delivery.
Does the prince, despite his blue blood, deliver to the poverty stricken or
not, that is the nub of the conundrum.

I do not wish to sound overkilling, but when we want to tackle poverty or
inequality, we have to travel the route of, inter alia, development, that
is empowerment for self-upliftment and self-reliance. However, this
development should not culminate in people being domesticated, having been
given a false notion of entitlement or, worse still, a mentality of
dependency.

Members will remember Thomas Jefferson's assertion that:  ``Dependency
begets subservience and venality; it suffocates the germ of virtue and
prepares fit tools for the designs of ambition''. It is not overstating
facts to point out that to improve the welfare of the citizens of South
Africa we must focus on job creation and skills development, not only in
order to tackle poverty and to bridge the wide gap of inequality, but also
fundamentally to create opportunities for people to become economically
independent and to regain their self-respect and sense of dignity in order
that they may enjoy greater freedom.

The assumption that prevailed in 1994 that a rural family with two adults
and three children needed R740,00 per month to survive - yes, indeed,
survive - and that a similar urban family required R840,00 per month needs
to be drastically reviewed. Welfare and social services are critical areas
that could enhance the fight against poverty and, indeed, abject poverty.
Welfare services are mostly state-run, but it is also desirable that more
and more large portions should also be driven by NGOs and the private
sector. The NGOs should be given special support in improved funding,
especially in doing work in remote and rural areas of our country.

There also seems to be problems with the criteria of evaluating
organisations such as NGOs in this field. It is not sufficient to base
evaluation of organisations only on unit costs of facilities and the number
of people which the organisation serves. Emphasis has also to be put on
quality. Qualitative services and delivery are critical and crucial. The DP
welcomes the move towards a more holistic evaluation system when dealing
with the NGOs rendering these important services.

It is cold comfort to live by the dictum that ``the poor shall always be
with us''. The challenge of poverty is, indeed, enormous and needs to be
tackled at all levels, by all and sundry. We should not shy away from
innovative ways of dealing with this gigantic task, and my colleague will
illustrate briefly how to go about addressing some of these tasks that are
facing us. Once a people are sustainably self-reliant and self-sufficient,
we can safely begin to have confidence that the issues of inequality -
socially, economically and politically - will begin to be tackled more
effectively and equitably.

In conclusion, I would like to say that perhaps we should also concentrate
more vigorously on building capacity at the provincial and local levels, so
that this intensification of our efforts may benefit the poor and those who
are at the bottom of our so-called disparity of resources. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy President and Ministers, I want to
start this discussion by asking what our vision is for future generations
of South Africans. I would like to believe that everyone in this House
shares with me the view that it is our mission and duty to create for
future generations an environment in which it is possible for every citizen
to reach their full potential, free from want and rich in fulfilment. We
want a future in which we no longer have to refer to the majority of South
Africans as the previously disadvantaged and the poor.

With that goal in mind, let us determine the action we can take in order to
level the playing fields, thereby overcoming the legacies of inequalities
and poverty. I believe that the most important tool at our disposal is
education. There is no doubt that students in well resourced learning
environments have a great advantage over those who have to struggle with
poorly equipped facilities and poorly trained teaching staff,
notwithstanding the fact that there are exceptions where poorly equipped
schools have achieved extraordinary successes.

Therefore, if we prioritise education as a major tool for levelling the
playing fields in order to eliminate inequality, then we need to examine
the current state of our education facilities. The President, in his speech
to the nation, specifically made reference to the IT sector. It was not
surprising to read in last night's edition of The Star that the Minister of
Education wants all schools to be on line and that a forum has been
established to examine ways and means of achieving this by creating a
national education network in order to link schools, through regional and
national education departments.

As 87% of our schools are without electricity and other necessary
facilities, this appears to be an impossible challenge. But unless we face
this challenge and overcome all obstacles, inequality will not be
eliminated. Our chances of improving the lives of our most marginalised
communities are unlikely to be achieved. I do believe that if we truly
focus on this issue we can and will succeed.

To face the challenge of globalisation and in order not to increase the
levels of poverty in South Africa, we need a motivated and well trained
workforce. I believe that the Right Honourable Claire Short, Secretary of
State for International Development, in her address ``Making globalisation
work for the poor'', issued a further challenge to us to work out for
ourselves how we, in the context of our realities, can turn what is
currently a threat into an advantage.

In the short term, we still have to look at empowerment programmes and
projects in order to alleviate poverty. This will have to be undertaken in
close consultation with communities. Small industries such as arts and
crafts, sewing and so on, still need to be encouraged. We have to
understand that communities are more than capable of identifying their own
projects. We need to continue to empower them by training and marketing and
other skills, and giving them access to materials needed to get these
projects started.

Communal food production also needs to be encouraged. It is possible to
negotiate land-use for vegetable growing and one only needs a supply of
small tools and seeds. Alleviation of the ravages of poverty should be our
immediate concern, followed by more integrated approaches in the medium to
long term. The management of HIV/Aids needs to be revisited in terms of
communities as the death of income-generating family members deepens
poverty, not only for the affected families, but for whole communities. To
overcome poverty, we need to specifically take note of the needs of the
poor in all our planning and decision-making. There is no short-term
solution.

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Mr Chairperson, during 1995 South Africa took part
in the world summit on social development in Copenhagen where the South
African Government endorsed 10 very important commitments that have a
bearing on the restructuring of post-apartheid South Africa, with specific
reference to poverty and inequality.

Through this agreement, the Government committed itself to issues such as
the creation of an enabling environment; the eradication of poverty; socio-
integration through a stable, secure and just society; and accelerated
socio-economic human development and empowerment in a society where the
people enjoy freedom from violence.

The New NP and DA fully endorse these objectives in an attempt to improve
the quality of life of all South Africans. It is necessary to have the
commitment of all South Africans to tirelessly build a nation that can be
freed from the shackles of the past and burdens of poverty and inequality.
We have to acknowledge the fact that, if nothing else, the ANC-led
Government has succeeded in creating hopes and dreams. They have succeeded
in capturing the emotions and expectations of people who were prepared to
put their trust in those who headed the struggle for an equal and just
society.

However, the further we move away from Copenhagen 1995, the more people are
waking up from their dreams of a new, prosperous South African society and
now face the reality that the very people whom they trusted do not have the
ability to actually manage the process that would finally free them from
their past. These people led them out of the bondage and slavery of
apartheid and are now wandering around in the desert of disillusionment.
They see leaders who are not able to take them to the promised land through
an integrated and sustainable approach to harness all the country's
resources towards redistribution and development.

They are taking them further away from a people-driven process which should
have been inclusive of all regardless of race, sex, urban or rural, rich or
poor; further away from peace and security, ignoring the reality of a
journey of reconstruction of the society in a process of nation-building to
unify the country, utilising all its resources to enrich the people both
materially and spiritually.

It is evident that more and more people in South Africa are siding with the
only movement that can address this issue of overcoming poverty and
inequality in South Africa in a practical way. They are moving away from
empty election promises towards a party which can understand the need for
proper housing and jobs, and wants expertise to run the economy of this
country and attract the necessary investments to prevent further job
losses. In short, the DA is clearly the best option to take the whole of
South African society away from pipe dreams, into the full reality that
human development is the end and economic growth the means.
[Interjections.]

The purpose of wealth should be to enrich people's lives, broaden their
choices and enable every citizen - every child, every woman and every man -
to reach his or her potential. It is only when we have reached that goal
that we will be able to say we are addressing the challenge to overcome
poverty and inequality in this country. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, will the hon member take a question
about the NP?

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Not now, Chairperson.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the hon Feinstein for bringing this
motion to Parliament and for the very competent way he presented it, giving
us an opportunity, in this South Africa, to support it in our way.
[Applause.] [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The hon L Mothiba will be delivering
his maiden speech. [Applause.]

Mr L C MOTHIBA: Mr Chairperson, it is especially fitting for me that my
first parliamentary speech deals with a central theme of UDM policy.

It is our painful past that meant that inequality was the result of
political oppression. Now, having attained political freedom, we have
discovered that poverty perpetuates inequality. Politically, we are
liberated but we still have to attain economic liberty.

Poverty is inextricably linked to the unemployment crisis facing South
Africa. All UDM policy is based on the tenet that we must reduce the gap
between the haves and the have-nots. To this end the UDM proposes that
enterprise development should be the solution that South Africa embraces
now. We must empower South Africans to create their own wealth and
employment.

If we have to attain such a goal, we need to recognise certain realities of
modern-day South Africa: Firstly, access to capital is still a privilege
not available to the majority of South Africans. In this regard the UDM
suggests that a number of innovative financing options be explored. To name
but a few, tax incentives to encourage venture capital investments, local
stock exchanges and so on.

Secondly, we must realise that enterprise development is not possible when
the majority of South Africans have been deprived of education and skills.
Human resource development in South Africa is lagging far behind, as
illustrated by the unacceptably high levels of illiteracy.

Thirdly, enterprise development will not be possible if Government does not
immediately remove the various bureaucratic and legislative obstacles that
prevent the growth of small and medium enterprises. There are numerous
other measures that Government, labour and business can and must undertake
to encourage job creation and end poverty. [Time expired.]

Ms L M T XINGWANA: Chairperson, the topic for today is a very challenging
one. We are looking at the challenges of poverty and inequality that
continue to face our nation.

Okokuqala, ndifuna ukucacisa ngokuphandle ukuba ayifiki namhlanje le
ntlupheko. Ayifikanga phezolo. Le ngxaki sivele saza sakhula ikho. Ivela
kwimbali yeli lizwe yengcinezelo nocalu-calulo lomntu omnyama kwilizwe
loobawomkhulu.

Indlala nentlupheko abaphila phantsi kwayo abantu bakowethu isuka
koorhulumente bangaphambili nezizukulwana ngezizukulwana zabo,
nakoonomgogwana boorhulumente abavela kubo ootata aba be-UDM, kumazwana
ayesakwaziwa njengeTranskei neBophuthatswana, nazo zonke iingxaki ezazalwa
ngabo.

Namhlanje ke iyeza lokuphelisa le ntlungu yesizwe ngokubanzi lilele ekubeni
simanyane, sibe yimbumba yamanyama. Iinkokeli zethu zonke, ezimhlophe
nezimnyama, mazizimisele ukuba ziza kujongana nawo ngokuzimisela lo mngeni.
Andiyiboni into yokuba  namhlanje intlupheko siyenze inzuzo yezopolitiko,
ibhola yokudlala kwezopolitiko, ngenjongo yokuzuza amanqakwana ambalwa
ezopolitiko kuba namhlanje iyingxaki yalo Rhulumente. Siyayazi into yokuba
oohlohlesakhe bayitya yonke imali. Siyayazi into yokuba lo Rhulumente
wangena kungekho nesenti engxoweni kuba iinkokeli zangaphambili zanikana
izigidi ngezigidi zemali yomhlala-phantsi. Namhlanje le sele iyingxaki
yoRhulumente we-ANC.

Asali ukuba ikho le ngxaki, kodwa uRhulumente sele eqalile ukuthabatha
amanyathelo athile ukuzama ukuyisombulula. Into esiyicelayo yeyokuba
masingazi apha size kushumayela ngentlupheko yabantu. Masizibone nazo
iinkokeli zamaqela ngamaqela, afana ne-DP ne-NNP zishukuma zifaka isandla.
Nankuya utata uMandela ebekufanele ukuba uphumle ekhayeni lakhe,
engaphumlanga, ehlanganisa zoonke iinkampani, ookopolotyeni, iicawe naye
wonke umntu ozinikeleyo kwilizwe loMzantsi Afrika ukuba enze igalelo.
Bekumele ukuba sibone i-DP ithabatha inyathelo lokuhlanganisa izihlobo zayo
ezifana nabalawuli benkampani yakwa-De Beer neyakwa-Anglo-American ukuze
bazame ukusombulula le ngxaki yentlupheko ngokunyanisekileyo. [Uwele-wele.]

Sifuna ukuthi uRhulumente uqalisile ukuthabatha amanyathelo. Ndiye phaya
kwiphondo laseMpuma Koloni. Ngoku sithethayo kukho iiprojekthi ezingama-652
zokuzama ukunqanda indlala phaya. Abona bantu baninzi bazuzayo kwezi
projekthi ngoomama, ngakumbi abo basemaphandleni. Njengoko sisazi, umthamo
omkhulu welaa phondo ngamaphandle. [Uwele-wele.] Oomama phaya bafuye iihagu
neenkukhu, bathengisa amaqanda nenyama. Bakwafuye neebhokhwe, bekwathengisa
uboya bebuthengisela namazwe angaphandle.

Bayaqala namhlanje ukuba babe nakho ukuzimela ngeenyawo zabo bangajongi
kootata abaseRhawutini okanye abasemgodini. Bayakwazi ukondla abantwana,
babathumele ezikolweni bahlawule neentlawulo zesikolo.

Namhlanje sineeprojekthi ezisungulwe nguRhulumente we-ANC ezingama-26,
ukuzama ukudala iimeko eziza kwenza ukuba ukutya kuhlale kufumaneka. Ezi
projekthi ziza kuba ngookopolotyeni okanye amalima [matsima]. Ziza kuba
ziiprojekthi eziquka amaqela oomama ukususela kuma-25 ukuya ekhulwini. Aba
mama baza kuqeqeshwa liSebe lezaBasebenzi neSebe lezoLimo ukuze bakwazi
ukulima baze baseke amashishini ezolimo anabileyo.

Ezi projekthi sizijongile ukuba ziza kukwazi na ukunqanda indlala nokuba
ziza kukwazi na ukusivelisela ukutya okuza kuhlala kufumaneka, ngakumbi
emaphandleni.

Sinazo nezinye iiprojekthi phaya eRhawutini, ezilokishini zethu, kuba
nalapho siyazi ukuba abantu bethu bahlupheke kakhulu kuba imisebenzi
ayikho. ISebe lezoLimo phaya eRhawutini liqeqeshe oomama abangaphaya
kwewaka. Umasipala wabanika umhlaba. Abakhange badlale ngawo lo mhlaba ke
oomama ngoba bayawazi ukuba umhlaba yinto yokwenzani. Bayalima phaya,
bondla nabantwana babo.

Abaphelelanga apho, bayathengisa nokuthengisa. La maqela sele ezimele
ngeenyawo zawo. Ancedwa nje nguRhulumente ngokuthi awabonelele ngomhlaba,
awafakele izixhobo zokusebenza kwanemibhobho yokunkcenkceshela. Namhlanje
ezo projekthi zizimele. Ke sifuna ukuva ukuba amanye amaphondo enze ntoni
na ngale ntlupheko ingaka ngoba apha sithetha ngoRhulumente we-ANC.

Ndifuna ukuqhuba ndithi, iSebe leZimbiwa naMandla nalo libabonelele
ngeeprojekthi ezithile oomama. Imiselwe ngokusesikweni imanyano yoomama i-
Sawima (South African Women In Mining Association). Ijongene nokuqeqesha
oomama abanemigodi yabo. Namhlanje sikhululekile yaye oomama baza kukwazi
ukuba nemigodi yabo. Baza kukwazi ukumba idayimani negolide ngenxa yokuba
kufike uRhulumente we-ANC, uRhulumente wentando yesininzi, uRhulumente
wabantu. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Namhlanje oomama bayaqeqeshwa. Namhlanje oomama bancedwa ngemali ukuze nabo
babe nokuthenga, imigodi eyeyabo. Imigodi ayizi kuba yeyakwaDe Beer
kuphela. Imigodi ayizi kuba yeyakwaOppenheimer kuphela. Imigodi nomhlaba
ngowethu. Itsho iFreedom Charter. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Mandiphinde ndiqhawule ndibheke kwiSebe lezeMpilo. Eli sebe liwuthabathile
umcimbi wesifo sikaGawulayo odla isizwe sonke lawusa ebantwini. Sinemibutho
efana ne-Youth in Partnership Against Aids ne-Women in Partnership Against
Aids. Ndiza kukhe ndihlale apha koomama.

Ngenxa yale nkqubo namhlanje oomama baqeqeshwa kumaphondo awahlukeneyo
ukuba babe ngabacebisi boluntu. Abantu abagulayo nabantu abachatshazelwa
sisifo sikaGawulayo bayazi ukuba bangaya kubani ekuhlaleni ukuze abaxhase
abuye abacebise. Namhlanje iSebe lezeMpilo liqeqeshe oomama kwizakhono
zokongiwa kwabantu abagula besemakhaya. Njengoko siyazi indlela enkulu
ngayo ingxaki yentsholongwane nesifo sikaGawulayo, izibhedlele zethu azizi
kukwazi ukumelana namanani abagulayo.

Kwakhona masikhumbule ukuba ihlala njalo ingumthwalo kamama into yokugula
komntwana, utata nobhuti. Siyacela sikhala nakootata ukuba nabo mababe kho
kwezi nkqubo zokongiwa kwabantu abagula besemakhaya, bancedise oomama
ekuqeqesheni nasekongeni abantwana, oobhuti noosisi bethu abagulayo.

Le nkqubo ingunozala wentsebenziswano kwakhona, phakathi kweSebe lezeNtlalo-
ntle neSebe lezeMpilo. Masikhumbule ke ukuba phambi komnyaka ka-1994 akukho
mntu wayethetha ngentsholongwane nesifo sikaGawulayo apha kweli lizwe,
kungekho nomntu owayeyikhathalele nokuyikhathalela loo nto. [Uwele-wele.]
NguRhulumente we-ANC kuphela othabathe inxaxheba, wacwangcisa waza weza
nenkqubo ecacileyo.

Okwesibini, ngokubhekiselele kule nkqubo yentsholongwane nesifo
sikaGawulayo, uRhulumente wethu ufundisa oomama ngexabiso lokutya
okunesondlo. Siyayazi into yokuba eYurophu naseMelika abantu abafi sisifo
sikaGawulayo ngohlobo abantu abalambayo abafa ngalo apha emazweni ethu.
Ngoko umcimbi wokutya okunesondlo nentlupheko unendima enkulu eyidlalayo
ngokubhekiselele kwintsholongwane nesifo sikaGawulayo. Kungoko uRhulumente
wethu ethe abantu mabaqeqeshwe ukuze bakwazi ukuzimela, nemizimba yabo
ikwazi ukuzikhusela.

Mandigqithe apho ndiye kumba wokulingana. Ndifuna ukuthi nakuwo i-ANC
ikhokele. Namhlanje sinabaphathiswa bakazwelonke abalithoba. Sivuyisana
noQabane uLindiwe Sisulu, uMphathiswa wethu wezoBuntlola omtsha.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms L M T XINGWANA: Firstly, I want to put it very clearly that poverty is
not a new thing amongst us. It has not just started today to be part of our
lives. It did not arrive yesterday. The problem of poverty existed long
before we were born. When we were growing up, it was there. It is part of
the history of oppression of the black person and apartheid in this country
of our grandfathers.

Our people live with hunger and poverty that was inherited from the former
governments and their generations, and the Bantustan governments like the
Transkei and Bophuthatswana, whence the UDM members come, and all the other
problems that they caused.

Today the only medicine that can stop this nation's pain is unity. We need
to unite. All our leaders, black and white, should commit themselves and
face up to the challenge. I do not think that today we should use poverty
for political gain and point so many fingers at this Government. We all
know that the fat cats embezzled the funds. We know that when this
Government came into power there were no funds because the previous leaders
gave each other pension packages that amounted to millions and millions of
rands. Today this is the ANC-led Government's problem.

We do not deny that the problem exists, but the Government has started to
take steps towards solving it. All that we ask for is that we should not
come here to preach about the poverty that people experience. We must see
the leaders of other parties, like the DP and the New NP taking initiatives
and helping out. Let us look at Mr Mandela, for instance, who, instead of
resting at home, is busy talking to companies, corporations, churches and
everybody else who is committed to South Africa, to make a contribution. We
expected that the DP would bring together all their friends and directors
of companies like De Beers and Anglo-American to find solutions to the
problem of poverty in earnest. [Interjections.]

The Government has started to take progressive steps. For instance, in the
Eastern Cape, as we speak, there are 652 projects that are aimed at
alleviating poverty, especially for women in rural areas. As we all know, a
large part of that province is rural. [Interjections.] Women there breed
pigs and chickens. They sell pork and eggs. They also breed goats and sell
wool and some is even exported.

This is the first time in their lives that they can provide for themselves
without having to wait for husbands to come back from Gauteng or the mines.
They can feed their children and send them to school and pay their fees.

Today there are 26 projects that the Government of the ANC started to
assist people in ways through which they can have food on the table. These
will develop into corporations. They will be made up of between 25 to 100
women. These women are going to be trained by the Department of Labour and
the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs so that they can start
farming and businesses for their farming products.

These projects will be closely watched to see that they meet the initial
aims for which they are started, and that is to alleviate poverty and
produce food continuously, particularly in the rural areas.

There are other projects in the townships of Gauteng because people are
also suffering there owing to unemployment. The Department of Agriculture
and Land Affairs in Gauteng trained more than a thousand women. The
municipality gave them land. They did not play with that land, because they
know what the land is for. They plough there so that they can produce food
to feed their children. That is not the end of it. They sell some of their
produce. They are self-reliant. The Government helped by giving them land
and irrigation pipes. So what do we want other provinces to do when we
continuously talk about poverty?

Again I want to say that the Department of Minerals and Energy started some
other projects. The South African Women in Mining Association (Sawima) was
launched and it is going to train women who own mines. Today we are free
and women can own mines. They will be able to mine diamonds and gold
because of the ANC-led Government, the democratically elected Government.
[Applause.]

Today we see women being trained. Today women are funded so that they can
buy their own mines. Mines will not belong to De Beers only. Mines are not
going to belong to the Oppenheimers alone. The mines and the land are ours.
That is in the Freedom Charter. [Applause.]

Let me go to the Department of Health. This Department took the problem of
the pandemic disease, Aids, to the people. We have organisations like Youth
in Partnership Against Aids and Women in Partnership Against Aids. My focus
is only going to be on women.

Because of this programme women are trained to be counsellors. Sick people
and those infected with Aids know about the people from whom they receive
counselling. The Department of Health trained women in care-giving skills
for those who are bed-ridden at home. As we know about the magnitude of the
problem of HIV and Aids, our hospitals will not be able to stand up to the
large number of people who become sick.

Let us also remember that if a child, a husband or a brother becomes sick,
it becomes the responsibility of a woman to give care. We appeal to the
men, the husbands, to be part of these programmes of caring for the ill at
home and assist women in educating and caring for our children, our
brothers and our sisters who are sick.
This programme brings integration between the Department of Social
Development and the Department of Health. Let us remember that before 1994
no one talked about HIV and Aids in this country, and no one even cared
about HIV/Aids. [Interjections.] It is the Government of the ANC that took
the initiative and planned a clear programme.

Secondly, considering this programme, our Government educates women about
nutrition. We know that in Europe and the United States, people infected
with Aids do not die in large numbers like the poverty-stricken people do
in our, African, countries. So, therefore, the standard of food and poverty
have great effects with regard to HIV/Aids. That is the reason our
Government insists on training and educating them about caring for their
bodies and protecting themselves.

Let me move on and talk about equality. I want to say that the ANC has set
precedents. Today we have nine Premiers. We congratulate Comrade Lindiwe
Sisulu, our new Minister of Intelligence.]

She is the first woman Minister of Intelligence in Africa. [Applause.]
Sinebhongo ngoba kaloku xa umama enguMphathiswa wezoBuntlola oko kuthetha
ukuba nathi sinengqondo. [Kwahlekwa.]

Ndifuna ukuthi kunyulo olugqithileyo ... (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[We are proud, because this means that women are intelligent too.
[Laughter.]

I want to say that in the last elections ...]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time has
expired. [Applause.]

Nksz L M T XINGWANA: Ndiyacela ke kooTony Leon ukuba balande ekhondweni
leenkokeli ze-ANC, bayeke ukulawula ngegqudu besithi umntu makaphumele
ngaphandle endaweni yokuba afune izimvo zabantu. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Ms L M T XINGWANA: I am appealing to Tony Leon and his own supporters to
follow the lead of the ANC, and stop enforcing their interests, saying that
one should step down instead of seeking out the views of other people.
[Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, take your book, please.
There is a pen also. Take your pen.

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Chairperson, our Constitution requires the state to
respect, protect, promote and fulfil the rights in the Bill of Rights. Our
Constitution is simply a set of principles written on a piece of paper.
Unless our hands find work to do, the nation will perish irrespective of
how excellent our Constitution may be. People create plenty, not just with
their hearts and minds, but also with their hands. Our bodies produce the
labour that manifest our dreams and discoveries into the physical world.

Visible leadership in government is an example of a strategic approach to
minimise the impact of poverty. A nation's will to tackle its problems is
only as strong as the moral will of the men and women in this House to rule
righteously and justly. That is the simple challenge to our perception on
how to tackle the problem of poverty. If the shoes of incorruptible
government fit properly on our feet, the nation will have clothes on their
backs and they will create work for their hands. It is disobedience to the
simple God-given truth and not simplistic theory, such as growing
population, that produces poverty. It is a fact that people produce
considerably more than they consume in their lifetimes.

God is a God of work and, being created in His image, we have the capacity
to produce and share. That is why growing human populations, far from
threatening to create poverty and exhausting natural resources, promise
instead to create wealth and to multiply resources. Human creativity within
a moral framework creates an endless wealth of ideas. Technology is the
moral application of science to benefit mankind and creation to the glory
of God. When applied to moral ends, it improves the quality of life! For
instance, medicine, energy sources, agricultural advances and information
explosions have all improved not just the quality of life but also the
quantity.

The state has to create an enabling environment for people to gain economic
and social rights through their own efforts and initiatives. We agree that
everyone should at least have access to basic economic and social rights to
sustain human life, health and dignity. People in rural areas need
assistance from co-operative partnerships between farmers and Government to
assist them to produce and grow their own food in order to survive.

The theme of alleviating poverty or addressing the needs of the poorest of
the poor has been echoing through the walls of this Parliament for the past
few years. It was extensively covered in the President's speech and
reflected in the budgets of various Ministries. Yet, to date, it appears as
though we are fighting a losing battle and putting money into pockets with
holes. Why?

Care for the poor is not a matter of logistics. No man or woman is an
island, neither are we a product of accident. If we disagree, then, by
careful search we will come to understand that poverty is a product of
greed and selfishness. We, as a nation, can meet the challenge of poverty.
South Africa can become prosperous and produce the best in the world if we
allow ourselves to obey God and his precepts, work hard and care for
others. Then, all will go well in our beautiful nation. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit is my oupa se
naam, ek is baie trots op hom.
Suid-Afrika het te doen met 'n ernstige armoedeprobleem, maar Suid-Afrika
het terselfdertyd ook te doen met 'n ernstige misdaadprobleem. Ons het te
doen met 'n ernstige gebrek aan buitelandse vertroue, wat lei tot 'n gebrek
aan buitelandse beleggings. Ons het te doen met 'n ernstige
werkloosheidsprobleem, en dit lyk of alles verskillende probleme is.

Tog, as mens gaan kyk, hou al die probleme met mekaar verband. Dit kan
eintlik as 'n bose kringloop bestempel word. Aan die een kant is daar 'n
gebrek aan nuwe beleggings, wat ons nodig het. Ons het die beleggings nodig
om nuwe werk te kan skep. Omdat ons nie nuwe werk kan skep met beleggings
nie, is mense arm. Armoede veroorsaak tot 'n groot mate misdaad. Die hoÃ«
misdaadsyfer lei op sy beurt tot 'n gebrek aan vertroue uit die buiteland
en ons is terug by die begin, ons kry nie beleggings nie.

Ons moet hierdie kringloop breek, anders gaan ons nooit die probleem oplos
nie. Hy kan gebreek word deur op elk van diÃ© aspekte te konsentreer. Ons
moet misdaad bekamp, ons moet vertroue in die buiteland wen, maar
uiteindelik kan agb lede sien alles kom terug na arbeid, en spesifiek die
arbeidsprobleem wat veroorsaak dat mense werkloos is. Ek praat hier
spesifiek van arbeidswetgewing.

Natuurlik is dit waarskynlik vir die Regering die moeilikste om diÃ© aspek
aan te pak, veral vanweÃ« sy vennootskap met Cosatu. Agb lede kan egter dink
na watter kant toe hulle wil, uiteindelik eindig alles daar. Al die
beperkings op ondernemers ten opsigte van arbeid veroorsaak dat ons
ekonomie tans groei, maar daar word nie nuwe werkgeleenthede geskep nie.

Agb lede moet maar gaan kyk hoe, in hierdie eeu van hoÃ« tegnologie, min
handearbeid daar is wat nie met 'n masjien of 'n robot vervang kan word
nie. Robotte staak nie, hulle vra nie oortyd betaling nie en as ons dit nie
moontlik maak dat mense meer werk gaan skep nie, gaan ons al meer in 'n
kringloop beland wat dit betref.

Ek wil ook oor die landbou praat, maar my tyd raak nou min. Dit is een van
die grootste werkskeppers in Suid-Afrika. VanweÃ« enkele gevalle is die
boodskap wat boere tans kry, ook uit diÃ© Huis, nie 'n boodskap dat hulle
welkom is nie, nie 'n boodskap dat hulle waardeer word nie. Die boodskap
dat boere onwelkom is, word voortdurend uitgestuur. Hulle skep werk, kyk
maar wat in Zimbabwe gaan gebeur waar die boere nie waardeer word nie. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman ... [Interjections.] It is my grandfather's
name, I am very proud of it.

South Africa is faced with a serious poverty problem, but at the same time
South Africa is also faced with a serious crime problem. We are faced with
a serious lack of foreign confidence, which leads to a lack of foreign
investment. We are faced with a serious unemployment problem, and it seems
as if all of these are different problems.

Nevertheless, when one looks at them, one sees that all the problems are
related to one another. It could in fact be defined as a vicious circle. On
the one hand there is a lack of new investments, which we need. We need the
investments to create new jobs. Because we cannot create new jobs by means
of investments, people are poor. Poverty causes crime to a great extent.
The high crime rate in turn leads to a lack of foreign confidence and we
are back at the beginning, we do not get investments.

We must break this vicious circle, or we will never solve the problem. It
can be broken by concentrating on each of these aspects. We must combat
crime, we must gain foreign confidence, but, as hon members can see,
eventually everything comes back to labour, and specifically the labour
problem, which causes unemployment among people. I am talking specifically
about labour legislation here.

Of course, for the Government this is probably the most difficult aspect to
tackle, especially owing to its partnership with Cosatu. Hon members may
think in whatever way they prefer, eventually everything ends up there
again. All the limitations on entrepreneurs in respect of labour are
contributing to our economy at present growing, but no new job
opportunities being created.

Hon members must go and look, in this century of high technology, at how
little manual labour there is that cannot be replaced with a machine or a
robot. Robots do not go on strike, they do not ask for overtime payment and
if we do not enable people to create more jobs we shall be drawn deeper
into a vicious circle as far as that is concerned.

I also want to talk about agriculture, but my time is running out. It is
one of the largest job creators in South Africa. Because of a few cases the
message that the farmers are at present getting, also from this House, is
not a message that they are welcome, nor a message that they are
appreciated. The message that farmers are unwelcome continues to go out.
They create jobs; just look at what is going to happen in Zimbabwe where
the farmers are not appreciated. [Time expired.]]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, the greatest danger and threat to our
fledgling democracy is an inability to address the fundamental question of
poverty and inequality substantively.

There is no doubt that our country has just emerged from its ugly past,
characterised by unjust apartheid laws and policies specifically designed
to disempower the majority of our people. As a result, inequality was
deliberately created by means of manipulating and limiting access to
employment opportunities, land, education, housing, health, welfare and
other basic social needs.

The resulting situation of these policies has given rise to the existing
socioeconomic conditions, as characterised by the huge gap in income and
wealth distribution along colour lines. It is a well-known fact that the
majority of our people live in abject poverty and squalid conditions and
most of them are to be found, though not exclusively, in the rural areas.
The greatest challenge facing our country is to undo the effects of these
past policies through dynamic and well thought-out policies aimed at
creating an equal and prosperous society.

The Government has, in the past, introduced the RDP, which was widely
hailed and accepted by most South Africans as a Marshall Plan, aimed at
eradicating inequality and poverty. However, as we all know, the RDP policy
was abandoned in favour of the controversial Gear policy. Gear, like any
other policy, has its own advantages and disadvantages.

The challenge is to introduce sustainable, integrated development projects.
We should also note that corruption is inimical to any meaningful
development. [Time expired.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, the most fundamental challenge in South Africa
today is to achieve a reduction in poverty and inequality. This will
require substantial changes in the distribution of income, wealth and
economic power between men and women, rural and urban areas, whites and
blacks, and between capital and labour. Clearly, a dramatic restructuring
of the economy needs to take place. The question is, how?

The past few years have seen considerable policy formulation. What is
really needed now is for Government to start implementing. The process of
getting water and electricity to villages, building schools and clinics,
training teachers and helping people to enter into self-employment need to
be accelerated.

The PAC supports a decision by Government to invest more in infrastructural
development and we appeal to Government to mobilise the unemployed to build
the backlog of infrastructure. Poverty and unemployment are closely linked.
The unemployment rate amongst those from poor households is 55%, in
comparison with a rate of 14% for those nonpoor households. Whilst more
jobs are important, so are better jobs for those who are already employed.

Our Constitution is unique in its antipoverty focus. It establishes rights
of access to housing, health and water, amongst other fundamental human
rights, compelling the state to take reasonable measures. We appeal to the
Constitutional Court to be more vigilant in enforcing these rights.

I want to agree with the hon Feinstein that poverty knows no political
affiliation. Therefore, we in this House must unite and tackle the scourge.
The PAC commits itself to working together with anyone who is ready and
committed to eradicate poverty and inequality. [Applause.]

Mr M S MANIE: Chairperson, poverty and inequality are not things that arose
after 1994. These issues are the direct results of the previous policies of
the old apartheid government.

The question that arises is whether the commitment to fight poverty and
inequality is only an ANC task. Judging from all the political speeches
made in this House today and before, it would appear to me that all
political parties have expressed the importance of fighting them. But our
fight against poverty and inequality must not be confined to nice speeches.
It must be reflected in practical actions and programmes that will make a
meaningful difference to the lives of the poor.

Our approach, however, needs to be based on certain existing realities and
not political expediency. Firstly, we have to ask: Were blacks deprived of
economic, social and political participation or not, and did whites benefit
materially through apartheid? But, secondly, we also have to ask whether we
need white skills and whether we have gone far enough to address their
concerns and fears.

Ordinary white people have the perception that the ANC Government is only
concerned about black interests and that they will achieve this by taking
away from the whites. These people feel very unsure about their future in
the new South Africa.

Ordinary black people, on the other hand, have the perception that whites
do not care about them and their needs, and that whites will do what they
can to hold on to their privileges. Black people feel very frustrated.
Although they now have the vote, they cannot use it to buy bread or to pay
their rent. They are desperate for a better life.

Although the Government has done a great deal to address these problems, as
previous speakers have mentioned, it cannot do it on its own. It requires
the assistance and support of all the people of our country. What we need
in South Africa is a common national agenda for all to unite behind,
something that can unite all South Africans.

I am fully aware that whites feel threatened by our policies of black
economic empowerment, employment equity and affirmative action. But these
policies did not fall out of the air. They are direct responses to dealing
with the consequences of past policies and practices.

Black economic empowerment tries to address the previous exclusion of
blacks from economic power. Affirmative action deals with the question of
past discrimination in the workplace and job reservation. Skills
development tries do address some of the effects of Bantu education. And
for the ANC to stand here, year after year, explaining why it is necessary
to have these extraordinary measures to combat the legacies of the past,
while the DA and other opposition parties are constantly focusing only on
the negative side of our policies, only further polarises our society.

We need to move beyond the talking and get to the point of dealing with the
solutions. If the measures we have taken are the wrong ones, what are the
alternatives? We all seem to acknowledge that the problems are real and not
perceived.

The question of economic growth should also be tackled head-on by all of
us, because as long as the cake is small, it will limit the ability of the
interventions that we can make. Addressing poverty and removing inequality
could be one way of stimulating the economy. For instance, bringing more
people into the mainstream of the economy will create a bigger domestic
market which will, in turn, lead to bigger demand and an increase in the
manufacturing and production activities in our country. This multiplier
effect is something that is often not considered when we talk about
removing poverty and inequality.

I am convinced that if we had the ability to prevent civil war, then we
have the capacity in South Africa to develop a programme behind which all
people in our country can unite. In my view, this national programme must
focus on at least four elements. These are black expectations, of which
poverty and inequality form important components, white fears, economic
growth and nation-building. But the lead that all people are looking for
needs to be driven by political parties in this House.

We, collectively, represent the will of the nation and the people out
there. What we require is a political process that will culminate in a
national programme that will be discussed between all the political players
as the first step. For this programme to succeed, though, other
stakeholders, such as business, labour, the religious sector and the media
must also endorse it. The forum in which the Deputy President meets with
the leaders of the opposition parties in this House could certainly be
considered as a platform to initiate these discussions. The vision as
outlined by the President in his state of the nation address forms an
important basis from which to proceed.

The Budget, in the way that it had redirected resources to certain priority
areas, is an important second step. I know that political point-scoring and
posturing is an integral part of political life. But we will not be
confronted by elections for the next two or three years, and that gives us
a very important window of opportunity to thrash out details of a proposed
national agenda behind which all South Africans can unite. This Parliament
can and should lead in the writing of the final chapter of the South
African miracle. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Sihlalo, ngithi kuLulu Xingwana siyabonga. Ubashayile
ngolwimi lethu lwaseNingizimu Afrika. [Ihlombe.] [Chairperson, I would like
to say thank you to the hon Lulu Xingwana. She surpassed everyone by
speaking our South African language.] [Applause.]]

South Africa is an upper middle income country but, despite this, the
relative experience of most South African households is outright poverty
and the continuing vulnerability of the poor. The distribution of wealth
and income in South Africa is amongst the most unequal in the world. Many
households still have unsatisfactory access to education, health care,
energy and clean water.

This situation is likely to affect not only the country's social and
political stability, but also the development path it follows. Policies to
reduce poverty and inequality have to take into account the complementary
nature of different kinds of assets and the markets where they are
exchanged.

While economic growth contributes to poverty reduction, it may not
necessarily reduce inequality. Several areas of Government actions are
relevant to the relationship between economic growth and the reduction of
poverty and inequality. This includes the allocation of state resources to
social services and infrastructure, the provision of social safety nets,
the promotion of social equity through the redistribution of policies
involving taxation, market reforms and reprioritising expenditure, the
development of good governance and administrative capacity.

The Government has already taken constructive steps to address poverty and
inequalities created by past policies and systems. A mechanism to monitor
the impact of policies very closely to ensure that poverty and inequality
reduction is an integral part of the focus of the policies and their
implementation is necessary.

The MF supports the Government's efforts in the challenge to overcome
poverty and inequality in South Africa. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, enige persoon wat nie ontroer word deur
die vernietigende effek van armoede op die lewens van mense nie, moet 'n
hardvogtige mens wees. Daarom is die onderwerp vandag so belangrik. Die AEB
steun die saak van die opheffing van die armes, tewens, dit is ons
Christelike plig. Die vraag is dus nie of armoede en ongelykheid moet
aangespreek word nie. Die vraag is: Hoe?

Laat ek eers sÃª hoe dit nie aangespreek moet word nie. Eerstens, moet
armoede en rykdom nie oorvereenvoudig gedefinieer word ingevolge wit en
swart nie, en die saak moet nie net bloot gegiet word in die vorm van 'n
tweenasieteorie nie. Die groeiende kloof begin vandag ontstaan binne-in die
onderskeie rasgroepe.

Tweedens: Hoe nie? Ons moet nie op opportunistiese wyse van die saak van
die armes 'n politieke speelbal maak nie. Ons moet ook nie die politieke
aspirasies probeer vervul vanuit die troostelose toestand van die armste
van die armes nie. Onvervulde beloftes wat aan armes gemaak word, verhoog
net die frustrasie. Deur bloot die koek anders te sny, gaan nie die
probleem van armoede oplos nie. Die koek moet groter gemaak word.

Blote herverdeling deur Robin Hood te speel, verlaag en verminder die
totale kapasiteit van die ekonomie totdat daar naderhand niks meer is om te
herverdeel nie. Gee die behoeftige 'n visstok eerder as 'n vis en
konsentreer sodoende op werkskepping, opvoeding en bemagtiging. Wat betref
werkskepping, moet ons kyk na ons arbeidswetgewing, waardeur die totale
aantal poste eenvoudig minder gemaak word.

'n Bemagtigde mens is 'n trotse mens. Die enigste manier waarop dit kan
geskied, is deur middel van gesonde, beproefde ekonomiese beginsels, deur
die ekonomie te laat groei, 'n beleggersvriendelike omgewing te skep,
behoorlike dienslewering en nie 'n staatsdepartement wat deur
onoordeelkundige regstellende optrede ontmagtig is nie. Ons moet kyk na die
belange van die landbousektor wat nie net kos aan die armes voorsien nie,
maar ook werk skep. Spreek die saak aan deur 'n positiewe wen-
wenbenadering. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, any person who is not moved by the
devastating effect of poverty on the lives of people, must be heartless.
For that reason the topic today is so important. The AEB supports the cause
of the upliftment of the poor; besides, it is our Christian duty. The
question is therefore not whether poverty and inequality must be addressed.
The question is: How?

First let me say how it must not be addressed. Firstly, poverty and wealth
must not be too simply defined in terms of white and black, and the issue
must not simply be moulded in the form of a two-nations theory. Today a
growing rift is beginning to develop within the various race groups.

Secondly: How not? We must not make a political football of the issue of
the poor in an opportunistic manner. We must also not attempt to fulfil
political aspirations out of the desolate situation of the poorest of the
poor. Unfulfilled promises made to the poor merely heighten the
frustration. The problem of poverty will not be solved by merely dividing
the cake differently. The cake must be made larger.

Mere redistribution by playing Robin Hood, lowers and reduces the total
capacity of the economy until eventually there is nothing more to
redistribute. Rather give the needy a fishing rod than a fish and in this
way concentrate on job creation, education and empowerment. As far as job
creation is concerned, we must look at our labour legislation, through
which the total number of positions is simply being reduced.

An empowered person is a proud person. The only way in which this can
happen is by way of healthy, proven economic principles, by causing the
economy to grow, creating an investor-friendly environment, proper service
delivery and not a state department disempowered by ill-considered
affirmative action. We must look at the interests of the agricultural
sector which not only provides food to the poor, but also creates jobs.
Address the issue by way of a positive win-win approach. [Time expired.]]

Mr A J FEINSTEIN: Chairperson, may I first thank all speakers for their
participation in today's discussion. May I also commend the hon member from
the UDM on his maiden speech in this House.

I would like to thank all speakers for the constructive commitment that
they enunciated to tackling poverty and inequality in our society. It was
both sad and interesting to me that there was only one speaker who
attempted to pull the discussion in a party-political direction. It is
interesting that he was also the only speaker who has belonged to the old
and the New NP. It was also interesting that, while he and I, both by the
accident only of the colour of our skin at our birth, have led lives of
relative comfort and privilege ... [Interjections] ... he omitted to
mention the specific responsibility that we have in overcoming poverty and
inequality.

If we, the historically privileged, lose sight of our responsibilities, we
ourselves will undermine the quest for a truly nonracial society.
[Applause.] Without nonracism, our struggle for liberation will always be
unfulfilled. To be white in South Africa - or as some people like to refer
to me, to be pale and male - does not imply that one should be uncritical.
What it does require is an active engagement with our society.

It requires the use of our skills to promote the common good and a redress
of the past, so that we can truly create a level playing field for our
children and grandchildren. At the same time, let us all bear in mind that
there are many in this House who have suffered and endured terrible and
tragic things. Today, we are all, simply by virtue of the fact that we sit
in this House and earn a salary every month, amongst the rich in our
society.

Let us never lose sight of where we came from and what we want to struggle
towards. Let us recommit ourselves, not to the fine words that we have
heard here today, but to a practical, consensual and implementable
programme of action that will ensure that all our children and their
children grow up in comfort, prosperity and with the opportunity to fulfil
their potential to its utmost. Again, I thank all members of this House for
their participation in this discussion and for their close attention.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! This subject is concluded, but
clearly, its many imperatives wait to be resolved, through us by our active
intervention. That is the key challenge facing this Parliament. Let us rise
adequately to that challenge and ensure that we can combat these ills in
our country.

Hon members, I wish to recognise the Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, who would like to present a motion without notice to the House.

                   ALLEVIATION OF POVERTY IN SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) noting that it is the elected representative body of all South
       Africans -


       (a)  commits itself to uniting in alleviating poverty and reducing
           inequality in general and across race and gender divides in
           particular; and


       (b)  calls on all party leaders, and the leadership of all sectors of
           our society, to meet to develop a consensual practical national
           programme of action;


  (2) is of the opinion that this practical programme should be -


       (a)  informed by -


           (i)   the active participation of all South Africans, driven by
                  our common commitment to our country and united in our
                  remarkable diversity; and


           (ii)  the need to redress the structural inequities created by
                  apartheid; and


       (b)  based on -


           (i)   a growing, job-creating economy;


           (ii)  a comprehensive rural and urban development strategy;


           (iii) a holistic welfare strategy;
           (iv)  massive investment in physical and service infrastructure;
                  and


           (v)   immediate combined interventions by business, labour and
                  Government to accelerate skills development in key
                  economic sectors; and


  (3) calls on all South Africans - black and white, rich and poor - to
       unite behind such a programme in the spirit of our vibrant, young
       democracy.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 16:48.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS:

National Assembly:

Papers:
1.    The Speaker:


     Petition from the Treatment Action Campaign calling on Parliament to
     support the policy on and to play a proactive role in the development
     of a treatment for people with HIV/Aids.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Ad hoc Committee on Report 13 of Public Protector,
     dated 28 February 2001:


     The Ad hoc Committee on Report 13 of Public Protector, having
     considered Report No 13 (Special Report): Report on the alleged
     irregularities with regard to the affairs and financial statements of
     the SFF Association, and on the relevant reports of the Auditor-General
     to Parliament, and having heard evidence, reports as follows:


     1.     Introduction


         (1)     On 21 January 2000, Report No 13 of the Public Protector
              was tabled in Parliament.


         (2)     The Committee was established in terms of Rule 214 of the
              National Assembly, by decision of the Speaker, on 19 January
              2000, which decision was ratified by the National Assembly on
              21 January 2000. The Committee was established to consider
              Report No 13 and to report to the National Assembly. The
              Committee was formally constituted on 20 January 2000.


         (3)     The Committee presented its first Report to the National
              Assembly on 25 February 2000, in which the Committee set out
              what it understood to be its terms of reference and work
              method:


                "The Committee, mindful of the fact that its terms of
                reference is to consider the report as a whole, proposes to
                deal with the report, its findings and recommendations in a
                comprehensive and holistic manner.
                The Committee notes that the report deals with matters and
                makes recommendations which go beyond the terms of reference
                derived from the Resolution dated 21 August 1997, adopted by
                the National Assembly, requesting the Public Protector to
                investigate and report on the alleged irregularities with
                respect to the affairs and financial statements of the SFF
                Association, including, having due regard to the Report of
                the Minister of Minerals and Energy and to the applicable
                law, whether the reports of the Auditor-General to
                Parliament thereon were correct and proper. This adds to the
                complexity of the Committee's task.


                In pursuance of its approach, the Committee will consider,
                when necessary, calling evidence on the findings and matters
                contained in the report and on the extent to which the
                recommendations contained in the report have been
                implemented.


                The Committee may further consider referring matters arising
                from the report to structures best suited to deal with them.


                Mindful of the need to deal with these matters as
                expeditiously as possible, but also mindful of the scope,
                range and complexity of the matters dealt with in the Public
                Protector's report, the Committee is of the opinion that it
                will require a period of at least three calendar months,
                from the date of adoption of this Report, to complete its
                work, provided that the Committee may need to approach the
                House with a view to extending this period, if necessary".


         (4)     The Committee has taken considerable time in completing
              its work, both due to the complexity of the matters it was
              asked to deal with as well as lengthy recesses in Parliament's
              schedule during an election year.


         (5)     The Committee has considered the report of the Public
              Protector and has also considered written and oral submissions
              by the Public Protector, presented at public hearings held on
              4 and 18 April 2000.


         (6)     The Committee would like to express its sincere gratitude
              to the Public Protector, Adv S A M Baqwa SC, and the staff in
              his Office, for the assistance they provided to the Committee,
              and the very cordial and constructive manner in which it was
              able to interact with them.


         (7)     The Committee is pleased to submit its final Report to the
              National Assembly.


     2.     Report of Public Protector


         (1)     The Committee would like to express its appreciation to
              the Public Protector for the investigation conducted by his
              Office and the comprehensive report that has been submitted to
              Parliament.


         (2)     On 21 August 1997 the National Assembly adopted the
              following resolution which constituted the terms of reference
              of the Public Protector:


              "That the House resolves to request the Public Protector, in
              terms of section 182(1)(a) and (b) of the Constitution, 1996,
              to investigate, and to report to the National Assembly on, the
              alleged irregularities with regard to the affairs and
              financial statements of the SFF Association, including having
              due regard to the Report of the Minister of Minerals and
              Energy and to the applicable law, whether reports of the
              Auditor-General to Parliament thereon were correct and
              proper".


         (3)     The investigation conducted by the Public Protector
              spanned an extensive period. There were 25 000 pages of
              written evidence and extensive oral evidence presented to the
              Public Protector. Parties who had an interest in the
              investigation were represented by senior legal teams.


              In his submission to the Committee the Public Protector
              addressed the question of the money and time spent on this
              investigation and indicated that the investigation was fully
              justified in view of the fact that the SFF Association was a
              wholly-owned government company worth more than R13 billion.
              He indicated that the money spent was mainly in the form of
              legal fees incurred by interested parties. He concluded that
              he believed that every cent spent was well worth it.


     3.     Findings of Public Protector


         The findings of the Public Protector can be summarised as follows:


         (1)     General approach


              The Public Protector took the following approach with his
              investigation:


              The key driving force to this investigation was to protect the
              public interest. When it appeared that no loss had occurred,
              he had to weigh whether the benefit of investigating further
              would be justified by the cost of the investigation. He did
              not investigate matters which had been dealt with elsewhere or
              in other investigations. He also did not investigate matters
              which would not have been of practical benefit to the public.


         (2)     Change in accounting policy (R170 million issue)


              (a) During the 1992-93 financial year, the Strategic Fuel Fund
                  Association (SFF) Management decided to change the
                  accounting policy relating to strategic oil stock that
                  had been sold from one storage facility and replaced
                  elsewhere, during the previous three years. This change
                  in accounting policy gave rise to a R170 million loss,
                  which the former Minister of Minerals and Energy Affairs,
                  Dr P M Maduna, referred to in his responses to questions
                  in Parliament. The Minister indicated that this was
                  possibly a physical loss to the SFF.


              (b) During the initial hearings in June 1998, Counsel for the
                  Minister put on record that the R170 million was not a
                  physical loss, as the Minister had indicated in his
                  responses in Parliament, but an accounting loss caused by
                  the change in accounting policy.


                  Considering and evaluating the accounting policy change
                  was only necessary for as long as it appeared that the
                  R170 million was a physical loss. Given that there was no
                  physical loss associated with the change in accounting
                  policy, the Public Protector therefore made no finding
                  regarding the reasonableness of the change in accounting
                  policy and its disclosure (see also paragraph 4(6)
                  below).


         (3)     Payments to Interstate


              (a) The SFF contracted directly with the Egyptian General
                  Petroleum Corporation (EGPC) to purchase Egyptian crude
                  oil in 1992. Prior to this date, due to sanctions, the
                  SFF had effectively purchased Egyptian crude oil through
                  a company called Interstate, paying Interstate a margin
                  for this service, as was normal practice at the time.


              (b) The SFF continued to pay Interstate a reduced margin
                  (US$Â 0,06 a barrel) on all oil purchased through EGPC
                  after 1992. Interstate paid the SFF US$Â 0,05 a barrel if
                  they, instead of the SFF, lifted the oil under the
                  contract.


              (c) Allegations were made that the payments to Interstate were
                  of no value and were perhaps improper or fraudulent.


              (d) Evidence showed that the payments were made for the
                  effective relinquishing to SFF of Interstate's Egyptian
                  oil contract volumes with EGPC, as EGPC did not have
                  additional oil volumes to contract with the SFF, without
                  Interstate giving up their volumes. Interstate also
                  provided ad hoc logistical services, but these were not
                  the main causa for the payments to Interstate.


              (e) Whilst there were many deficiencies in the documentation
                  of the contract with Interstate, which gave rise to the
                  suspicions of impropriety, the Public Protector finds
                  that there was a valid reason or causa for the payments
                  to Interstate. It is, however, equally true that the
                  benefit received for the payments to Interstate reduced
                  or weakened over the years as the oil procurement
                  environment improved.


         (4)     Salem recovery


              (a) Allegations were also made with regard to the R1Â 450
                  million payment by SFF to the Government in April 1997,
                  and the incorrect posting in the books of SFF of moneys
                  recovered from the Salem oil tanker incident.


              (b) Whilst the Public Protector needed to investigate these
                  allegations and covered these issues in the report, he
                  regarded it as common cause that no losses arose from
                  these issues. As such these issues did not form the
                  primary focus of his investigation.


         (5)     Auditor-General's Report to Parliament


              Audit of SFF


              (a) The general allegation was that the audits of the SFF by
                  the Auditor-General and his agent, Price Waterhouse,
                  should have identified the problems with regard to the
                  contract underlying the payments to Interstate (referred
                  to as the Six Cents Agreement) and the other alleged
                  irregularities.
              (b) The Public Protector indicates that Parliament
                  specifically requested him to look at the alleged
                  irregularities and therefore he considered the audit
                  process only in so far as it related to the alleged
                  irregularities noted above.


              (c) Given that he found that there was a valid causa for the
                  Interstate payments and that the issue regarding the
                  change in accounting policy did not cause an actual loss,
                  he found no basis on which the audit of the SFF could be
                  criticised for not identifying these issues.


              (d) The main criticism of the Auditor-General's reporting to
                  Parliament was that the 1992-93 management financial
                  statements, which in previous years had not been
                  published, were published for the first time in 1992-93
                  in an abridged format. The abridged financial statements
                  summarised the management financial statements and did
                  not separately disclose the R170 million relating to the
                  change in the accounting policy.


              (e) The argument was that the secrecy provisions, which had
                  previously restricted the publishing of crude oil
                  information, were sufficiently relaxed to allow full
                  publication of the financial statements. The allegations
                  went further to imply that the abbreviation had occurred
                  to cover up the R170 million loss.


              (f) Based on the evidence the Public Protector finds that it
                  appears that the Auditor-General (who had the discretion
                  after consultation to decide what information to publish)
                  in fact published the SFF information much earlier than
                  he was required to do. In addition he finds that whilst
                  there were minor technical difficulties with the
                  abbreviated 1992-93 financial statements, they could not
                  be said to be misleading or inappropriate.


              (g) While the Committee accepts the findings of the Public
                  Protector outlined above, it wishes to draw the attention
                  of the National Assembly to the following matters:


                  (i)  The CEF Group and the SFF Association were
                         instrumental in attempts by the Apartheid State to
                         break the international oil embargo imposed by the
                         United Nations in protest against Apartheid.


                  (ii) As such these organisations operated behind a veil
                         of secrecy and conducted operations that were, by
                         definition, in contravention of international law.


                  (iii)      The structure and functioning of the SFF was
                         such that it made political and administrative
                         accountability difficult.


                  (iv) There are certain allegations, in particular
                         concerning the diversion of funds from the SFF for
                         political purposes, that the Committee is not
                         necessarily satisfied were isolated incidents. The
                         Committee is of the view that a forensic
                         investigation into such matters would have been in
                         the public interest.


                  (v)  During the course of its work further allegations of
                         irregularities in the operations of the SFF
                         Association were reported.


                  (vi) The Committee wishes to state that, if the
                         accounting policy was adequately discussed with and
                         explained to the Minister and the National
                         Assembly, much of the misunderstanding could have
                         been avoided.


         (6)     Findings regarding actions of Minister
              The Public Protector makes the following findings regarding
              the actions of the Minister:


              (a) The Public Protector finds that the Minister's statements,
                  both in Parliament and outside Parliament, were
                  tantamount to suggesting that the Office of the Auditor-
                  General had either covered up the loss of R170 million or
                  that he had not done his duty properly by ascertaining
                  and disclosing that such a loss had occurred. The Public
                  Protector finds that this unfortunate impression could
                  easily have been dispelled by an appropriate consultation
                  with his Management Auditor or by a direct in-depth
                  discussion with the Auditor-General himself. Even though
                  there were meetings between the Minister and the Office
                  of the Auditor-General, it did not seem to him that they
                  were in the spirit of section 181 or section 41(1), which
                  provides as follows:


                  "(1) All spheres of government and all organs of State
                  within each sphere must -
                  (a)  preserve the peace, the national unity and the
                       indivisibility of the Republic;
                  (b)  secure the well-being of the people of the Republic;
                  (c)  provide effective, transparent, accountable and
                       coherent government for the Republic as a whole;
                  (d)  be loyal to the Constitution, the Republic and its
                       people;
                  (e)  respect the constitutional status, institutions,
                       powers and functions of government in the other
                       spheres;
                  (f)  not assume any power or function except those
                       conferred on them in terms of the Constitution;
                  (g)  exercise their powers and perform their functions in
                       a manner that does not encroach on the geographical,
                       functional or institutional integrity of government
                       in another sphere; and
                  (h)  co-operate with one another in mutual trust and good
                       faith by -
                       (i)   fostering friendly relations;
                       (ii)  assisting and supporting one another;
                       (iii) informing one another of, and consulting one
                             another on, matters of common interest;
                       (iv)  co-ordinating their actions and legislation
                             with one another;
                       (v)   adhering to agreed procedures; and
                       (vi)  avoiding legal proceedings against one another
                             ..."


              (b) With regard to protection of institutions, functional or
                  institutional integrity, fostering good relations,
                  supporting one another, consulting one another and
                  adhering to agreed procedures, the Public Protector finds
                  that the Minister violated the spirit of the Constitution
                  by not upholding the principles and prescripts contained
                  particularly in the quoted sections of the Constitution.
                  Adherence thereto would have led to the immediate
                  rectification of any incorrect perception which the
                  Minister might have had.


              (c) The Public Protector indicates that he has not suggested
                  and he does not suggest that the Minister acted mala
                  fide. None of the evidence presented before him suggested
                  that the Minister had any bone to pick with the Office of
                  the Auditor-General prior to the reports he received
                  which led to the Management Audit. The Public Protector
                  finds that the Constitution can be transgressed even if
                  the Minister's allegations were made bona fide and had
                  been correct.


              (d) The Public Protector holds that the Minister is duty-bound
                  to uphold the constitutional principles and follow
                  correct procedures at all times, and that it is
                  absolutely imperative for all South Africans, both in and
                  outside Parliament, to accept the consequences of the
                  Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land. One
                  of those consequences is to uphold and protect the
                  dignity, the integrity and independence of the
                  institutions mentioned in Chapter 9 of the Constitution.


              (e) The Public Protector points out that neither section 181
                  nor section 41 provides any sanction for their
                  transgression, and that he is not possessed of any power
                  to prescribe such sanctions. He regards this as a
                  constitutional weakness that can only be remedied by
                  Parliament itself. Parliament has to provide such remedy
                  because he considers these matters to be serious enough
                  "not even to be adequately addressed by a simple
                  apology". Parliament therefore needs to devise a
                  mechanism with which to deal with such matters when they
                  arise. This is necessary also to endorse not only the
                  fact that the Constitution is a living document, but also
                  one that is effective. The public needs to be assured
                  that the Constitution is not a document of mere words.


              (f) The Public Protector points out that the Minister is a
                  Member of Parliament and a Member of the Cabinet, and in
                  this regard section 92 of the Constitution provides as
                  follows:


                  "(2) Members of the Cabinet are accountable collectively
                  and individually to Parliament for the exercise of their
                  powers and the performance of their functions.
                  (3)  Members of the Cabinet must -
                  (a)  act in accordance with the Constitution; and
                  (b)  provide Parliament with full and regular reports
                       concerning matters under their control."


              (g) The Committee is of the view that the National Assembly
                  has already found that the Minister acted in
                  contravention of the then Rule 99 (now Rule 66) by
                  reflecting upon the competence or honour of the Auditor-
                  General, and that the remarks were not in keeping with
                  the spirit of sections 181 and 41 of the Constitution.


              (h) The Committee deals more extensively with matters relating
                  to sections 181 and 41 under paragraph 5(4).


     4.     Recommendations by Public Protector


         The recommendations contained in the Public Protector's report can
         be summarised as follows:


         (1)     With regard to the failure to record the Six Cents
              Agreement with Interstate in writing, and the issues raised
              with regard to the causa for the payments to Interstate, the
              Public Protector found it to be untenable that the causa for
              the payments was not recorded in the facsimile of 2 July 1992
              and that the term contract was not in writing in accordance
              with the Company Policy R02. It was found that the policy with
              regard to term contracts, namely that they had to be in
              writing, was a salutary one, and that all contracts should be
              formalised and authorised at the appropriate levels, as a
              written contract would probably have gone a long way to allay
              the suspicions that had arisen around the US$Â 0,06 payments to
              Interstate. It was also found to be unacceptable that this
              matter was not addressed by internal controls such as Internal
              Audit, which is an indication of a material defect in the
              organisational structure.


              Strict application of the written contracts policy is
              therefore recommended, and this has to be drawn especially to
              the attention of Internal Audit of SFF, and specifically
              incorporated as one of the imperatives into the rules and
              regulations in terms of which they approve payments.


         (2)     With regard to the absence of reference in minutes of the
              Board/Crude Oil Committee for 1992 and 1993 to the Six Cents
              Agreement with Interstate, and the fact that minutes of the
              Crude Oil Committee meetings were kept by a member of the
              crude oil department, and not by the regular Board secretary,
              it was noted that no relaxation or laxity of standards should
              be tolerated in any State entity, and in particular one which
              deals in billions of rands on behalf of the tax payer. The
              Public Protector took it that minuting is now undertaken by a
              competent person trained to do so. If not, it is recommended
              to the Board of the SFF that this be effected. It is also
              recommended that the Directors and committee members, when
              checking minutes, ensure that these fully record the matters
              of importance with regard to the management of the business as
              well as key decisions in this regard.


         (3)     With regard to the issues arising from the alleged absence
              of Board approval for the EGAM contract and the level of
              authorisation needed for an evergreen contract, it was noted
              that contracts longer than a year should go to the Board. As
              an evergreen contract is intended to last for more than a
              year, it is recommended that evergreen contracts also be
              reviewed by the Board in future.


              With reference to the delay in bringing the EGAM contract to
              the attention of the Board, it is recommended that such delays
              be strongly discouraged, since it is improper not to keep the
              Board informed at all times.


         (4)     With regard to the Ivory Coast payment, it appears to have
              been an isolated incident representing a classic case of
              political manipulation of a state-owned company for political
              gain. It is indeed hoped that this case represents an
              aberration which will never be repeated within the CEF group
              or any similar organisation. It is a lesson about what ought
              never to be allowed to happen by all State institutions and
              para-statals.


         (5)     With regard to the Salem issue, and the incorrect posting
              of monies received: This practice should be deprecated as
              inappropriate. Though it did not have any practical negative
              consequences, it ought not to have been done and reflects a
              practice that should not be repeated in the future.


         (6)     With regard to the change in accounting policy, the Public
              Protector is of the opinion that the processes followed and
              the expertise utilised in considering the change and its
              disclosure, were reasonable. However, should there still be
              concerns, the Public Protector states that the Minister is
              entitled to request the Board to review the matter further and
              to obtain further expert advice.


         (7)     With regard to the old Company Policy R05, which was
              silent on whether funds for return cargoes should be retained:
              The new policy is explicit that the funds must be set aside
              from the original sale. Therefore the Public Protector has no
              further recommendation in this regard, other than to say that
              this is more desirable. As it was common cause that there was
              no actual cash shortage caused by these payments (cash
              transfers to the Government based on oil sales which had not
              yet occurred), and in view of the fact that the cash flow
              forecasts are subjective projections into the future, the
              Public Protector did not go into too much detail on the
              various cash flow forecasts prepared and the differences
              between them. It is recommended, however, that if a cash flow
              shortage is forecast, even a short-term one, this should be
              clearly communicated to the Board so that the matter can be
              addressed in whatever manner deemed appropriate by the Board.


         (8)     With regard to company policy on whether strategic oil
              reserves should be held in wet or paper barrels, the Public
              Protector is of the opinion that Company Policy R02 was in
              fact not complied with, as 11 million barrels were held in
              paper barrels. Consequently the required reserves were below
              the minimum standard required at the time. At that stage (31
              March 1997) the breach of policy did not have any serious
              consequences for the SFF or South Africa. In saying so, he
              does not seek to justify the aforementioned breach, which
              potentially could have had serious consequences for the
              country. Such breaches of company policy should never be
              countenanced or allowed to occur in future.


         (9)     With regard to the Interstate payments, the change in
              accounting policy and the R1 450 million payment to the
              Government, and the allegations raised by NSN that the General
              Manager acted without the appropriate authority and knowledge
              of the Board, and did not provide them with adequate
              information regarding the key issues: The position would have
              been different had the SFF had both Executive and Non-
              Executive Directors, in that the flow of information would not
              have been open to potential limitations by one person as was
              alleged.


              The Public Protector therefore recommends that SFF and other
              similar Government organisations should have a Board of
              Directors consisting of Executive and Non-Executive Directors,
              as suggested by the King Report. This would not necessarily
              require additional people. It would be expected that the non-
              executive Board would remain, but that the General Manager and
              Deputy General Managers be appointed Executive Directors. This
              would prevent the Board being dominated by an individual or
              individuals whilst ensuring that it is fully informed on all
              matters at all stages. The Chairperson would, however,
              continue to be independent and non-executive.


         (10)With regard to other Corporate Governance issues: The Public
              Protector is of the view that State institutions should form
              the model for good Corporate Governance. Whilst these
              institutions do not always operate in the same way as a normal
              business, the Corporate Governance principles outlined in the
              King Report are still applicable. Given the highlighting of
              fraud in business today, it is vital that as part of this
              Corporate Governance fraud be specifically addressed. It is
              therefore recommended that all State institutions should have
              a finalised fraud strategy as part of their overall strategy,
              which should include the following:


              (a) How fraud risks will be assessed on an ongoing basis.


              (b) An ongoing methodology for ensuring that the controls in
                  place correctly identify, deter and prevent fraud.


              (c) A fraud response plan to ensure that any fraud detected is
                  responded to appropriately.


              (d) Specific responsibilities for ensuring that the fraud
                  strategy is implemented and followed up on an ongoing
                  basis.


         (11)With regard to the interaction between the Minister and the
              Auditor-General, the Public Protector states that he found the
              Minister's conduct in regard to the accusations made with
              regard to the implied cover-up of a loss of R170 million by
              the Auditor-General to be unacceptable. In this regard, he
              recommends that not only the Minister, but all officials of
              the State, should take heed of the prescribed relationship
              between institutions and organs of State as spelt out in the
              Constitution. Section 41(1) and section 181 of the
              Constitution specifically deal with this. Section 41 provides
              that organs of State must respect the constitutional status,
              the one of the other. They must not exercise their powers in a
              manner that encroaches on the institutional integrity of
              another. It furthermore provides that organs of State should
              co-operate with one another in mutual trust and good faith by
              consulting one another on matters of common interest, and
              adhering to agreed procedures. The correct channels and
              procedure must be followed when addressing concerns one might
              have about a Chapter 9 institution. The Public Protector
              accordingly recommends that the Speaker of the National
              Assembly takes the necessary steps to ensure that not only
              this report, but also, more specifically, matters regarding
              sections 181 and 41 of the Constitution, be raised in the
              Legislature with a view to a pronouncement regarding the
              accountability of the Minister and any possible sanction which
              the Legislature might consider appropriate.


     5.     Recommendations of Committee


         The Committee considered the above recommendations and wishes to
         recommend to the National Assembly, as follows:


         (1)     Matters relating to corporate governance of SFF


              That the recommendations contained in paragraphs 4(1), 4(2),
              4(3), 4(4), 4(5), 4(7), 4(8), 4(9) and 4(10) be referred to
              the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, the Committee
              to consider these matters and to report to the National
              Assembly.


         (2)     Matters relating to corporate governance of public
              enterprises
              That the recommendations contained in paragraphs 4(4), 4(9)
              and 4(10) be referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
              Enterprises, the Committee to consider these matters and to
              report to the National Assembly.


         (3)     Matters relating to public service and administration


              That the recommendations contained in paragraph 4(10) be
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
              Administration, the Committee to consider these matters and to
              report to the National Assembly.


         (4)     Matters relating to sections 181 and 41 of Constitution


              (a) The Public Protector points out that neither section 181
                  nor section 41 of the Constitution provides any sanction
                  for their transgression. This is held to be a
                  "constitutional weakness" that can only be remedied by
                  Parliament itself. These matters are considered to be
                  serious enough "not even to be adequately addressed by a
                  simple apology".


              (b) The Committee concurs with the Public Protector regarding
                  the importance of the institutions supporting democracy
                  created in Chapter 9 of the Constitution and their role
                  in supporting democracy and human rights, and
                  consequently the need for the independence, impartiality,
                  dignity and effectiveness of these institutions to be
                  protected.


              (c) The Committee agrees with the Public Protector that the
                  Constitution does not provide for sanctions for the
                  contravention of sections 181 and 41(1) of the
                  Constitution. However, the Committee does not wish to
                  express itself on whether this constitutes a
                  "constitutional weakness" in view of the fact that
                  section 181 of the Constitution itself provides that
                  "other organs of State through legislative and other
                  measures must assist and protect these institutions to
                  ensure the independence, impartiality, dignity and
                  effectiveness of these institutions." (Committee's
                  emphasis.)


              (d) The Committee recommends that these matters be referred to
                  the Constitutional Review Committee and the Portfolio
                  Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, the
                  committees to consider the above matters and to report to
                  Parliament.


     6.     Accountability of Minister and appropriate sanction


         (1)     The Public Protector recommends that Parliament make a
              pronouncement regarding the accountability of the Minister and
              any possible sanction which Parliament might consider
              appropriate.


         (2)     In considering the above recommendation, the Committee
              considered the following factors:


              (a) The process of pronouncing on accountability and sanctions
                  is a judicial or quasi-judicial one that would entail,
                  inter alia, adherence to the principles of natural
                  justice. This clearly fell outside the mandate of the
                  Committee. The Committee was not constituted as a
                  disciplinary committee.


              (b) The National Assembly has already found that the Minister
                  acted in contravention of the then Rule 99 (now Rule 66)
                  by reflecting on the honour and integrity of the Auditor-
                  General other than by way of substantive motion and
                  ordered him to withdraw his statements and to apologise.
                  The Minister duly apologised unreservedly and
                  unconditionally retracted his remarks on 4Â September
                  1998. The Committee cannot concur with the assertion by
                  the Public Protector that the Minister apologised but did
                  not retract his statements. Hansard and the Minutes of
                  the National Assembly reflect otherwise.
              (c) The Supreme Court of Appeal stated, per Mohammed, CJ, in
                  the matter of The Speaker of the National Assembly vs De
                  Lille and Another 1999 (4 SA 863 SCA), that -


                  "This enquiry must crucially rest on the Constitution of
                  the Republic of South Africa, Act 108 of 1996. It is
                  Supreme - not Parliament. It is the ultimate source of
                  all lawful authority in the country. No Parliament,
                  however bona fide or eminent its membership, no
                  President, however formidable be his reputation or
                  scholarship, and no official, however efficient or well-
                  meaning, can make any law or perform any act which is not
                  sanctioned by the Constitution. Section 2 of the
                  Constitution expressly provides that law or conduct
                  inconsistent with the Constitution is invalid and the
                  obligations imposed by it must be fulfilled. It follows
                  that any citizen adversely affected by any decree, order
                  or action of any official or body, which is not properly
                  authorised by the Constitution is entitled to the
                  protection of the Courts. No Parliament, no official and
                  no institution is immune from Judicial scrutiny in such
                  circumstances." (p 868-9.)


                  "There is therefore nothing in the "Rules and orders" of
                  the Assembly which qualifies, in any respect relevant to
                  the appeal, the right to freedom of speech in the
                  Assembly which s58(1) guarantees. More directly, there is
                  nothing which provides any constitutional authority for
                  the Assembly to punish any Member of the Assembly for
                  making a speech through an order suspending such Member
                  from the proceedings of the Assembly. The right of free
                  speech in the Assembly protected by s58(1) is a
                  fundamental right crucial to representative government in
                  a democratic society. Its tenor and spirit must conform
                  to all other provisions of the Constitution relevant to
                  the conduct of proceedings in Parliament." (p 874.)
                  (Committee's emphasis.)
                  The judgment states that section 57 of the Constitution
                  "provides that the National Assembly 'may determine and
                  control its internal arrangements, proceedings and
                  procedures'. There can be no doubt that this authority is
                  wide enough to enable the Assembly to maintain internal
                  order and discipline in its proceedings by means which it
                  considers appropriate for this purpose. This would, for
                  example, include the power to exclude from the Assembly
                  for temporary periods any member who is disrupting or
                  obstructing its proceedings or impairing unreasonably its
                  ability to conduct its business in an orderly or regular
                  manner acceptable in a democratic society. Without some
                  internal mechanism of control and discipline, the
                  Assembly would be impotent to maintain effective
                  discipline and order during debates." (p 869.)
                  (Committee's emphasis.)


         (3)     In view of the above the Committee recommends that it
              would not be appropriate to make a pronouncement on an
              appropriate sanction in the instant case.


         (4)     The Committee recommends that these matters be referred to
              the Rules Committee of the National Assembly to consider any
              amendments to the Rules of the National Assembly and/or the
              Powers and Privileges of Parliament Act that might be
              appropriate, the Committee to report to the National Assembly.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development on the
     Developmental Welfare Governance Bill [B 43 - 2000] (National Assembly
     - sec 75), dated 28 February 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Social Development, having considered
         the subject of the Developmental Welfare Governance Bill [B 43 -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
         Bill with amendments [B 43A - 2000] (Advisory Board on Social
         Development Bill [B 43B - 2000]).


