---
title: 'National Assembly - 22 May 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-05-22
---

TUESDAY, 22 MAY 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M T GONIWE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the unwarranted attacks on the Speaker of the National Assembly
       by leaders of certain opposition political parties;


  (2) believes that such attacks undermine the integrity of the institution
       and threaten the ability of this House to serve the people who
       elected its members;


  (3) notes the exalted international reputation of Speaker Ginwala and the
       regard in which she is held by the people of South Africa;


  (4) recognises that Speaker Ginwala has been exemplary in the manner in
       which she has ensured that all parties and all the people of South
       Africa have a voice in the National Assembly; and


  (5) reaffirms its confidence in Speaker Ginwala and looks forward to her
       presiding over this House for many years to come.

[Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its disgust at the extravagance of the ANC's Ekurhuleni
       Mayor, labelled,``Mr Big Spender'' by the media, who has put his own
       self-importance ahead of the needs of those living in poverty;


  (2) notes that in his first six months in office he has squandered
       millions of rands, including -


       (a)  R500 000 on an inauguration party;
       (b)  R560 000 on an armour-plated Mercedes Benz;
       (c)  over R3 million per year on salaries for his personal staff;
       (d)  R60 million for yet another Council chamber; and
       (e)  over R400 000 to redecorate his current office and


  (3) calls on the ANC to at least choose candidates who have the best
       interests of the voters at heart when they dictatorially impose
       mayors on our communities.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with disgust that three police officers have been arrested for
       being part of a ring that rapes and commits other sexual offences on
       girls as young as twelve;


  (2) further notes with contempt that at least 15 members of the Pretoria
       Flying Squad are being investigated for this barbaric and inhumane
       crime, whereas they are the people who are supposed to protect the
       public, especially the helpless, innocent children;


  (3) is also shocked to learn that the so-raped and sexually-abused
       children had escaped from their abusive parents to the safe houses
       where they also faced their limbo through police officers; and


  (4) calls on both the Ministers of Safety and Security and of Social
       Development to attend to the plight of these children by specifically
       deploying social workers, police investigators and innocent parents
       to look closer into this matter.

Mr L V NGCULU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a veteran of the people's army uMkhonto weSizwe, comrade
       Graham ``Ntate Mashigo'' Morodi, has passed away;


  (2) believes that Comrade Ntate Mashigo has played a significant role in
       the liberation of our people, and will always be remembered by the
       masses of our people;


  (3) expresses its heartfelt condolences to his family and relatives; and


  (4) reiterates the ANC's commitment to pick up his spear and continue to
       champion and advance the transformation agenda.

[Applause.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with concern the increase in the use of drugs amongst learners;
           and


       (b)  with dismay that learners are being used by syndicates to sell
           drugs at schools; and


  (2) supports random drug-testing at schools on a voluntary basis, well
       believing that rehabilitation instead of punitive measures will
       prevent first-time users from becoming full-fledged addicts.

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its shock and dismay at two farm attacks in the past 48
       hours, one involving an elderly couple in the Free State, the other
       involving a family in KwaZulu-Natal;


  (2) extends its sincerest regret and sympathies to the injured victims,
       as well as their families;


  (3) acknowledges that the continuing spate of farm attacks across the
       country exacerbates the growing hostility and fear in rural areas and
       among farmers and farm workers;


  (4) confirms that farm and rural safety must be a priority and that we
       cannot allow a situation to develop where the ``remoteness'' of rural
       areas equate to a reduction in the Government's constitutional
       responsibility to protect the lives and property of rural citizens;
       and
  (5) notes that the UDM calls on the authorities to implement immediately
       strategies to curb these violent crimes.

[Applause.]

Ms M N BUTHELEZI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that South Africa's best entrepreneur, Mr Zitulele ``KK''
       Combi, won the acclaimed Ernest and Young Entrepreneur of the Year
       award for managing change;


  (2) believes that our democratic dispensation has given opportunities for
       black entrepreneurs to display their skills and talent and reach for
       their goals; and


  (3) congratulates Mr Zitulele Combi on his achievements.

[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock the insensitivity of the Ekurhuleni Mayor who has
       chosen to be extravagant and earned himself the title of ``Mr Big
       Spender'';


  (2) dismisses attempts by his spokesman to justify using council money to
       buy him an armoured-plated R560 000 Mercedes-Benz by claiming that,
       because the Mayor has come down very hard on criminals, he might be
       targeted;


  (3) rejects the Mayor's plans to spend R3 million on salaries for his
       personal staff and R430 000 to improve his office in one of the
       poorest areas in Gauteng;


  (4) notes with serious concern that hundreds of thousands of our people
       in the East Rand are so poor that they cannot afford a decent meal,
       while others cannot even afford a roof over their heads;


  (5) concludes that such extravagant spending in such a poor area must be
       condemned and rejected by all those who believe in the rights of the
       poor; and


  (6) calls on the Mayor of Ekurhuleni to stop spending millions on himself
       and his staff and to start spending millions on improving the lives
       of the poor around him by giving them excellent service.

[Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with horror how some schools such as Kanonkop High School in
       Middelburg, still cling to the outlawed and barbaric practice of
       initiation rituals;


  (2) challenges such schools and other centres of learning to refrain from
       this type of practice in the new dispensation as such practices are
       harmful to learners, not only physically but also emotionally, for
       victims remain traumatised and their learning is adversely affected;


  (3) supports the Minister of Education for having recommended that an
       independent investigation be mounted into the incident; and


  (4) while appreciating the independence of the judiciary, calls on the
       prosecutor who declined to prosecute, to reflect on similar matters
       with the greatest circumspection and empathy in future.

Mr E M SIGWELA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Palestinians are calling for international
       intervention to stop the destruction of property and loss of life in
       the Middle East conflict;


  (2) believes that the peaceful resolution of the problems in the Middle
       East is the only viable option which is in the interest of this and
       future generations; and


  (3) calls on all parties and the Israeli security forces in particular to
       desist from using excessive force, and to work towards the peaceful
       resolution of the conflict.

Mr H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the current investigationn into the R43 billion strategic
       arms-procurement deal, which is proving to be a major embarrassment
       to the Government, has not yet been finalised;


  (2) expresses its concern at reported Government plans to purchase
       additional armaments;
  (3) condemns the announcement by the Chairman of the SA Aerospace,
       Maritime and Defence Industries Association, Mr Max Sisulu, that the
       Government intends purchasing an anti-aircraft gun or missile system;
       and


  (4) calls on the Government to place a moratorium on all further arms
       purchases, pending the finalisation of the current investigation into
       the strategic arms-procurement, and to call for a re-examination of
       the Defence Review.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the good rapport that exists between traditional healers and the
           vast majority of South Africans;


       (b)  recent claims by traditional healers that they have a cure for
           Aids; and
       (c)  the need for the Government to work with traditional healers in
           combatting the Aids pandemic; and


  (2) calls on the Minister of Health to -


       (a)  appoint a team within her department to investigate the claims
           in conjunction with the Medicines Control Council; and


       (b)  establish formal channels of communication between traditional
           healers and local clinics and hospitals with regard to their HIV
           and Aids management programmes since it is of the utmost
           importance for all those involved in preventing and treating
           HIV/Aids to speak with one voice.

Ms N B GXOWA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the first groups of verified District Six tenancy
       claimants signed an agreement with the Department of Land Affairs;


  (2) believes that this move is significant in returning land which was
       illegally taken away from its owners by the apartheid regime; and


  (3) welcomes the signing of this agreement as this demonstrates the
       commitment of the ANC-led Government to undo the effects of apartheid
       and to work towards a better life for all our people.

[Applause.]

Mr H A SMIT: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel: [Madam Speaker, I
hereby give notice that on the next sitting day I shall move on behalf of
the New NP:


  Dat die Huis – [That the House -]


  (1) is to discuss the scandalous squandering of hard-earned taxpayer's
       money during the construction of the new prison in Kokstad;


  (2) notes that this prison, built at a cost of R450 million, was
       completed some time ago, but is standing vacant while prisons in
       South Africa average a 170% occupancy rate;


  (3) meen dit is laakbaar dat die Departement van Openbare Werke
       voortgegaan het met die bou van dié gevangenis terwyl die plaaslike
       munisipaliteit nie noodsaaklike dienste, soos die verskaffing van
       water en elektrisiteit en die hantering van rioolafval, kan voorsien
       nie, waarvan daar skriftelike bewys bestaan;


  [(3)     is of the opinion that it is reprehensible for the Department of
       Public Works to have proceeded with the construction of this prison
       when the local municipality cannot provide essential services, such
       as the provision of water and electricity and the handling of sewage
       waste, of which there is written proof;]

(4)   concludes that it is evident how the ANC Government     recklessly
      continues to squander the taxpayers' money; and

(5)   besef dat 'n onafhanklike hoëvlak-ondersoek uiters noodsaaklik is.
      [realises that an independent high-level investigation is extremely
      essential.]

[Applause.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with alarm the results of a recent survey done by the Centre for
           Statistical Studies, which found that Cape Town could be the
           crime capital of South Africa; and


       (b)  that the moratorium on the crime statistics, which was imposed
           more than a year ago, has prevented the citizens of Cape Town,
           and others across the country, from being informed about which
           places, times and activities pose a danger to their lives;


  (2) recognises this as a huge injustice committed by the Government,
       amounting to nothing other than turning a blind eye to the death and
       injury of innocent citizens who could have been warned to avoid crime
       hotspots; and


  (3) calls on the Government to urgently deal with the escalating crime
       wave in South Africa that has laid siege to the ordinary law-abiding
       citizens of the country.

Mr N M DUMA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that 1 200 employers have not submitted employment equity plans
       a year after the deadline;


  (2) believes that some employers are resisting the implementation of the
       law with spurious reference to principles of nondiscrimination with
       tacit encouragement from certain opposition parties;


  (3) observes that these employers, silent during all those years of
       discrimination against black people and women, now paint themselves
       as fervent defenders of the rights of white men to equal opportunity
       in employment, citing the Constitution whenever anyone
       says,``affirmative action''; and


  (4) applauds the Department of Labour's plans to crack down on those who
       resist developing employment equity plans, aimed at building a just
       South Africa with equal opportunities for all.

[Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that the Government has ``read the riot act'' to Mpumalanga
       over its financial mismanagement and warned of severe measures if it
       does not get its house in order;


  (2) further notes that Mpumalanga has received a R300 million bail-out
       package in April to cover outstanding debts and the cost of the new
       government complex;


  (3) calls on the Government to outline what these further steps may
       involve, as apart from cutting off additional financing for the
       province, the agreement does not specify such steps and as this
       action would simply further penalise the people of Mpumalanga and not
       those responsible; and


  (4) further calls on the Government to explain what disciplinary measures
       will be taken against those responsible for the mismanagement.

The SPEAKER: Order! Before we proceed to the next item, I wish to recognise
the honourable Jennifer Smith, premier of the island of Bermuda, who is in
our gallery and is visiting South Africa to attend the African Travel
Association Conference. [Applause.] Honourable premier, minister and
senators, you are most welcome in the South African Parliament. We trust
you will have a good visit to South Africa and encourage more visitors.

                           MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

             GEORGE BIZOS SC NAMED TRIAL LAWYER OF THE YEAR 2001
                                    ____

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that veteran advocate and human rights activist George Bizos,
       SC, has been named trial lawyer of the year for 2001 by the
       International Academy of Trial Lawyers;


  (2) further notes the outstanding contribution, over a period of more
       than four decades, that Adv Bizos has made, and continues to make, to
       the struggle for democracy and human rights in South Africa; and


  (3) congratulates Adv Bizos on receiving this prestigious award and
       commends him on his contribution to promoting justice, democracy and
       human rights.

Agreed to.

                     CONGRATULATIONS TO THE SA AIR FORCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the SA Airforce, in addition to receiving the Prince
       Philip Award in the United Kingdom in 2000, has now received an award
       from the American Helicopter Society for its flood relief efforts in
       Mozambique;


  (2) further notes that the SA Airforce, through its rescue and relocation
       operations, saved 15 000 Mozambicans and distributed more than 21 000
       tons of medical supplies, blankets and clothing; and


  (3) congratulates the crews of the SA Airforce on this latest award for
       their bold efforts that contributed to South Africa's good image, not
       only in the region but in the rest of the world.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the Minister of Finance has asked for an
opportunity to make a statement on Census 2001. I now grant him that
opportunity, but I would remind members that, as agreed at the programming
committee, parties will have an opportunity to respond to the statement
when the Vote on Statistics South Africa is debated.

                                 CENSUS 2001

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, the first nationwide
population census in the new democratic South Africa took place in October
1996. Democracy for all meant that the fragmentation of the country along
racial lines and the differential and discriminatory treatment of people in
the census according to their race were abandoned. Instead, people were
given the opportunity to describe themselves and their families, their life
circumstances and living conditions, by completing the census
questionnaire. The results of the census fed into planning and allocation
of funds, for example, for development projects, health and education, for
even the smallest or most sparsely populated areas of the country. Census
'96 formed the baseline. It told us what needed to be done.

Indeed, a census is used in all countries to provide each sector of
government with confidential information, not only on the number of people
living in a specific suburb or village, but also on their particular life
circumstances and living conditions. Census '96 enabled us to deepen our
democracy as it informed the planning for the national and local government
elections that followed in 1999 and last year respectively.
How have life circumstances changed since 1996? Has the country made
progress in promoting a better life for all? A fresh census can tell us
what has been achieved and what still has to be done to ensure delivery of
services to all the people. The next census will take place this year on 10
October. I want to repeat that. Census 2001 will take place on 10 October,
exactly five years since the last population census. Once again, this new
census will give essential information on all our people, to enable the
entire country to plan at each level of government and allocate budgets
appropriately.

I would like to point out to hon members that because we did not have all
the information available, Statistics SA provided only medium T-shirts here
today. Hopefully, after Census 2001 they will know that members of
Parliament need XXL or that kind of information. [Laughter.]

The choice of Wednesday 10 October as a census date is in keeping with a
number of considerations. The first is our statutory obligation that
promulgates the running of a population census of the Republic every five
years. Secondly, mobility of the population should be minimal at the time
of the census so the choice of a midweek day, that is a Wednesday, meets
this requirement. Furthermore, 10 October is outside the school holidays, a
period when most holiday-makers head for a variety of destinations for
relaxation. There are also weather considerations and in this regard
October is a warm month and days are longer. This will permit field workers
sufficient daytime in which they can do their work and the weather
conditions are much less hostile to the work that needs to be done.

Census 2001 is part of a worldwide celebration welcoming the new
millennium. In the SADC region, seven of our member states will be taking
part. These include Namibia, Botswana and South Africa this year, Zimbabwe
and Tanzania next year, and Mauritius and Zambia, which have already gone
ahead of us with their census last year. Joint planning sessions within
member states culminated in an agreement to have a minimum set of SADC
questions. Statistics SA was assigned by SADC to co-ordinate this
successful initiative. Further afield in Africa has been the census in
Ghana last year as well as across the oceans in the United States last
year, the UK just a few weeks ago, Canada in May this year, and Australia
and New Zealand in the last quarter of this year. So Census 2001 is a
millennium celebration indeed.

Each publicly elected office bearer in the country has a responsibility to
his or her constituency to ensure that delivery does take place. Every
member of Cabinet and every Deputy Minister, every member of Parliament in
both this House and the National Council of Provinces, members of
provincial legislatures and the 10 000 elected local government
representatives need to be actively part of promoting Census 2001 across
party lines. What a fantastic resource we have in the elected members to
make this endeavour a success for the benefit of the communities that have
entrusted us with political responsibility.

As an elected member one is a direct beneficiary of the census. These
results will help each of us in this House in making better informed
decisions. Each of us should go out there and ensure that it is possible
for enumerators to reach every household in the country, from the less
accessible high-walled and security-guarded leafy suburbs of Sandton and
Waterkloof to the poverty-stricken areas of Richmond and Tamboville.
Members should ensure that the people in their constituencies keep their
Rottweilers on leash; in fact, on that day we should all sing together
``please keep the dogs in'' ... [Interjections] ... and allow census-takers
to do their work. We count because the rich in this country count, but more
importantly, we also count because the poor in this country count.

In especially the poverty-stricken areas we call upon members as elected
members to ensure that there is full co-operation and the census succeeds
without hindrance. In the potentially crime-infested areas like Alex,
KwaMashu and Mannenberg, we need members as elected officers to pave the
way for enumerators to do their work without fear. We count because crime
in this country needs to be rooted out.

Along our borders, particularly in the Northern Province and Mpumalanga,
the Department of Home Affairs reports that it is inundated with an influx
of illegal immigrants. As elected members we must ensure that the people
employed as farmworkers are enumerated, for as long as they are in South
Africa irrespective of their residential status. We count because every
worker in this country counts. Census '96 experienced a high undercount in
the farming community. As elected members it is our responsibility to
ensure that this feature of Census '96 exists in our minds only to the
extent that it should be a lesson for Census 2001, a lesson never to be
repeated. By getting every farmer to take it upon themselves to ensure that
every person on the farm gets counted, we can make this a reality. Members
should talk to the farmers in their constituencies.

Cassie, praat tog asseblief met die boere daar in Ellisras. [Please Cassie,
talk to the farmers in Ellisras.]

Talk to your farmers in your constituency and ensure them of the importance
and confidentiality of the census. We count because farmers in this country
count.

It is a reality that there are people in this country who are involved in
illegal activities or practices described as socially unacceptable. I can
assure hon members that the information provided by this sector of the
society is as important as that of anyone else and is accorded the same
level of confidentiality in the census. We count because each of these
people count.

As elected members representing people in varying constituencies, we must
ensure that we count everybody irrespective of their works of life. As the
campaign intensifies, we shall be providing material that will go a long
way in making the census more visible, dissolving resistance and removing
scepticism, fear and anxiety, and in its place bringing confidence, co-
operation and collaboration. Hope is what qualifies and distinguishes us as
elected members in our society.

Each of us in this House today can therefore play a catalytic role in
ensuring that everyone is counted and that the life circumstances of each
individual, each household and each community is accurately recorded. The
census data can then tell each community where they have gained and where
they lost in the past five years, and enable us policy-makers to directly
address their needs. This is very important because each of us in this
House also counts.

Census 2001 will provide a special framework for planning by providing the
bases for review of demarcation where necessary, thereby entrenching
democratisation and governance. We will know how the population has
increased over time and how many people in each age category there are in
the country. Has the age profile changed between 1996 and 2001? Have
fatality rates in life expectancy at birth changed over time? What is the
effect of illness such as HIV/Aids on the age profile of our country?

Census 2001 will help us to measure how the previously disadvantaged people
participate meaningfully in the economic mainstream of our country. For
example the previous census showed us that 58% of households in the country
had access to electricity for lighting in 1996. How has it altered in the
past five years? In 1996, 64% of households in the Northern Province were
using wood as their main source of energy for cooking. Has this situation
changed and if so, how? How, if at all, has the access to clean water
changed in the 13% of households who were using river streams and dams as
their main water source in 1996?

Therefore, a successful Census 2001 will inform planning, monitor progress
and measure performance and the impact of our endeavours. All the people of
our nation in their various walks of life are called upon to be counted.
From the remote villages to the platteland towns, from the sprawling
townships in densely populated informal settlements, to the high walled
surburbs across the vast farm lands of our country we say: ``Stand up and
be counted''.

Everybody will be asked to co-operate fully with Statistics South Africa in
this mammoth but vital task of counting people, whereby a battalion of a
100 000 will be combing every corner of the country, from the rolling hills
of KwaZulu-Natal to the sandy deserts of the Northern Cape. They will
count. This includes newly born children, the old, the youthful and mobile,
migrant workers both from within and without South Africa. Census 2001
calls upon people to be counted.

We appeal to the various categories of our leadership, in industries and on
farms, trade union leaders, student leaders, traditional leaders and church
leaders to mobilise for South Africa to be counted.

Our publicity campaign starts here and now. It extends to the provinces
with premiers launching the census in their respective provinces. Another
innovation in our campaign is the census at school where we collaborate
with the Department of Education. Our Census 2001 song has lyrics that
reflects our unity and our diversity.

I would urge hon members to please assist us in this mammoth task and say
``Count us in, hihlayeni hinkweru, re bale kamoka, re bale kaofela, re bale
rotlhe, ri vhaleni rothe, sibale sonke, tel ons by''. [Applause.]
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 25 - Communications:

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon
members, distinguished guests, colleagues, comrades and friends, I feel
honoured once more to stand in front of you to present the Budget Vote of
the Department of Communications, Vote 25 for the 2001 - 2002 financial
year.

A few years ago this Government embarked on a road of transformation,
laying new foundations for a vision or images which today are being turned
into true stories about real people. The message we bring today is that the
communications portfolio, which includes telecommunications, broadcasting
and poastal services, has at last seen the building it started taking
shape, but not necessarily in the manner it envisaged because of rapid
technological changes in our sector.

Broadcasting and postal services have had to reinvent themselves as a
result of the major changes in communications and information technologies.
What is important, however, is that we have kept to the national vision set
by the President in his last two speeches when he outlined national
priorities and called for unity in action for change. This speech outlines
how this portfolio faces the challenges posed and how future ones will be
met. The imperatives posed by globalisation, the convergence of
technologies and digitalisation all in a short space of time, as well as
the pressing need for Africa's renewal, have shaped our responses to the
challenge.

As we embrace the new technologies, it is important to recognise the
technological innovations of our past provided by the Khoi and the San
people, whose superior communications and navigation skills depended on
nature and their instincts. The experience of this indigenous people of our
land shows that Africa is not new in the information and communications
sector. We need to build from this strong historical heritage and play our
role in technological systems development and innovations.

Our budget speech for this year is based on the theme ``Unity in action for
Change''. For us this means unity in action between departments, unity in
action between the public and private sectors, unity in action between
Government and civil society, unity in action between governments in Africa
and unity in action between Africa and the world.

The budget is also based on a programme of action to bridge the global
disparities through ICTs. Over the past year, in our programme for 2000 and
2001, we outlined a number of tasks to be implemented in our portfolio and
we promised that the telecommunications sector would roll out additional
telephone lines to extend infrastructure and services to schools, clinics
and hospitals. We also promised to review the mandate of the universal
service agency, to extend the WAP internet laboratories and to conclude the
electronic commerce screen per paper process.

In the broadcasting sector we promised to roll out community radio
stations, to extend the television footprint of the SABC, to establish
digital and broadcast advisory bodies, to make feasibility studies for a
parliamentary dedicated education channel, to restructure Channel Africa
and to develop an African strategy for Santech.

In our postal services we promised to increase postal outlets, integrate
electronic communications and transactions into the post office, roll out
public information terminals, restructure the Post Bank, establish an
international mail hub and to roll out addresses.

In the international sector of our work, we promise to set-up an African
connection centre, to make a commitment to and participate in the
implementation of the African Renaissance, and to make sure that we attend
regular meetings with the ministers of the African continent of the ATU.

While during the year we made significant strides in policy development,
universal access and restructuring, some of the programmes are of course
ongoing. Parliament will be kept informed about the progress we are making.

I shall now deal with the Budget Vote for 2001-2. The telecommunications
sector is important for attracting foreign and domestic direct investment
and in contributing to economic growth and social development. I am happy
to announce that the South African information and communication sector
remains stable, irrespective of volatility in the world ICT markets.

As regards policy and legislation, developing a stable and predictable
regulatory regime on electronic commerce is central to our vision of taking
South Africa into the knowledge economy.

Since 1998 we have been working together with other Government departments,
with industry, civil society and labour, on the development of an
electronic commerce policy and law. In 1999 we published the Discussion
Paper on e-commerce for public discussion. Emanating from the inputs we
received, we developed a Green Paper, which was published for public
comment in November 2000.

Subsequent to the launch of the Green Paper in April, we hosted an
electronic law conference to develop national electronic communication and
transaction legislation and to deliberate on issues which should go into
the Bill. The conference was a success, as broader understanding was
reached on key policy and legislative issues, amongst which were the need
to prioritise universal access to electronic commerce; the need to bridge
the digital and knowledge divide; the need to position Government as a role
model user of electronic communications, including in the area of
procurement and particularly in the area of integrated rural and
sustainable development; the need to set up a national public key
infrastructure that will ensure security, confidence, validity and
reliability of online transactions; run on and the need to develop an
institutional framework for the governance of electronic communications,
including a country code top - level domain name registry in the form of a
section 21 company, digital signature and cyber inspection.

We are in the process of finalising of the Electronic Communications and
Transactions Bill which will be tabled in the House before the end of this
year.

With regard to the review of telecommunications policy and legislation, in
the last quarter of 2000 we started a process to review the
telecommunications policy and legislature. This review was undertaken to
reposition the South African telecommunications sector, to ensure that it
contributes to the development of a new economy, rural telephone access,
the development of small and medium enterprises and also the development of
skills.
To ensure effective stakeholder participation, we hosted a policy
colloquium, which deliberated on a number of policy issues contained in the
telecommunications White Paper. Informed by the outcome of this colloquium,
Cabinet took decisions which formed the basis of draft policy directions,
which were gazetted for public comment. The policy focuses on bridging the
digital divide, lowering input costs, increasing universal service and
access, human resource development, black economic empowerment, and a
stable and predictable regulatory regime.

This will culminate in the licensing of the second national operator or
SNO, the development of small and medium enterprises, Sentech and value
added network operators called or VANS, and pave the way for the necessary
legislative amendments, which will be tabled soon. This will particularly
seek to address an issue that was highlighted by the Minister of Finance,
when he talked about the telephones in the country only reaching about
28,8% of the people.

To ensure the maximum utilisation of state assets to enhance growth, we are
proposing that Sentech's licence should be extended to offer long-distance
telecommunications and multimedia services and that Esi-Tel and Transtel
should form part of the SNO. This policy and legislative environment will
pave the way for the initial public offering of Telkom, because it provides
certainty and predictability. Minister Radebe will elaborate on these
developments in his budget speech.

I turn over to the programmes we are embarking on. With regard to the
public emergency communications centres, we find ourselves in a situation
in which many emergency services operate technical and communication
systems that are not compatible. The South African public is in need of
fast, effective emergency communications in order to address traffic, fire
and other local emergency needs. In this regard we are working very closely
with local government.

We cannot talk of efficient emergency communications while we use systems
which are not linked to each other. To improve the situation, Cabinet has
accepted the establishment of a co-ordinated public emergency service. The
department will establish a three - digit emergency number, 112 operated
nationwide and accessible through call centres, and a national trunk radio
network.
Sentech has been mandated to lead the process of re-engineering the
provision of a national radio trunking network. Early in May a workshop was
held by the department in conjunction with Sentech, which hosted local
authorities and state agencies involved in the provision of public
emergency communications. the amount of R4,3 million has already been
allocated to Sentech towards the establishment of such a system and we hope
that this will ensure equitable access to infrastructure for all public
emergency utilities, urban and rural.

For the establishment of public emergency call centres, the Minister of
Finance has already announced that R80 million will be made available over
three years.

We have also embarked on a smart card development. In the quest to bridge
the digital divide the Department of Home Affairs and the Department of
Communications are engaged in the process of ensuring that all South
African citizens are part of the information revolution by ensuring that
the use this smart card as a form of identification, which stores
Government information such as pension details, driver's licence and other
personal information. This long-term programme will enhance Batho Pele, as
people will be able to interface with Government in a more effective and
friendly manner.

This year the Department of Communications will also continue with its Web
Internet Laboratories or Doc Wils, which will be linked up via satellite
with the Institute of Satellite and Software Applications, to provide
software engineering. This is called the Java project. The Department of
Communications will accelerate the deployment of DoC WILs to make this
possible, so that our institutions can all be learning something about
software and training in the various parts of the country.

The Department of Communications, in consultation with the Department of
Health, will also develop a portal that will help to create a network which
will facilitate a partnership between the private sector, NGOs, civil
society organisations and Government. The portal will provide an entry
point for sharing information in the fight against HIV/Aids, and will be
known as the Aids portal.

In order to do many of these things, we have to ensure that electronic
transactions are conducted in a secure manner and prevent pornography, and
the abuse of children and women via the net, and therefore the department
will be setting up an internet directory.

As I have spoken here, we have seen how unity in action can actually make
us bring about a better life for our people. We have finalised the domestic
satellite feasibility study in conjunction with the Department of Trade and
Industry, as well as the CSIR. The next step is to identify private sector
partners who will invest in this opportunity - Another example of unity in
action.

In 1997 Telkom was given a five - year exclusivity period to implement
universal access to telecommunications by rolling out infrastructure in
underserviced areas and to rebalance tariffs. During the same period Telkom
was also required to provide first-time telephone services to over 300
villages and to install more than 20 000 new lines to priority customers
such as schools, hospitals, clinics and police stations, and to replace
around 1,2 million analogue lines with digital technology.

Telkom was given an option to apply for an extension of its exclusivity for
an additional year if it met these targets. I am happy to announce that
Telkom is on track to meet its roll-out targets. And after the publication
of the policy directives for the post exclusivity period, Telkom decided
not to apply for an extension of its exclusivity. Therefore, we expect to
take Telkom onto IPO in the fourth quarter of this year. Telkom, we know,
is ready to compete in the market.

We, therefore, have to get ready for licensing for competition. The policy
directions will be finalised. The following licences will also be issued:
the Global Mobile Personal Communications by Sattellite - which is a very
long word for GMPCS - and licences for the third or 2,5 generation
cellular. These will be considered during the year.

Draft policy directions recognise the need to stimulate economic activity
in small towns by providing competition and licensing of small SMMEs, so
that they can also provide some of Telkom's services. They will provide
services to areas with a teledensity of less than 1%.

Cognisant of the exclusion of many black people out of this sector,
historically disadvantaged people who have been excluded will be allowed to
participate. The draft policy directions addresses this matter in a
decisive way by setting aside up to 30% of all licences for historically
disadvantaged people. And I hope the operative word is ``up to''.

We successfully set aside 3% of Telkom to Uthingo. I am happy to know that
black economic empowerment groups are part and parcel of one of the biggest
enterprises in the country. There is no doubt that these kind of
transactions will go a long way in our endeavour to deracialise and
diversify participation in our economy.

On the broadcasting side, we are restructuring the SABC. To strategically
reposition the SABC in the context of a changing media and communications
environment, we are going ahead with the restructuring as outlined in the
Broadcasting Act of 1999. The new board has experienced many difficulties
as a result of numerous vacancies at management level. Vacant posts are now
being filled, to enhance the management capacity of the broadcaster. The
top three executive positions have already been filled.

The corporatisation of the SABC is now on track, and a memorandum and
articles of association have been lodged with the registrar of campanies. A
review is under way to clarify the role and social obligations of the SABC.
With the constantly changing environment, there is no doubt that such a
review will be needed from time to time to ensure that the SABC meets the
needs of the entire nation.

Regarding the extension of the SABC's footprint, infrastructure roll-out of
the television network has been disappointing, thus causing great
frustration to small towns and rural areas. Many people have to travel from
their homes in outlying areas to bigger cities and towns to watch their
favourite televised sports events. Many of these are the poor who cannot
afford satellite dishes and are, therefore, reliant on the public
broadcaster.

The SABC and the signal distributor, Sentec, must resolve their
difficulties about the roll-out of the infrastructure and budget allocation
process being sorted out in order to achieve this.

In the meantime, Sentec has completed an investigation and planning for the
upgrading of the broadcasting infrastructure in certain rural areas.
Accordingly, during the current financial year, infrastructure roll-out
will take place in the Northern Province, Mpumalanga, Eastern Cape and
KwaZulu-Natal, especially because these are the areas where integrated
rural and sustainable development is absolutely crucial.

We are at the threshold of the Millennium Africa Recovery Programme. We
have to reposition Channel Africa. The outcome of the journey we have
started will also depend on how we communicate and co-operate with each
other within and amongst countries. This new environment presents us with a
myriad of challenges for Channel Africa. Plans to corporatise Channel
Africa are under-way, and there is a need to review our approach to this
channel.

This respositioning will entail the adoption of new technologies, programme
content and format which appeal to decision-makers and the public on the
continent. This will be done through the utilisation of all media platforms
such as the Internet, television, radio, etc.

The process of corporatisation of Bop Broadcasting is under way. Rhino
Studios is in the process of being sold. We have done a feasibility study
for a dedicated education channel. It was found, however, that a better
option would be an establishment of a national education network utilising
multimedia. We are in discussion with the Department of Education regarding
the implementation of this.

A study for the dedicated parliamentary channel is also underway. We are in
the process of consulting with the stakeholders, the presiding officers,
regulators, the portfolio committee and the industry.

With regard to community radio broadcasting, information dissemination is
vital for nation-building and the struggle against poverty, illiteracy,
HIV/Aids and crime.

Production hubs have been established in all nine provinces to enable
community radio stations to produce their own programmes. People from
various stations have been trained to produce these programmes on behalf of
their people at their stations as well as at Nemisa.

The skills development and the necessary financial support is being given
by training under Nemisa, which is the electronic institute that we have.
The Independent Communications Authority of South Africa, Icasa, is a by-
product of broadcasting and telecommunications which were merged into one
regulatory entity. The capacity of the regulator is a matter of concern.
The convergence of the technologies and new complexities of the ICT sector
pose new challenges for the authority. The new telecoms policy dispensation
will pose additional challenges to the regulator.

To prepare the regulator to deal with these challenges, Cabinet took a
decision to increase resources for Icasa, to enable it to meet its
regulatory mandate and obligations. The contestations that surrounded the
communications authority in the award of the third cellular licence is
still in the courts.

The National Electronic Media Institute of South Africa, Nemisa, is moving
on. The mandate for Nemisa to contribute to the development of human
resources in broadcasting systems is on track. Later this year, the first
group of 30 postgraduate students will complete their studies at the
institute. These students, the majority of whom are from disadvantaged
communities, have been trained in programme production and broadcast
business management.

We have set up the Broadcasting Production and Digital Advisory bodies.
Both bodies are chaired by women of great intellectual standing.

With regard to the postal services, transformation of the Post Office was,
indeed, a challenge. The 1998 Postal Act paved the way for the
transformation of the Post Office, and arising from the new legislative
environment, the Post Office was given universal service obligations to
rollout infrastructure and services in underserviced areas. The
transformation of the Post Office was divided into two parts, namely
universal access and enterprise reform.

With regard to the extension of infrastructure and provision of cost-
effective and quality services, the Post Office has made progress. Targets
to increase the number of postal outlets by an additional 600 and the
provision of 4 million addresses is on track.

In terms of enterprise reform, the Post Office has not performed as
expected, hence the board has requested me to reconsider the strategic
management contract entered into with the New Zealand postal services.
Cabinet will be considering this request.
From our own assessment Government will have to continue supporting the
Post Office, while we continue to seek avenues for financial stability.

The impact of technology on the Post Office is enormous. We are in the
process of making sure that the Post Office adjust to technological trends
and innovations. Internet, electronic mail and the Short Message Service,
SMS, are competing directly with the traditional letter business service.
This phenomena is global. During the last festive season we saw more SMS
festive greetings than the traditional posting of Christmas cards.

Consequently, the Post Office is re-inventing itself. It started a Citizens
Post Office in order to adjust to these new challenges. The pilot site was
put into operation in Soshanguve in July 2000. This is yet another response
to the changing technologies. In another response, the department and the
Post Office are rolling out public information terminals and in the year
under review 100 such terminals will be set out.

The restructuring of the Post Bank is on track. Consultants have been
engaged and the discussions are on-going with the different departments,
including the Department of Public Enterprises and the National Treasury.
The changes are intended to reduce the institutional barriers in providing
credit to SMMEs.

The Communication Sector Summit will be held this year. The first meeting
to prepare for the summit has been held with the stakeholders, including
civil society and the unions, and the event will be announced in due
course.

The department has remained committed to gender equity in its own internal
structures and processes. It has moved from a gender representation of 100%
male to 75% at the top level. At senior level women have increased from 10%
to 30%. The boards and management or portfolio organisations reflect strong
participation of both males and females.

At the international level we have made sure that we also participate in
many of the events and issues that should take us to the Organisation of
Africa Summit Meeting. Globalisation has made consolidation of the African
Renaissance even more urgent. There is no doubt that ICTs will play an
important role in the realisation of this renewal. In recognition of this,
the President has announced the establishment of two bodies, ie, the Task
forces on information society and the commission on ICTs.

The Ministers on the African continent, conscious of this need, have, under
the ministerial oversight committee chaired by South Africa, restructured
the African Telecommunications Union, ATU, set out the African connection
centre at the DBSA in Midrand and requested the Presidents of our
continents to declare ICTs as one of the priorities of the OAU, because of
their importance as a tool to socioeconomic development.

There is no doubt that when the President announced the Millennium Africa
programme to us all, we needed to move forward as South Africa to also
prepare our own plan. We did this in May 2000. In conclusion, there is, no
doubt that our country is on course. Given the fact that ICTs cut across
all sectors of health, education, agriculture and safety, we are ready to
make the integrated sustainable rural development strategy real.

The focus of Government is to co-ordinate the implementation of its
programmes, and I can assure the House that we will play our part because
we are now ready, willing and able. I therefore invite this House to help
us in this endeavour by voting to approve the budget of R487 523 million
for this financial year.

Let me conclude by thanking the director-general of the department, Andile
Ngqaba, my advisers, the management and the entire staff of the Ministry. I
thank all stakeholders and the law commission, and special thanks to the
chairperson of the portfolio committee. We count on the public for their
support. I thank all my colleagues, from the advisory groups in Africa, to
my colleagues in Cabinet, for their advice, support and sense of humour,
and my sincere thanks for allowing me to grow. To my large extended family,
I thank them for always being there as my anchor. Let us continue with the
creation of a better South Africa for us all. [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Speaker, I regret to say that South Africa is making a
fourth start in liberalising the telecommunications sector. In fact we have
to ask whether the newly announced policy directions do not throw us into
reverse. They certainly take a step backward from the existing legal
position where, at least, any aspirant operators can apply for a licence
even if they have to wait until the Government decides to open up a given
licence category.

I refer to the Telecommunications Act, Act 103 of 1996. For all its already
old-fashioned shortcomings, it requires transparent nondiscriminatory
licencing procedures performed by the independent regulator. So the
Minister could say that managed liberalisation is, in fact, what we had to
date, because the next logical step that Act anticipates was the opening up
of the various licensing categories.

I have said that that Act is old-fashioned. What we should be doing and
debating right now, viz-à-vis a new legal framework altogether, is a new
communications Act that regulates all of the transmission network and
services under one system, recognising the convergence of telecoms,
broadcasting and information technology. When one can listen to radio over
the Internet or use a cellphone for data applications, then old categories
really no longer makes any sense.

Like the European Union, we should accept that -


  ... there is no objective justification for splitting up authorisations
  and licences into ever so many service categories. Heavy-handed market
  access regulation is not in fact in line with the policy objective of
  stimulating a competitive market.

Our competition commission says the same. It says that unfettered
competition is necessary in telecoms.

The single exception to a broad electronic commucations licence, which
almost anyone should be able to get authorised, is that services which use
spectrum must remain, ie cellphones and terrestrial broadcasting. Why?
Because spectrum is finite. It needs old-fashioned licencing procedures.

But now, instead of that, this is what we should be doing. The hon the
Minister has drafted no law whatsoever. She has distributed licences and
spectrum in the most closed and discriminatory manner possible, mostly to
parastatals, as if they are so much largesse at her disposal. It is almost
as if she has worked her way through the licensing category section of the
Act.
... een vir jou, een vir my, maar alles vir die staat, nè. [... one for
you, one for me, but everything for the State.]

And I do not quite see how this section is going to be amended to give the
parastatals their stakes without losing the idea altogether of transparent
licencing, because even future licences have been preallocated. The third
generation licences have been preallocated to what will then be the five
existing operators.

We have to ask the question: Is it because the hon the Minister does not
really intend to liberalise at all, after all? Because we are mindful of
the fact that Government's managed liberalisation initiative forms part of
a more interventionist approach and represents a retreat from Gear. The
allocation of licences to parastatals only begins to make sense from this
perspective, and that does not make sense to us at all.

The hon the Minister said that what she calls the dominant multinationals
cannot be avoided, but that their entry could be mediated and the negative
effects of globalisation reduced. Instead, the millennium plan for Africa
was in fact to be advanced as she has just reiterated.

I wonder and ask myself whether she perhaps has vision of Eskom's optic
fibre-lashed pylons marching from the Cape to Cairo. And I must warn her
that the last Minister drove off into Africa chanting ``Africa Connection''
in a 4x4. He drove off in a 4x4 and disappeared into the desert sunset,
never to be seen in politics again. So perhaps she might want to rethink.

The hon the Minister cannot have it both ways in this field. Bridging the
digital divide means joining the world and its technological logic.

Our department here has been waffling about convergence for years. It went
as far as to converge the two regulators but without touching the
underlying statutes. Parliament, in the past year, was asked to vote funds
for research in this field, yet here we are with the only sign of attention
given to convergence in the policy directions taking the form of something
unheard of in the world, the fixed mobile licence, which is to be granted
to a somewhat puzzled Telkom 1 and Telkom 2.
A mobile licence is the one thing that one cannot converge with other
functions because it is spectrum-based and packet switched. Convergence
does not mean inventing funny old licences in an ad hoc manner. In short,
the Minister has converged in the one place where she cannot and has done
nothing to cater for convergence where she ought to have done so.

Lastly, our regulator, ICASA, has been treated like Cinderella through the
years, but it is now expected to draft the law which should have emanated
from the Ministry. We intend to try to help. For example, regarding the
separate regulation of transmission - those broad licences that I described
- if one separately regulates content as with broadcasting, then one solves
that long-standing problem that we have had here, that the regulator's
independence is constitutionally enshrined for broadcasting whereas
Telekom's is not. We know that it is more vulnerable to executive
interference. That solves that problem and we intend to help.
[Interjections.]

Finally, on the matter of telekoms and executive interference. Telekom is
not entirely vulnerable. There is precedent in Zimbabwean and European law
for protecting telekoms under the freedom of speech and information.
Government cannot just close the sector off. It cannot close off
communications. There may be a constitutional case which may assist us all
as South Africans. [Applause.]

Mr N N KEKANA: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, today we are allocating
about R487 million to the Department of Communications. We are confident
that the department will put this money to good use. One example of the
department's groundbreaking work is the establishment of the Institute for
Satellite and Software Applications. This is a world-class initiative that
we should all applaud.

On Saturday, many joined the Minister and the director general in
celebrating World Telecommunication Day in style. Issa students hosted the
industry, visitors and schoolkids in Grabouw and displayed spectacular
models of their acquired knowledge. The DA was not there to witness this
remarkable achievement by our Government. [Interjections.] It is therefore
not even qualified to participate in this debate, save for the benefit of
democracy.

The Portfolio Committee on Communications held a meeting with the council
of ICASA this morning to address allegations related to the conduct of one
of its councillors. We do have a statement that was prepared and we have
released that statement to the public.

We all know what happened with Satra and, today, the third cellular process
is still not operational as a certain bidder had taken the whole process to
the High Court. As the matter is sub judice I will not commend further,
except to say that the delay disadvantages the entire country. More jobs
would have been created and users would have received a better quality of
service and cheaper prices.

We have learned our lesson. Gone are the days when allegations, rumours or
even whispers against a councillor of ICASA would be left to chance. The
law has been amended to empower the National Assembly to deal swiftly with
any allegation regarding a conflict of interest, any misconduct or
wrongdoing on the part of a councillor or, indeed, the entire council.

Our committee will not hesitate to act against any form of misconduct or
corruption perpetrated by any person or persons. We do not want legal
battles to rage on in our courtrooms.

We must deal with all allegations now, before the regulatory process of
licensing the Second National Operator and other operators begins. We
appeal to all those who have any allegation, fact or fiction, to reveal
them now. The portfolio committee will leave no stone unturned in dealing
with any problem. We need a stable, independent regulator that commands
absolute confidence from all in the industry and from the Government. The
rulings of the regulator must be respected by all. The independent
regulator must act fairly and without favour or prejudice. The regulator
must treat Telkom and other operators in a nondiscriminatory manner.

We urge operators to negotiate a new interconnection agreement. In the
event of a conflict or a deadlock, we call on the regulator to arbitrate
effectively. Telkom, Vodacom, MTN and other operators must reach a
commercial agreement on a new interconnection regime as soon as possible.
We are encouraged by the confidence of the regulator to begin in earnest to
meet the deadlines prescribed in the policy directions.
We are on the eve of a major overhaul of our telecommunication policy. We
are adopting policy directions that will radically alter the quality of
service that our people have been receiving up to now. These policy
directions signify a break with the past - ending the monopoly of Telkom.
We have put the interest of the consumer first and are making rapid
progress towards full liberalisation.

With the support of the industry, we have avoided a big bang approach and
opted for the gradual introduction of competition. By way of example, India
used this big bang approach in opening their cellular market about four
years ago. Everything went wrong. They auctioned licences to 22 firms in 42
regions of India. All major international telecommunication companies
received the licences, but today each one of them is still struggling to
make ends meet.

We have said no, to the big bang approach and the industry agrees with us.
The DA on the other hand, wants market forces to rule. They are all alone.
The industry is not receptive to this approach.

It is possible to achieve universal service within the framework of managed
liberalisation. The regulator, ICASA together with the Universal Service
Agency should accurately cost the financing of universal service and guide
operators on possible obligations. In the very least, every user in our
country deserves a basic affordable voice telephone service on a line that
can carry a fax and low-speed data transmission. Even the poor deserve a
basic telephone service. Operators must make concessions for low-income
groups including people with disability. We need to introduce special
tariff schemes for low-income groups.

During our portfolio committee whistle-stop tour of the industry, recently,
the DA was at it again as they have been doing today - sowing division and
confusion as they usually do. They were mislead by those industry-players,
whose main interest is their profit margins, to question the wisdom of our
policy directions. The DA accused us of embarrassing the country by
proposing a fixed mobile convergence in the new policy directions. Despite
our attempt to explain at length what fixed-mobile convergence was all
about, they refused to listen or understand.

Today, their view is another demonstration that they still refuse to
listen.

We will try one more time perhaps, Madam Smuts and the DA will understand.
Our policy directions are a prerequisite for the third generation services
expected in just over a year. The new third generation mobile communication
with a higher bandwidth, access to the Internet and other multimedia
services will offer the current mobile operators advantages over the
traditional fixed line services. This is a fact.

These systems and services will enable users of mobile networks to conduct
their business without relying on Telkom as a public switched data network
or a Public Switched Telephone Network service. What we need is a
favourable environment for the introduction of a third-generation mobile
service, without destroying our existing telecommunication infrastructure.

The ITU Telecom 99 in Geneva which was about the world coming together -
deliberated on what is coming down the pipeline. Debates centred around the
integration of fixed and mobile services. The DA should simply surf the ITU
website to benefit from this experience and become more informed.
[Interjections.]

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Speaker, would the hon member take a question on fixed
mobile interconnect, which is what they discussed in Geneva interconnect?
[Interjections.]

Mr N N KEKANA: Madam Speaker, no I will not do that. [Interjections.]

Ms M SMUTS: It is what I raised here on the budget debate. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Would you please sit down Madam Smuts.

Mr N N KEKANA: Madam Speaker, there is an article that the hon member
should get hold of where that says: fixed mixed mobile, and I quote ``The
integration of fixed and mobile poses real challenges but also offer
crucial advantages.'' This is an article that is there. It was there in the
ITU Telecom 99.

In order to understand fixed mobile one needs to look at it from the
perspective of the consumer. The DA is looking at it from the perspective
of the operators. The fixed mobile convergence means connectivity at
anytime, anyplace and anywhere. It means technology neutrality. When a
customer applies for a service, they do not care whether the operator digs
a trench, uses a radio, or whatever technology, all that they want is the
service.

To subscribe to many operators is also expensive and unmanageable.
Consumers require a simple unified service.

For instance, let us take the case of a doctor - I am using these examples
for them to understand; if they do not understand this one, they will never
understand them. A doctor has a pager, a cellphone and a fixed line at home
and at the surgery. He or she receives a number of bills from different
service providers. Surely, that is a problem. The doctor's patients, family
and friends might have to phone a few numbers before locating him or her.
What the doctor wants is a common number, perhaps two phones. It is
possible - mobile and fixed line, but one number.

There will be an automatic routing of calls without huge expenses for
diverting from one network to the other. Many users need an integrated
voice mail and a unified system of billing. I surely do need that. I do not
need many, many bills.

The fixed mobile convergence will also benefit operators because of the
prospect of customer loyalty and customer care. It will also offer service
providers the facility to integrate the marketing of their products and
services, thus providing users with a better and more accurate service. The
generation will eliminate the division between mobile and fixed networks.
There will be advanced services equally across fixed and mobile platforms.

It is the Democratic Alliance who, not long ago, wanted to unleash market
forces in telecommunications. We firmly believe that neither market forces
nor competition laws will deliver universal service or govern the
telecommunications market. There are specific regulations that are
necessary to ensure fair competition. Many countries throughout the world
have opened their telecommunications sector to competition with regulation.
The challenge is to combine universal service with competition.

But as one advert says: ``Some people still don't get it, but they will ...
very very soon. The point is, new technologies have always made people see
things in an entirely new way.

We need to facilitate the development of local content and use advanced
services to meet the educational, social and cultural needs of our people.
At the core of this local content industry is the viability of the
television and radio sectors. A multimedia environment will offer
opportunities to develop local content and create jobs.

However, I wish to take issue with a particular segment of the content
industry, the advertising industry. The advertising industry is unregulated
yet it commands huge budgets that determine what and who create, develop,
package and distribute content on television, radio and print. This
responsibility is left to the free market, of which Madam Smuts is surely
in favour. However, I regret to inform this House that the advertising
market is failing the industry and our country, miserably.

Although Government had opened the radio sector to competition, the
advertising industry has yet to come to the party. Government has
terminated the monopoly of the SABC, yet very little is done to support
many new operators in the radio sector. We have hosted a discussion with
the marketers and advertisers, but unfortunately we seem to be talking at
cross-purposes.

During the portfolio committee tour we visited a number of radio stations
that were licensed in Johannesburg and the surrounding areas. Of course, I
wish to congratulate Primedia on resolving their corporate governance
predicament. But I am afraid, I cannot extend congratulations to other
radio stations. It is a fact that many of the private radio stations are
struggling to survive, let alone break even. They have the listenership,
but not enough advertising revenue. Punt Radio has virtually collapsed.

Let us consider for a moment the case of two radio station, Highveld Stereo
and Kaya FM. They have the same footprint, the same number of listeners and
the same target audience in the brackets LSM 6, 7 and 8 the only difference
being that the one has a predominantly white listenership while the other
has a predominantly black listenership. Highveld Stereo receives a huge
backing from the advertising industry, while the opposite is, of course,
true for Kaya FM. There is an unconfirmed ratio of 100:10. Between the two,
Highveld Stereo receives by far the biggest chunk of the advertising cake.
Although we do not want to speculate, we cannot deny that there is a
problem.

The advertising industry is conservative and lily-white, unlike the
majority of the people in this country. Many of the salespersons are young
girls who read Style magazine and listen to 5FM, and habitually roam the
shopping malls. They do not have a clue about what is happening in the
townships or the culture of the majority of South Africans. They are
conditioned by the historically influential advertising networks who shift
and spend huge budgets without any consideration of the reality in this
country.

According to Leadership magazine R199,2 million was spent in the
traditionally white media, in contrast to R5,7 million in the black media
in 1999 - his, despite the fact that the combined household income of black
consumers is far greater than that of white consumers.

This begs the question: Is the advertising industry not an old boy's
network where money circulates among friends and family businesses? In
other words, the owners of the media will no doubt favour spending their
advertising budgets in businesses of families and friends in the industry.
Is this not the case? If this is the case, it clearly presents a conflict
of interest, and will result in the unfair treatment of stations which do
not have the same arrangement. This situation needs to be addressed.

We have raised this matter with both the Department of Communications and
the GCIS, and are seized with this problem. The Director-General on
Communications is conducting a snap survey of the viability of the private
radio segment, and this will form the basis of discussions later in the
year. We will once again invite the advertisers, marketers and radio
stations to participate in these discussions.

Meanwhile, we urge all Ministers and Government departments, even at
provincial and local levels, to spend their promotion and advertising
budgets wisely, and to support the radio stations that are struggling to
survive. They have the listenership they need our support. The country
needs a multiplicity of broadcasts, many voices in one country. We cannot
afford to fail our democracy. We need the support of Government
departments. [Applause.]

Mrs S C VOS: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon colleagues, the Minister
and her department, as hon members have heard, manage a wide range of
diverse, hugely complex and highly technical subject matters concerning
telecommunications, broadcasting and postal services.

The rapidly expanding, globally competitive multibillion dollar
telecommunications and broadcasting industry, in particular, demand the
provision of efficient, high quality consumer access and service, as well
as evolving and innovative public policy perspectives.

Together these issues, a well as the obvious requirement to educate and
empower young persons in these multifaceted fields of endeavour, consume
much of the Budget Vote being debated here today, which we support.

Huge amounts are being spent year after year on policy developments, and
the director-general has heard that the IFP would like to see more of the
fruits of this expensive labour as soon as possible. We share with the
Minister and her department concern with regard to many of the problems and
challenges they know they face, and some which, I am sure, they wish they
did not. In all the areas of telecommunications, broadcasting and postal
services, some warning flags simply have to be briefly raised in the
limited time available.

Firstly, given the challenges and opportunities flowing from the rapid
convergence of technologies and the immediate imperatives
telecommunications and broadcasting brought before this Parliament in
recent years, many members of the Portfolio Comminttee on Communications
admit that the SA Post Office has somehow never received the same kind of
attention we have lavished on telecommunications and broadcasting.

Well, as we all know, the Post Office certainly has our attention now that
we have just learned that it made a huge loss this year; that it is not
meeting its delivery targets; that the board of directors wants to fire its
New Zealand management partners; and that skilled black managers are
falling over each other to jump ship.

On top of all these, a forensic audit is underway and allegations of
corruption continue to abound year after year. One thing is for sure: This
Government will have to continue subsidising the Post Office, when the big
plan was that it would break even this year. So we have to ask: Where is
this money going to come from?

The IFP, for the most part, represents a constituency of the poorest of the
poor in our land. Time and again in this House the IFP has made the point
that for these people access to postal services is more often than not a
financial lifeline and the only means of vital communication with their
loved ones living elsewhere.

The Post Office is an economic and social survival hub, and yet we all know
that our constituents are being poorly served and, to make matters worse,
many are also being swindled by criminal elements that continue to flourish
within the organisation.

We have to admit that the Minister and her department have a fiasco on
their hands.

We will need to know a lot more, very soon, about precisely how the
department is planning to handle that crisis.

Secondly, as much as the IFP agrees, in principle, with Government policy
to usher in the managed liberalisation of the telecommunications sector, we
are far from convinced that the duopoly is going to substantially benefit
South African consumers. Public and private telephone access charges are
far too high, given the wages earned by average South Africans. The dangers
of Telkom 1 and the future Telkom 2 colluding, with regard to their pricing
structures, are all too obvious. We would like to see very real efforts
being made by this Government to insist that consumer protection in the
sector is vigilantly pursued by the regulator.

That brings the IFP to its next concern, in that regard. When the second
national operator, Telkom 2, is in the process of being licensed and
various empowerment contenders, domestic and foreign investors are being
evaluated, could we please avoid any hint of another Cell C NextCom
debacle? The matter is currently under judicial review, as we all know. So,
no more can be said but, surely, enough said.
On the issue of genuine black empowerment, the IFP notes that too many of
the same faces, wearing the same or only slightly different hats, seem to
be benefiting from the ongoing redistribution of Government goodies and
opportunities that are being created by privatisation. We would like to see
innovative ways and means developed to bring large numbers of rural men and
women, from throughout the country, into this process of wealth creation
and the skills transfer that will automatically follow.

The proposal regarding SMMEs in underserviced areas for the teledensity of
less than 1% is a tiny start. But, that must not be used as a sop to
marginalise rural people from being resourced and assisted in developing
the capacity to compete for a share, too, in the major domestic bids. The
IFP has made it clear that it deplores what appears to be an overt lack of
general empowerment of women in the actual decision-making and management
of Cell-C and calls on constituencies committed to the creation of gender
equality throughout South Africa to insist that that is not repeated in the
finalised licence framework for the second national operator.

A golden thread running through all discourse about telecommunications and
broadcasting is the need for a well-resourced and respected regulator. The
Independent Communications Authority of South Africa is cash-strapped and
is at present unable to meet its mandate. The director-general has assured
the committee that this matter will be resolved shortly. We await
developments in that regard. Any further delays will seriously compromise
the work and perceived independence of that body which is something that
this Parliament should not tolerate.

Finally, our best wishes go to Mr Peter Matlare who has taken over the helm
as CEO of the SABC at probably the most difficult time and juncture in this
corporation's history. Transforming the organisation from a state to a
public broadcaster clearly had its problems way back in 1994. But, today,
Mr Matlare is having to split the SABC into commercial and public entities
and cross-subsidise the so-called public channels with the profits of its
commercial channel enterprises. As time goes on, I think that we should all
remember that Mr Matlare is not the architect of that broadcasting Act
policy but merely the poor man who has to try to implement it.

The IFP believes that the exercise is fraught with danger. The IFP has long
warned that the Public Service demands of the public broadcaster including,
quite correctly, increasing amounts of hugely expensive local content
programming will sap the resources of the SABC's commercial entities which
will at the same time be trying to provide their own high quality
programming and compete with the likes of eTV, DSTV, successful commercial
radio stations and the advertising revenue that those audiences generate.

There is more than enough evidence, as the members have already heard from
Mr Kekana, that public broadcasters find it difficult to attract
advertising rands and that media buyers, whom we all know are mostly young
white women, are refusing to recognise the buying power of black people and
the value of black media products. In the context of the SABC, that
situation is truely alarming. The media buyers, in turn, say that TV
advertising is too expensive and that they would rather put their money
with the print media. We have a serious problem and the implications are
going to come rebounding right back into this House, with regard to the
SABC.

Finally, the Minister and her department are having to grapple with
difficult and financially volatile issues. We wish them well and would like
to remind them of the old saying: You have to live with criticism. If you
do nothing, then nobody will criticise you. [Applause.]

Muf I MUTSILA: Mulangadzulo, kha heyi Vouthu 25 ya Vhudavhidzani, ndi tama
u bvisela khagala zwa dziposo, ndo ḓisendeka nga maanḓa nga vhadzulapo vha
mahayani ngauri ndi vhaṅwe vha vhathu vho huvhadzeswaho nga muvhuso wa
tshiṱalula. Vho vha vho ṅaledzwa, vho hangwiwa nahone vha sa londiwi.
(Translation of Venḓa paragraph follows.)

[Ms I MUTSILA: Madam Speaker, when debating this Vote No 25 on
Communication, I want to concentrate on postal services to the rural
population, because they were victims of severe discrimination. They were
neglected, forgotten and not catered for.]

The challenges which are facing us as we seek to make people of our beloved
country have better access to all services and postal services, in
particular, are the divide between the rich and poor. The foremost
challenge is the emerging digital divide between those who have access to
digital information and those who do not. This divide threatens to worsen
the existing poverty gap between the rich and the poor, and also between
the urban and rural population.

The main objective of postal service is the provision of universal service.
That ensures that all citizens have equal access to basic letter service
that is reasonably accessible to all people in the country, regardless of
physical location, at a uniform rate of postage and at an affordable price
which offers reliable service.

The postal service is the most basic and common means by which messages can
be communicated and goods delivered. Postal service is a basic link which
serves the entire population. It also serves as an important medium of
communication for business and commerce.

Kha riṋe vhadzulapo vha mahayani, vhudavhidzani ha poso ndi tshi
vhangalelwa tsha ndeme, ngauri miṱa yashu yo fhandekanywa. Vhunzhi ha
vhanna vha shuma dziḓoroboni na migodini, miṱa yo sala mahayani. Henefho,
ndi he ha vha na tshengelo khulu. Vhadzulapo vho vha vha tshi shumisa poso
gute dza vho ramavhengele, zwikolo, kereke na zwibadela. Marifhi na thundu
dza vhathu zwo vha zwi tshi xela na u ngalangala. (Translation of Venḓa
paragraph follows.)

[For us rural people, a postal service is one of the most important
commodities, because our families are separated. Most men work in the urban
areas and on the mines, leaving their families behind in the rural areas.
This led to great suffering. They used private boxes owned by businessmen,
schools, churches and hospitals. Their letters and goods used to get lost
or disappeared.]

Given that background of how our people suffered, our Government was
compelled to commit itself to facilitate the growth of the development of
this sector and to ensure the provision of universal and affordable postal
service to all South Africans irrespective of race, class, gender, age and
geographical location.

Our Government, through this Vote, makes sure that access to reliable and
affordable Public Service is no longer a privilege to be enjoyed by the few
but that it is the rightful expectation of all citizens, especially those
who were previously disadvantaged and that it improves the quality of life
of every South African.

Lu ḓo vha lwa u thoma vhutshiloni ha vhadzulapo vha mahayani, hune nṋe nda
bva hone, miḓi yavho i tshi ḓo vha na ṋomboro dza nnḓu dzavho na madzina a
zwiṱaraṱa zwavho, naho zwiṅwe zwa zwiṱaraṱa zwi tshi nga milila. Ri livhuwa
na mahosi ashu vha re na tshumisano ya vhuḓi yo dzikaho na vhalanda vhavho.
Vha ita mutingati wa u ḓisa tshanduko hune vha dzula hone. Zwa itea hune
vha dzula hone. (Translation of Venḓa paragraph follows.)

[This will be the first time that the rural population, where I come from,
will have their houses numbered and the streets named, even though some of
them are like pathways. I thank most of our traditional leaders, who work
constructively and harmoniously with their subjects. They work together to
bring change and allow the process to take place where they are staying.]

The ultimate purpose of communication is to alter the original
relationships between people's own organisms and their environments, so
that they are not targets of external forces, but exact forces themselves.
In this way people become an effecting agent, affect others, their physical
environments and themselves to become a determining factor in the state of
the world around them.

Effective information through postal services opens up progress by helping
people to find out about development. It is the motto to social activity
and civilisation, and thereby animates and sustains life. It inspires and
strengthens the spirit of togetherness, and integrates knowledge,
organising and power.

Communication informs people about their social, economic, political and
cultural environments, and links components of past society and transmits
social values, norms and morals. Information not only spreads knowledge,
but also stimulates creativity, enhances participation, promotes social
cohesion and facilitates the measurements of change. It is directly linked
to the exercise of basic human liberty and the freedom of expression.

Vhuḓi na mutoli hoyu wa vhudavhidzani, vhathu vhashu vho zwi shaya. Vho zwi
tama vha tshi vhona zwi tshi fhira nga kule, vha balelwa u zwi swikelela.
Nga heyi vouthu, nga maanḓa siani ḽa dziposo, i ḓo ḓisa tshanduko kha
vhathu vha hashu vhe vha vha vho dzimiwa mvelaphanḓa nga khole. Zwino na
vhone vha ḓo ḓi pfa vhe vhathu, vho itwa vhathu. Ngauralo heyi vouthu, ri i
tikedza ro khwaṱha. (Translation of Venḓa paragraph follows.)

[The beauty and knowledge of communication was unknown to our people. They
just saw it from a distance, but failed to get it. This Vote No 25, more
especially as regards postal services, will bring change to people who were
deliberately deprived of an opportunity to develop. At least, they will now
enjoy the fruits of liberty. Therefore, we strongly support this Vote.]

Lastly, we urge out department to speed up the process of making postboxes
functional. They must not be seen as white elephants, which are there to
decorate the post offices. Post offices in rural areas should not be
removed at all costs, because that is the only source of communication and
information for the population in the deep rural area. We urge our
department to speed up this process and we congratulate them on whatever
progress they are making to bring a better life to all South African
citizens. [Applause.]

Mr J J DOWRY: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, during the last few years we
have seen a lot of development through the Department of Communications.
Many people from the previously disadvantaged groups now have access to
telephones, postal addresses and, through the Multipurpose Community
Centres, to various other facilities which they did not have before. In the
broadcasting field we have also seen community radio stations coming into
existence. However, a lot more remains to be done. The country still waits
for the third cellular network to be licensed and then of course the SA
Post Office is really in bad shape. I want to focus on this aspect of
communications.

Aan die positiewe kant van die bedrywighede van die poskantoor is daar
natuurlik die verskaffing van honderdduisende nuwe posadresse aan mense wat
voorheen nie eens 'n brief kon ontvang nie. Nietemin kon die poskantoor nog
nie naby die beplande vier miljoen nuwe adresse kom nie. Aan die negatiewe
kant is daar die choatiese bestuur van die poskantoor se
privatiseringsproses. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[On the positive side of the activities of the Post Office there is, of
course, the provision of hundreds of thousands of new postal addresses to
people who could not even receive a letter in the past. Nevertheless, the
post office has not yet been able to get anywhere near the planned four
million new addresses. On the negative side there is the chaotic management
of ther Post Office’s privatization process.]

In 1999 the New Zealand Post International was appointed to help transform
the SA Post Office, to drive postal services to underserviced areas, to
help bring delivery to a professional level and to help the Post Office
into a financially sound position. What has happened since then, after NZPI
received about R185 million for its services? In March 2000 the Post Office
reported a loss of R482 million, and in the year ending 31 March this year,
the loss was R750 million. If we add to that the 27 skilled black managers
who left the service of the SA Post Office, the question arises: to what
benefit was the NZPI to the cause of the SA Post Office? Due to all this
the Post Office suffered huge setbacks and delivery targets could not be
met. Now the board of the SA Post Office, together with key stakeholders
such as the Communication Workers Union and the Post and Telecommunications
Association has asked for the cancellation of the contract with the NZPI,
18 months before the contract was due to expire. To the credit of the
Minister, we must acknowledge the fact that she has launched a full audit
into the problems facing the SA Post Office.

Due to all this the Post Office suffered huge setbacks and delivery targets
could not be met. Now the board of the SA Post Office, together with key
stakeholders such as the Communication Workers Union and the Post and
Telecommunication Association, has asked for the cancellation of the
contract with the NZPI, 18 months before the contract was due to expire. To
the credit of the Minister, we must acknowledge the fact that she has
launched a full audit into the problems facing the SA Post Office.

Ons hoop die aantygings wat vroeër vanjaar tydens die staking van
poskantoorwerkers deur die CWU, die unie vir kommunikasiewerkers, gemaak is
oor korrupsie en ander ongerymdhede binne die poskantoor, deeglik ondersoek
sal word.

Een van die aspekte waarin die poskantoor veral gefaal het, is
dienslewering. Veral in die Gautenggebied kla mense voortdurend dat hulle
nie gereeld hul pos ontvang nie en dat tjeks en ander waardevolle artikels
in die pos verlore raak. Groot ondernemings verskuif tans hul sake na
private posdienste omdat hulle net nie meer vertroue in die poskantoor se
dienslewering het nie.

Mnr Andila Nkaba, DG van die Departement Kommunikasie, het verlede week
gesê die poskantoor is die beste toegerus om die Posbank en veral
pensioenuitbetalings te behartig. Ek meen tans is dié siening te
optimisties, aangesien die publiek se vertroue in die poskantoor daagliks
afneem.

My vraag aan die Minister is hoekom soveel poskantore sluit. Dit kan tog
nie tot gevolg hê dat dienslewering altyd verbeter nie. Ons weet sekere
ekonomiese oorwegings is noodsaaklik, maar die sluiting van sommige
poskantore maak nie sin nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

We hope that the allegations made earlier this year by the CWU, the
Communication Workers Union, during the strike by post office workers with
regard to corruption and other irregularities within the Post Office, will
be thoroughly investigated.

One of the aspects in respect of which the Post Office has indeed failed,
is service delivery. In the Gauteng area in particular people are
constantly complaining that they do not receive their mail regularly and
that cheques and other items of value are lost in the post. Large
enterprises are now moving their business to private postal services
because they simply no longer have confidence in the Post Office’s service
delivery.

Last week Mr Andila Nkaba, Director-General of the Department of
Communications, said that the Post Office was best equipped to deal with
the Post Bank and pension payouts in particular. I am of the opinion that
this view is currently too optimistic, as the public’s confidence in the
Post Office is declining daily.

My question to the Minister is why so many post offices are closing. This
can surely not result in improved service delivery. We know that certain
economic considerations are essential, but the closure of some post offices
dos not make sense.]

The Waterkloof and Groenkloof post offices in Pretoria were closed without
consulting the local community. To say afterwards that no local organised
group could be located is just not good enough. According to the Minister's
answer to question 58 in the National Assembly, the Waterkloof and
Groenkloof post offices were closed because of their amalgamation with the
Brooklyn post office, but soon afterwards the Brooklyn post office was also
closed and relocated somewhere else in the same centre. Although
dramatically improved service was promised, the people in the area complain
constantly about bad service and even sometimes that service is
nonexistent.

Na aan leiding van haar verwysing na Bop TV wil ek die Minister graag vra,
aangesien die SABC se mandaat is om reg te laat geskied aan die 11
amptelike tale van die land en veral aan die nege inheemse tale, of dit nie
moontlik is om veral die Bopkanaal met die SABC te geïntegreer nie? Hy kan
dan help om byvoorbeeld ten minste twee tale soos Tshivenda en Afrikaans te
akkommodeer. Indien dit moontlik is, kan die SABC ver vorder om sy mandaat
ten opsigte van die verskillende amptelike inheemse tale na te kom.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In response to her reference to Bop TV I would like to ask the Minister,
since it is the SABC’s mandate to do justice to the 11 indigenous languages
in particular, whether it is not possible to integrate the Bop channel in
particular with the SABC? It could then help to accommodate at least two
languages, such as Tshivenda and Afrikaans, for example. If this were
possible, the SABC would make a great deal of progress in meeting its
mandate with regard to the various official indigenous languages.
[Applause.]]

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, at the outset I wish to thank the chairperson of
the portfolio committee for the manner in which he has driven the committee
thus far. We in the UDM support the Department of Communications in their
endeavours to create universal access, so as to enable ordinary people to
have access not only to traditional media but also to the convenience of
information technology, and will therefore support the Vote.

In programme 2, dealing with telecommunications, the department has
emphasised the need for basic telecommunications services in our rural
areas. The core of our economic plan is enterprise development, creating
the environment enabling every South African to become the creator of his
or her own wealth. Within the context of communications, we urge Government
to help make it happen by entering into partnerships with SMMEs and large
entrepreneurs in order to create healthy and constructive competition, with
an insistence on delivery of services to rural areas.

Enjoying a monopoly in telecommunications makes Telkom an unfair
competitor. However, we welcome the department's commitment to developing
policies dealing with the post - exclusivity period of Telkom, and
competition and trade liberalisation in telecommunications. The possible
listing of Telkom shares is a positive development, but will mean nothing
to the previously disadvantaged if it is not accompanied by mechanisms by
which shares could be accessed by them, and we urge the department to look
at this matter cautiously. In fact, I have taken note of what the hon the
Minister had to say on this matter this afternoon.

It is hoped that the initial public offering will occur before the end of
2001, as announced by the President. Many national and international
telecom stakeholders have expressed concern at the lack of a competitive
factor. The competitive spin of the IPO will seriously address job
creation, which is pivotal to our economic advancement.

Issues surrounding the third cellular operator licence need to be urgently
resolved. Whilst the matter is subjudice, there are important lessons to be
learnt. Never again must a similar situation be permitted to develop, as it
does not engender investor confidence. The matter has been in limbo for far
too long and such delays are not business-friendly. Its resolution will
open up the labour and services market, promoting job creation and the
delivery of services.

The rate of job-force mobilisation and education will also be rapidly
increased. Not only are the legal costs questionable - and I would like to
know what the department's tab is thus far - but taxpayers and bidders are
compelled to take the financial tab for this bungling. On the positive
side, both current operators are upbeat about the possible success of the
third cellular operator. Less than a quarter of cellphone users in our
country are on contract. The rest are prepaid users. This means at an
amount of R10 per month, prepaid users have access to a world-class
service.

The current debate around the registration of prepaid users for security
reasons must be driven cautiously. In rolling our telecom services out to
all sectors of society, the industry has empowered hawkers, spaza shops,
shebeens, rural establishments and so on to sell prepaid. The impact on
these intrepreneurs must be carefully considered. The investigation and
gathering of information by the department on the subject of spectrum
pricing, as well as the allocation of 1 800 spectrum to all mobile and
fixed line licensees on terms to be determined by Icasa by September 2001,
I am certain, is welcome by the industry. However, industry sources have
stated that the lack of adequate capacity at Icasa is hampering the
industry. This needs to be seriously addressed. The expenditure estimate
for 2001 and 2002 of a R107 million must be adjusted, if need be.

Nkszn N S MTSWENI: Sekela likaNomlomo, ikulumo engaphezulu bengidzubhula
uMengameli ekulumeni yakhe ayiqalise esitjhabeni ngomhlaka 9 Frebruwari
2001:


  Ngaphambi kwethu yisentjhuri nekulungwana-minyaka etjha. Singena
  esikhathini esitjha sesentjhuri yeAfrika njengama-Afrika enze isiqiniseko
  sokobona isentjhuri le ngeyeminyaka elikhulu lapho sizakuqeda ukuba
  bongazimbi bokutlhaga okwenziwa bunjalo bethu sitjhuguluke sibe bathumbi
  ... Ngesikwenzako sizaqiniseka bona izipi, amalwelwe nokungathuthuki
  angekhe kusafiniswa nama-Afrika. Ngezenzo zethu sizaqiniseka bona
  ukutlhaga kutjhidela ihlumo.

Sekela likaNomlomo, Ngqongqotjhe, malunga ahloniphekileko ngiyanilotjhisa
egameni labantu. I-World Telecommunications Day yadingidwa ngoMgqibelo
ngezi 19 Mayi 2001, ezikweni le Institute for Satellite and Software
Application (ISSA). UNgqongqotjhe uDr Matsepe-Casaburri, wamema amalungu we
portfolio committee, bona bazoku gidinga naye umnyanya lo oqakatheke
kangaka. Ngiyatjho bona ngadana khulu ukungabikho kweenchema eziphikisako.
Ngakho-ke ngifuna ukulimukisa amalungu weenchema eziphikisako bona ngomuso
babekele phambili immemo ezifana nalezi, khona bazakwazi ukubona ituthuko
elethwa nguRhulumende we-ANC, nokuzibophelela anakho ebantwini ezange
bafikelele ifundo eyethulwa kwi-ISSA ngesikhathi sokubusa kwenu nina be DA.
(Translation of isiNdebele paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N S MTSWENI: Madam Speaker, in his state-of-the nation address on 9
February 2001, the President said:


  Ahead of us is a new century and a new millennium. We march into the new
  era of the African Century as Africans who have made the determination
  that this century will be a hundred years in which we cease to be victims
  of our circumstances but victors ... By what we do, we will ensure that
  wars, disease and underdevelopment are no longer seen as being synonymous
  with Africans. Through our own actions we will ensure that poverty gives
  way to prosperity.

Madam Speaker, Minister, hon members, I greet you in the name of the
people. World Telecommunications Day was celebrated on Saturday 19 May
2001, at the Institute for Satellite and Software Applications (ISSA). The
Minister, Dr Matsepe-Casaburri, invited members of the portfolio committee
to come and celebrate this important event. I must say I was really
disappointed at the absence of opposition parties. I want to advise members
of these opposition parties that in future they should first consider such
invitations so that they can see the developments made by the Government of
the ANC, and its commitment to the people who never got the education
offered by the ISSA at the time of their government.]

The private sector in South Africa complains about Icasa's performance.
Icasa will never be able to compete with the private sector even if it can
get the necessary funds. This sector is weakening Icasa by recruiting its
staff. These are people who are trained by the regulator. I therefore want
to urge this sector to practise loyalty to the country by assisting Icasa
to keep its competent staff.

We are confident that the issue around the supplementary finance
requirements will be addressed before the end of this month. We are aware
that according to the CEO, Mr Snakes Nyoka, Icasa is fully committed to
playing its part in implementing the new telecommunications policy
directives and that the process has already started. This will enable them
to maximise the delivery of effective regulatory services within the
illustrated, broad timeframes as stipulated in the Telecommunications Act.

Icasa is an engine, therefore the country's interest should come first. It
should top their list of priorities. We therefore wish to bring to the
attention of Icasa the provisions of sections that are relevant. These are
sections 12 and 18 (e). I will not read them out.

The tendency to want to take us back to the Satra saga should be avoided by
all means. We cannot afford to be taken back. We plead with Icasa
councillors to work together as a team. It is the country that will suffer
if there are problems within Icasa. We will not hesitate to apply the laws
whenever necessary, and we therefore urge all councillors to work together
to put a strong united regulator that will put our country on the world
map.

Telecommunications is recognised internationally as a basic human right.
This means governments throughout Africa will be hard-pressed to deliver
telephones to the majority of people, especially the historically
disadvantaged. Telecommunications liberalisation is the cornerstone of
South Africa's transition, as well as lowering the price of communicating,
encouraging innovation and investing in new services and networks.

The hon the Minister of Communications has issued policy directions. These
directions are meant to change the lives of our people as far as access is
concerned. I must inform the hon Smuts that these are user-/ and people-
friendly.

According to the policy directions the small, medium and micro enterprises,
including co-operatives, shall be permitted to provide services in the
local loop using their own or lease infrastructure. This means that a local
line shall be provided to connect a terminal connection point to a local
exchange. These historically disadvantaged communities will need support
and access to funds.

During the national colloquium there was a feeling that a new separate body
be created under the auspices of the Department of Communications to
provide support to the ICT SMMEs. The motivation was that the current ITC
SMME's support mechanisms either do not exist or are totally ineffective.
The SMME ICT sector should be supported and stimulated, hence reporting and
monitoring measures have to be introduced on all operators on the
performance and contributions to the ICT SMMEs.

While there are plans, there are still many men controlling the industry.
Hon members should remember that when one communicates to a man, one
communicates to an individual, yet when one communicates to a woman, one
communicates to a nation. It does not mean that just because somebody is in
a wheelchair, deaf or blind, that he or she cannot be communicated to.
Although in our different constituencies we appreciate good work and
success stories about women in the telecommunication sector, we have a real
challenge to create opportunities to expose women to technology and to make
human resources available to assist women in their businesses.

In discussing black economic empowerment at the national colloquium policy
discussion, there was consensus that it was important to establish a clear
target for economic empowerment and also general consensus to the concept
of national ownership of licence entities at the minimum of 51% of equity.
On the issue of BEE, was generally accepted that a target of 30% of company
licences under the new regime be allocated to BEE companies and SMMEs.

Not only should empowerment be defined by ownership, but also should
include issues regarding procurement, skills development and management
skills. The process of awarding a third cellular licence is clouded with
many unfortunate developments. If only people were more careful, the
process would have been finished by now, as I speak. One is concerned
because this involves billions of rands. In our country, in order to reach
a service, one has to dial a number of telephones before reaching one's
actual emergency service. Thanks to the department for coming up with the
new one number for all South Africans.

We had a lot of unfortunate situations; I experienced one of these
situations which I will share with hon members. Early this month one
evening my dog started barking nonstop. I went out to check, I found that
there was a snake on my doorstep. What came to my mind was an emergency
service, more so because nature conservation is against the killing of
snakes. I dialled the number that I used last year when I had the same
problem, but it rejected me. At the next number I dialled, I was told they
were not responsible for snakes. What bothered me most was that if
something like this happening to me could with two mobile phones and a
fixed line in the house, what about an ordinary man or woman at an
underserviced area where a telephone is about five kilometres away.

The telecommunications policy directives call for the establishment of a
new public emergency telephone number and an integrated public call centre
that will be called an intergrated public emergency communication centre.
The 112 emergency number calls for the improvement of access to
telecommunications services. Telkom must make sure that all disadvantaged
people have telephones. In order to access the 112 number, one needs a
telephone to connect into the emergency number.

The SABC must come up with a programme that will promote the 112 number
instead of than popularising the American 119 number. We appreciate the
amount allocated to this project, but we think it will need more funds. The
Government communications system should make sure that people are informed,
because no information is disinformation. We should make sure that leaders
who go around confusing people about what Government is doing do not stand
a chance.

In conclusion, yes, a better life has not reached everybody, but we are on
course. I want to commend the Department of Communications for the support
they are giving the gender unit in the department. I want to thank the DG
and his staff for whatever good work they are doing. I would like to call
on the departments were this gender units have not been established that
they must take some notes from the Department of Communications. I support
the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before I call on the next speaker, I would like
to recognise a delegation from China, led by the Vice-Minister of State
Security, Mr Song Ping. Welcome to the Parliament of South Africa.
[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and hon members, we are all aware
that modern technology, especially the Internet and electronic mail, is
determining the way communication will be done.

The future is literally being shaped by the younger generation, especially
since the computer age has become a natural way of life for them. The youth
of today has more power than ever before to determine what the future may
look like. It is an urgent imperative that South Africa, for the sake of
the future of its youth, improves its investments in technology. The
communications environment needs to enjoy critical attention.

Any child who is not computer literate in the new millennium would be as
disadvantaged as a child in the 60s and 70s who could not read or write.
Computer literacy must be a compulsory subject for all children and must be
introduced at primary school level. There are schools which have computers,
but many of them lack trained staff to effeciently use the tools. An
effective and efficient knowledge-based society is not a pipe dream any
longer, but a necessity.

Budget allocation for the department has declined from R766,9 million, to
about R486 million. The reason for this is that the subsidy for the Post
Office will be terminated. The SABC will also see its subsidy being reduced
by about R45 million. I would propose that the department asks the Ministry
of Finance to allow it to use its funds to implement a communications
infrastructure within our schools and community organisations. In that way
the department will work together with the Department of Education.

With regard to community radio stations, it is the view of the ACDP that
Christian braodcasting in South Africa is under threat, especially with
reference to Christian community radio stations. If one examines, case by
case, licence hearings that are being conducted by Icasa, one soon comes to
the realisation that applications by Christian community radio stations are
treated very harshly and with no symphathy. The independence of Icasa
becomes questionable when applicants who promote Christian radio and TV are
treated with contempt.

A case in point is the applications of Link FM and Imonti who were vying
for the same frequency. Link FM had a far harder and indepth interrogation
by Icasa than Imonti. In fact, it is the longest interrogation on record by
Icasa. Despite the good work done by Link FM and the support from all
communities, the community radio licence was finally given to Imonti. As a
result, Link FM took Icasa to court because of their biased approach.

Radio King Fisher is another case in point. After the license authority
refused to award a community radio licence to Radio King Fisher, the matter
was taken to court which ruled in favour of Radio King Fisher, and Icasa
has been instructed to reasses that application.

The cost of this mistake by Icasa to the taxpayer was over
R200 000. We accept this Budget Vote today, this should not give Icasa the
green light to continue with its mismanagement and shameful treatment of
Christian broadcasters.

Another case in point is TBN when it applied for the renewal of their
community TV licence. TBN has been broadcasting in South Africa for the
past 15 years. The renewal of its licence is being refused by Icasa and
TBN's application is treated as a new licence application. List of
questions TBN had to answer include such great detail that it has cost it
up to R80 000 to collate all the answers.

With regard to the Post Office, the organisation has shown that it cannot
expect an extension of its subsidy due to mismanagement. The ACDP calls on
the Minister to investigate thoroughly what went wrong with the New Zealand
partnership. The investigative and forensic firm that will be examining the
financial irregularities at the Post Office must also be tasked to give us
an assessment of whether proper procedures were followed when this foreign
firms were allocated the contracts. We have heard of senior executives in
the Post Office linking their salaries to the rand-dollar exchange rate.
This means that if the rand falls against the dollar, their salaries would
increase.

With regard to restructuring and competitive performances, these are
relatively new experiences for the avarage state employee. Foreign firms
are not always aware of this and many times their tactics appear harsh and
unsympathetic. This is the reason for the strike by the Communication
Workers Union.

With these few words, ACDP supports the Budget Vote.

Mr V C GORE: Madam Speaker, may I beg your indulgence and that of the House
for a few moment?. Owing to the unacceptable levels of access to resources
for disabled persons in Parliament, I have not been afforded efficient
resources to prepare adequately for this debate. If we as Parliament are
committed to equality, then I invite members of this House to assist me and
others in rectifying this situation. [Applause.]

If the priority of Government is to condemn South Africans to the wrong
side of the digital divide, then with all due respect, this Government has
gone beyond the call of duty.

The Minister of Communications has achieved some accomplishments in the
past year. We are finally pleased to see the release of the Green Paper on
e-commerce, the establishment of Icasa and the beginning of the roll out of
MPCCs, which will help to bridge the digital divide.

Has the Minister done enough in closing this divide? Sadly, the answer is,
``No''. Government quite correctly identified communications sector as a
major driver for the South African economy. The ANC-led Government has
still not got this right. The telecommunications sector contributes less
than 10% to GDP.

As a country, we should begin to set high targets in this regard. For
example, a country such as Germany believes that 20% to 30% of GDP is
achievable.

Turning to another failure, the department, in a very noble attempt to
increase teledensity, decreed that granting Telkom a monopoly in the
fixedline market would best serve universal access. Their latest policy
directions continue with this trend by licensing an SNO and, perhaps, a
third national operator in a few years' time.

This tinkering with managed liberalisation, monopolies and duopolies is
doing nothing for the progress so urgently required. What this country
needs, and what the consumer and the South African citizen demands is free
and fair competition.

I would like to ask the hon Kekana why we continue to ignore international
and local experience in this regard? A country such as Brazil has managed,
through competition, to provide telecommunication services to millions of
Brazilians. Vodacom and MTN have, in sevem years, connected more than 10
million customers.

Of course, there is a constant temptation for policy-makers and regulators
to design markets, products and prices outside of market forces. However,
experience abroard constantly shows that minimising this ``cookbook''
approach to competition maximises the social and economic benefits of
liberalisation.

Conversely, we have seen that monopolies - and, for that matter, duopolies
- do not work. For example, Telkom has disconnected 200 000 fixed lines and
charges up to 60% more for particular services than some international
competitors.

If Government is serious about providing affordable and quality
communications to all South Africans, then it has to seriously address
issues such as universal access, the digital divide and leapfrogging, and
not simply pay lip service to these issues. In conclussion, if the Minister
chooses or allows competition to do the delivering, she will give the
nation a fighting chance. [Applause.]

Mr M A MAZIYA: Madam Speaker, Ministers and members, last year Cabinet
approved the restructuring of the Post Bank as part of its comprehensive
programme to restructure the state-owned assets.

Subsequently, a strategic management partner was appointed to facilitate
the restructuring. The restructuring is based on the following points.
Firstly, to provide for greater autonomy and separate financial statements
with the intention of corporatising the Post Bank and, secondly, either to
introduce the strategic partner or an initial public offering to
recapitalise the bank.

The Post Bank, therefore, is an important financial institution that is in
a position to influence economic growth in our country through its ability
to mobilise savings. The mission of this institution is to offer easy-to-
understand, reliable, secure and affordable services to the masses of our
country, especially the unbankable and rural communities. This will broaden
the participation of people in financial markets and will satisfy the most
basic financial service needs, especially of the poorest, the least mobile
segments of the rural population.

The ANC-led Government has embarked on a very critical intervention
strategy to better and improve the lives of the rural people. The
integrated sustainable rural development strategy cannot be implemented in
isolation of the financial services that are within the context of rural
development objectives of the Reconstruction and Development Programme.

The so-called unbanked sector of the population, both in rural and urban
areas, will benefit from the restructured and focused Post Bank. The Post
Bank already has approximately 1,8 million active savers, with savings to
the value of R700 million. Once it begins its operation as a separate
business aimed at providing service for lower-income earners, its client
base is likely to double or treble. The post bank general manager, Billy
Thlabanelo, says that the bank shall be running as a full revenue bank for
its target market within two to three years.

It is further encouraging to note that apart from savings and deposits, the
Post Bank will have a range of savings and deposits products as required by
its customers. The poor or the unbanked sector of the population need
accessible basic banking services.

Currently there are 2 000 Post Bank outlets in the country. At the moment
the Post Bank uses all these facilities of the Post Office. However, it
must expand so that it is accessible to its clients.

The expansion programme will establish retail outlets at supermarkets and
pharmacies, with the flexibility of operating times that will ensure that
people are conveniently serviced at all times. As the Post Bank offers the
service of payment and money transfers, will assist its clients to move
funds from one area to another.

It is very dificult for people without current accounts to move funds from
one place to another. People who are in urban areas and families in rural
areas need a reliable and affordable system to transfer money. The Post
Bank is well-placed to offer this type of service.

The Strauss Commission that was appointed in January 1995 to look at and
report on these matters, looked into the question of broadening the
participation of rural people in financial markets by proposing diverse
financing mechanism to ensure access to financial services with the
emphasis on saving mobilisation.
The recommendation of the Strauss Commission were threefold. Firstly, as
far as savings products are concerned, it recommended greater availability
of access to appropriate saving products and more opportunities for
mobilising rural savings. Secondly, tailor-made products could be made
available and provision should be made to give incentives for increased
savings. It further recommended improved transmission services, with
special attention to the processing of pension payments. Assistance was to
be rendered to rural people in paying for services such as water supply,
electricity and telecommunications. Thirdly, there was a focus on
consumption, smoothing and productive loans which, amongst others, would
have to be translated into financial assistance for farm and farm
activities.

If all these requirements are successfully implemented, this will go a long
way in ensuring that all sectors of the population are part and parcel of
the economic growth of this country, and the realisation of the objectives
of the Reconstruction and Development Programme.

Commercial banks are inclined to focus on higher-income groups, and this
leaves a significant portion of the population, particularly those in rural
areas, not serviced. It is, therefore, highly recommended that the Post
Bank should include credit facilities in their services. The emergence and
the proliferation of microlenders is an indication that this sector of the
population requires this product from a reliable institution like the Post
Bank.

Interest rates charged by microlenders to the poor are unacceptably high.
Therefore, I believe that the post bank can safely make a significant
difference in this particular area of credit facilities.

This can be extended to small business entrepreneurs like street vendors,
hawkers and small-scale farmers. These types of clients will contribute
significantly in their respective rural communities to economic growth,
food security and job creation.

In Bangladesh a shining example is a grameen bank which serves the poor,
particularly women in rural areas. The grameen bank began as a government
project in 1976 and got established in 1983 as an independent bank. It
continued to provide financial resources to the poor on reasonable terms
and continued to generate productive self-employment.

The customers of the grameen bank were landless peasants who took out small
loans for all types of economic activities, including housing. What is even
more interesting is that 70% of the borrowers were rural women. The
remarkable accomplishment was the phenomenal recovery rate. Only 4% of
grameen loans were overdue. They managed to achieve this because of a
specialised system of intensive credit supervision.

The grameen bank in Bangladesh is the most appropriate where lessons could
be learnt from. It is my honest belief that the Post Bank is the best
suitable candidate to offer similar types of services as the grameen bank.
This will definitely contribute to sustainable quality jobs, food security
and stimulate local economic development. The integrated sustainable rural
development strategy can thus be complemented and the lives of millions of
rural communities especially women improved.

This can be a bold move to include rural people into the mainstream of the
economy. The long queues which are the order of the day during the payment
of social grants are a further burden for the eldlerly. It is rather sad
and unfortunate that senior citizens and the recipients of the other grants
cannot meet the criterion to open accounts with commercial banking
institutions.

While understanding that servicing the lower end of the market with high
transaction volumes with no values is an expensive business, the Post Bank
has a social responsibility not to exclude lower income earners. If the
Post Bank offers credit and all other services which I have mentioned, it
will be able to break through and even dominate this market. The
Government's decision to establish the Post Bank as a separate legal entity
will transform the live and millions of millions of people whose relative
poverty and geographical obscurity have excluded them from the retail
banking services.

The ANC, through the RDP, demonstrates its noble intentions that the
poorest of the poor are part of the mainstream economy, making sure that
their lives are improved. There is no doubt that the Post Bank will
ultimately result in a better life for all. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, technology is the buzzword of our day. A
country that stays behind and does not keep track of the newest
technologies might never be able to catch up again. That makes this
department so important for South Africa. This department and its
activities determine whether South Africa will be part of the exciting new
communication world or stay behind forever.

Ek het minder as twee minute tyd vir twee sake. Die VF wil eerstens die
direkteur-generaal gelukwens met sy departement se pogings om die probleme
rakende nooddienste en noodnommers aan te spreek. As die departement se
beplanning slaag, behoort Suid-Afrika binnekort slegs een noodnommer,
naamlik 112 te skakel as daar iewers 'n krisis is. Tans verskil die
noodnommers van gebied tot gebied, en is daar geen versekering dat die
betrokke nommer wat jy skakel nie dié van 'n naburige gebied is of dié van
'n gebied is waar hulle jou nie meer kan help nie. Die VF steun hierdie
voorstel, en sal graag daarmee saamstem dat daarvoor geld begroot word.

In die tweede plek, een van die doelstellings van hierdie department is om
gemeenskapradiostasies orals in Suid-Afrika te vestig. Toe die wet destyds
bespreek is, het die wet slegs voorsiening gemaak vir
gemeenskapradiostasies wat op geografiese grondslag toegeken word. So 'n
stasie lewer diens aan alle persone binne die geografiese gebied waarvoor
die lisensie toegeken is. Dit is baie nodig, en die VF steun die gedagte
van geografiese gemeenskapradiostasies.

Die probleem is dat so 'n stasie baie moeilik aandag aan minderhede soos
godsdiensminderheidsgroepe, of taal- en kultuurgroepe in daardie betrokke
gebied kan gee. Daarom het ons voorgestel dat die wet ook 'n tweede tipe
radiolisensie, naamlik ``community of interest'' lisensies, of dan
radiolisensies wat 'n spesifieke belangegroep dien, moet hê. Moslem en
Christen radiolisensies word so toegeken. Zulu, Sotho en Afrikaanse
radiolisensies kan so toegeken word.

Die afgelope tyd het Icasa ongeveer eweveel aansoeke vir geografiese- en
belangestasies ontvang. 26% van die geografiese aansoeke is afgekeur,
terwyl 77% van die belange-aansoeke, dit is nou die godsdiens- en
kultuurstasies, afgekeur is. Dit terwyl 13 van die 36 belangestasies geen
kompetisie gehad het nie. Dit maak nie sin nie. Dit veroorsaak 'n woede
daar waar daar stasies is wat lank uitgesaai het. Hoe kan ons meer geld vir
Icasa gee as die organisasie berekend besig is om godsdiens- en taalstasies
daarmee dood te maak.

Ons stem nie daarmee saam nie. Ons dink dit is 'n fout. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I have less than two minutes for two issues. Firstly, the FF would like to
congratulate the director-general on his department's attempts to address
the problems with regard to emergency services and emergency numbers. If
the department's planning is successful, South Africa should soon only have
to dial one emergency number, namely 112, if there is a crisis somewhere.
The emergency numbers currently vary from region to region, and there is no
guarantee that the relevant number which one dials is not that of a
neighbouring area or of an area where they cannot help you. The FF supports
this proposal, and will gladly agree to money being budgeted for it.

In the second place, one of the aims of this department is to establish
community radio stations all over South Africa. At the time that the Act
was discussed, it only made provision for community radio stations
allocated on a geographic basis. Such a station delivers a service to all
people within the geographic region for which the licence is allocated.
This is very necessary, and the FF supports the idea of geographic
community radio stations.

The problem is that such a station has difficulty in giving attention to
minorities like religious minority groups, or linguistic and cultural
groups in that particular region. For that reason we proposed that the Act
should also have a second type of radio licence, namely community of
interest licences, or radio licences which serve a specific interest group.
Muslim and Christian radio licences are allocated in this way. Zulu, Sotho
and Afrikaans radio licences can be allocated in this way.

Recently Icasa has received approximately the same number of applications
for geographic and community of interest stations. Twenty-six per cent of
the geographic applications were turned down, while 77% of the community of
interest applications, that is the religious and cultural stations, were
turned down. That while 13 of the 36 community of interest stations had no
competition. This does not make sense. This creates anger where there are
stations which have been broadcasting for a long time. How can we give
Icasa more money if the organisation is using it to deliberately kill
religious and linguistic stations? We do not agree with that. We think it
is a mistake.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members, there is so much monopoly
in the commucations sector that any attempt to introduces a competitor is
met with the greatest obstruction.

That Eskom Enterprises is ready to start rolling out a fibre optic network
as a second national operator is something to be happy about. But one has
Telkom balking and claiming that they have up to 2003 to operate and will
not let in another service provider. ATNT, a US-based telecommunications
operator, has a value-added network service licence in South Africa and can
offer a bandwidth which is eight times faster than that of Telkom.

The monopoly enjoyed by the 70% state-owned Telkom has to cease and make
room for competition. It takes them more than a week to repair a telephone
line with a technical fault in an urban area. The Government should take
note that the WTO commitments, to which South Africa is signatory, require
that Telkom provide nondiscriminatory access to and use of its facilities
for the supply of a value-added network service.

Television has become controversial because of its language policy. Some
indigenous languages are not satisfactorily catered for in the programmes
of the national broadcaster - eg news is never read in languages such as
Xitsonga and Tshivenda - while others are lumped together in one bulletin
or the other. This impacts negatively on the development of these
languages. Sign language is used rather too sparingly, more of which should
grace our screens. One may ask the question: When will the Bop-TV signal be
accessible to the greater South Africa, to allow viewers wider choice of
channels?

We commend, however, Icasa for the position the regulator took in
allocating times for the party election broadcast in the run-up to the
local government elections. The regulator maintained that it was a
completely new election to all parties and they were allocated equal
election broadcast on all national radio stations, depending on where the
parties contested. We hope they maintain the same principle even in the
future elections.

While we appreciate that there are 11 official languages, they may not be
spoken all at the same time. Each radio station has its designated language
and that has to be maintained. The radio, while serving as an entertainment
medium, has to serve as a teaching instrument. Purity of language should be
the hallmark of each broadcasting station.

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and members, the secrecies
surrounding the postal contracts seems to be symptomatic of the Department
of Communications at large, which fails even to answer parliamentary
questions, some of which have been clogging up the Order Paper for an
unbelievable three years.

During 1999 I asked 25 questions to the Minister, of which 16 were
answered. Last year I asked the Minister an additional 25 questions, many
being repeats from the previous year and only three out of 25 were
answered, 12%.

The questions I have asked ranged from the cost of the now defunct counter
system Excellpos, which, according to minutes of a board meeting, cost the
taxpayer R170 million. I have also asked questions relating to the
financial situation at the Wits region concerning the R12,7 million that
was written off and the salary sacrifice scheme that was never accepted by
the receiver of revenue, had little or no administrative control and led to
the Post Office owing Sars R8,3 million in VAT.

Another question I would like to ask the Minister here today is: Why was
the former CEO, Mr Frank Touwen, paid two cheques of R0,5 million each
after his services were terminated, while Max Mayisela was a very
generously paid acting CEO. However, vital questions from my side concerned
the strategic management partnership contract with the New Zealand Post and
Royal Mail, costing R185 million.

During our sparring over the contract, the Minister threatened to sue me.
Well, I am still waiting.

So, 20 months later and after R143 million, the Minister has now decided
that she would like to terminate the contract. That raises several
questions, the obvious ones being why, and why now? We see reports in the
press that the vision of achieving breakeven status lies in tatters and
that certain obligations were not met. There is only one obligation that
was not met and that was around service performance where a target of 92%
was set, and 90,1 was achieved - a mere shortfall of 1,9%.

We would like to hear from the Minister, as an answer to the taxpayer, what
the cost of the termination of the contract will be and why she feels that
it is necessary to terminate the contract after spending R143 million.

Another point of concern is that over the years, and definitely from 1993,
around R100 million has been deposited into the Post Office pension fund in
order to reflect a greater loss just before the finalisation of the
financial records. Once the new annual subsidy has been approved, the
amount is transferred back into the Post Office account. There is a great
possibility that this has just recently happened.

As a result, we are compelled to insist that the Auditor-General should
examine closely the financial statements of the Post office and that the
reports of Kroll Associates be made public immediately in order to allay
the fear that there is something to hide. There are so many questions which
are without answers and I trust that the hon Minister will give us some
answers today.
Mr E S MAGASHULE: Madam Speaker, hon members, historically, South Africa's
mainstream media has largely been owned and controlled by a minority,
particularly big business and what was regarded as the apartheid state. The
views, perspectives and values of the people in those groups were reflected
in most of their newspapers, radio and TV programmes. In terms of white
education it is usually said that white apartheid education domesticated.
Ek dink Waters is nog nat agter die ore. [I think Waters is still wet
behind the ears.]

The 1952 apartheid Radio Act and the 1976 apartheid Broadcasting Act,
primarily laid the rules for the SABC and other broadcasters to air their
programmes. The SABC radio and TV stations were used by successive
apartheid governments as state broadcasters. The grand plan of the
architects of apartheid was to establish ethnic based radio and TV
stations, Bop TV radio Transkei and other TBVC radio stations were
established soon after the bantustans' independence. This means that SABC
controlled and owned almost all public and commercial broadcasting stations
during the heydays of the apartheid era.

Unlike today, the history of the services rendered by the SABC reflected
the view of the fascist NP and that of separate and unequal development.
Apartheid broadcasting and colonialism divided many communities and used
discriminatory policies to restrict and control communication between
people. The mass media language and other means of communication were used
by the few to dominate the majority of South Africans.

Since the destruction of apartheid broadcasting, the new political system
ushered in the re-regulation of the SABC. The aim of that was to introduce
the new role-players in the broadcasting arena and to place the regulation
of the broadcasting system in the hands of an independent broadcasting
authority.

Since the ANC-led Government seized power, freedom of expression by the
media is protected. That is why the DP can actually talk today. In terms of
the access to information section in the Constitution journalists, today,
are given access to governmental information, which never happened during
apartheid times. The changes in broadcasting, since 1994, have not been
imposed by the state. The SABC today can draw on a wide range of previously
excluded professional producers.

Prior to the restructuring of the SABC, it relied on in-house producers in
conjunction with a small group of outside contractors for the production of
TV material. In 1994 the restructured SABC Board and management expanded
their range of outside production resources.

Television today focuses its attention on, particularly, the following
aspects of broadcasting. It realises the importance of locally produced
programmes in the main South African languages, since viewers easily
identify with the information, education and entertainment offered in
locally manufactured programmes.

It is important to run TV stations in a way that will have a positive
impact on the growth of indigenous talent capable of producing for both the
local and international TV, and feature film market. The public
broadcaster, today, purports to fulfil its social responsibility to South
Africans. The missing kid campaign which commenced in October 1999 on SABC
1 is a prime example of a resounding success. The success of this programme
has been recognised on two international TV channels, namely, CBS and CNN
International.

The SABC is also paying special attention to the Aids Awareness Campaign.
To this effect, a special documentary on how truck drivers who travel into
Africa face the threat of HIV was commissioned and broadcast on the SABC 3
channel.

It is clear that in a democratic society like ours, which is under the ANC
leadership, the free flow of information introduces a multiple-choice of
ideas that equip and expose people to interact with each other and also
interpret events around them. It is commendable that the department has
established 36 community radio stations in six provinces and 25 multimedia
centres in schools for people with disabilities. Twenty-two radio stations
were launched and basic radio equipment was provided at a cost of more than
R300 000 per station.

I wish to urge ICASA to work closely with NDDA, once it is established, to
support community radio. Service delivery indicators are: the
implementation of the recommended restructuring of the SABC, the
commercialisation of Channel Africa, the installation of community radio
stations in rural and peri-urban areas, a parliamentary channel and a
communications policy on people with disabilities.

It is clear that the budget allocation will enable the department to focus
on the following objectives: Firstly, to assist the country with taking
advantage of the convergence in communications technologies; secondly, to
enable the broadcasting system to reflect the identity and diverse nature
of South Africa; thirdly, to reflect the multilingual and diverse nature of
South Africa by promoting the entire spectrum of cultural backgrounds and
official languages; and finally, to set up a broadcasting system based on
universal access, nation-building and education.

In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity to salute the Minister, the
Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Communications, the Director-
General and all the staff members for their dedication and hard work. To
the SABC Board and the chief executive officer, I would like to say that we
are aware of the enormity of the problems and challenges facing the SABC.
[Interjections.] Nevertheless, they should remember their mandate. They
should not to fail our local producers and our people. They should make
their mark and never forget what apartheid broadcasting did to our country.
We also hope that SABC will have clear editorial policies and radically
transform the newsroom. [Interjections.]

I also take this opportunity to congratulate the hon Mathata Tsedu for his
appointment. [Interjections.] South Africa, under the leadership of the ANC
and the President, is a place of hope for all humanity, unlike South Africa
that was under apartheid.

I am sure that everybody will agree with us that today Dene Smuts is a
demoralised person. But I am sure that out of Dene Smuts we will be able to
create a human being. We are going to assist in building her. I think Dene
Smuts is not always focusing in committee work. She is worried about the
Western Cape battles. I am sure we will take this opportunity to ensure
that we groom a person out of her. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all
the hon members for the contributions that they have made, and the support
they have given us in those things that we have done right. I just want to
respond to some of them. I will not respond to all of them.

With regard to the hon Dene Smuts, she has indeed said what I have often
said: we need to come into the world. But we have not answered the
question: On whose terms, and at what cost? We certainly, as South
Africans, are not going to enter this world only on the terms that others
have set for us. We must also participate in the setting up of those terms
and estimate the cost to us, and what is the benefit for us. That is what
we must do.

On the issue of the fixed mobile, I think the hon Nat Kekana has indeed
dealt with the matter. I have just come back from Europe, and a month or
two ago I was in Africa where everybody was talking about the fixed mobile.
Therefore, I am not so sure whether South Africans are the ones left behind
in the digital devide. I thought maybe many Africans were left behind in
the digital divide, but maybe somewhere South Africans were also left
behind.

In the case of the role of the state, if we look at the issue of managed
liberalisation, most of the states, particularly in Europe, liberalised at
a time when they had achieved certain levels of teledensity. They did not
liberalise when they had such low teledensity. We therefore cannot just
follow what other countries are doing without also looking at the lessons
that we have learned. Managed liberalisation is to ensure that, as we grow
and open, we also make sure that the majority of the people come into the
world. And the majority of this country are not the minority that was
catered for by the previous government, but is a majority that is looked
after by this ANC Government. We have already talked about the avoidance of
the big bang.

With regard to the African Connection, I would just like to thank many of
the members of the portfolio committee who went to Houwteq for the ISSA
celebration of World Telecommunications Day, because they have brought that
message. Those who were left behind and did not come, do not know what
message we took to Africa. That is why they think the African Connection is
dead. It is alive and kicking, and doing very, very well.

Hon members would have heard the message that I took on behalf of the
Ministers of this continent to the LDC conference in Europe, ie what that
message was and its nature. But what it was telling us is that we, as
African Ministers, do have a mission for this continent. Therefore, the
African Connection is very much alive.

We would also like to thank all the others who have made contributions, in
particular Susan Vos for her supportive way and cautions, because I think
some of the cautionary measures she stated are very, very important. We
cannot, however, say that a geopoly is not necessarily the answer. We have
to be vigilant that the geopoly does not undermine those things that we
want to achieve, for example the reduction of costs, etc.

With regard to the issue that has been brought up about emergency services,
these are very important to us, as ordinary people. And I include myself in
that, because when my aunt's daughter is attacked in Soweto and cannot get
through to a hospital, an ambulance or the police to come over for three
hours at three o'clock in the morning, and has to contact me at five
o'clock, then we know that there is a problem. The emergency services are,
indeed, intended to bring about an equity amongst blacks and whites, rural
and urban people, and those that are not so rural or not so urban. I
therefore thank her very much.
With regard to the issues that Mr Waters has raised, I would like to just
say to him that, indeed, I have noticed, that he was asking the same
questions, and sometimes that was precisely the reason I said this could
not be urgent. Either he was being provocative or he wanted to catch me out
for telling a lie, and I do not want to be accused of telling a lie. But I
would also like to say that a number of issues he raised, which he said are
problems with the Post Office, are indeed problems that arose out of the
agreement that have been made by the previous government. The deals that
were made as the new Government was coming in on pension funds and medical
aid for pensioners have created huge deficits in the Post Office. What is
causing the problems for the Post Office is that debt is overhanging. It is
particularly the new entrants - those who do not look like those who have
been there before, unfortunately - who are paying for these deficits that
were created by the previous government, because the medical aid alone has
a deficit of R1,5 billion. I think we should take note of that. The other
questions I will certainly try to answer.

Mr Mfundisi of the ACDP has raised the issue of ATNT. ATNT could indeed
certainly provide all kinds of services. But because ATNT is also expanding
into a new market, digitalisation for us will bring about the changes. We
cannot be sure that when ATNT comes in it will necessarily want to focus on
Venda, Lebowa and Qwaqwa, because that is where the poor of the poorest
live. We have to ensure that as we use the capacities the infrastructure
that Telkom, Transtel and Esi-Tel have, in order to ensure that all
communities are brought into this new economy, and not just ``some people''
whilst we leave out others. I think that is what we are doing. The
intention is not to create a monopoly. That is why we say that anybody can
come in and participate.

With regard to Mr Abram's question around the retail sale of shares in
Telkom, we would indeed like to encourage ordinary people, stokvels,
societies, churches, youths and their clubs to also be able to buy shares.
We will certainly be looking into a mechanism to ensure that there is
increasing access for ordinary people in the schemes that have been made,
eg Ikageng and Phuthuma, which we are evaluating to see how, indeed, we
will be able to bring access to ordinary people.

With regard to the issue that was raised about Brazil and its successes, I
hope we do not want to compare ourselves with Brazil on a superficial
level. Brazil has been a country at the site of the new economy for quite
some time. Rio de Janeiro alone has 7 million people and Sâo Paulo has
about 10 million people, if I am correct. None of the cities of South
Africa have that kind of population. So when we make comparisons, we must
make comparisons between apples and apples, and not apples and pears.

We would also like to draw the House's attention to the fact that when we
talk about the Second National Operator, Esi-Tel and Transtel being
included in this, the intention is to maximise a large investment that
Government has already made in these companies. To expect that Government
must abandon this infrastructure would be wasting the country's investment.


Vivendi in France, for example, which is now one of the major
telecommunications companies, comes from a power company. The involvement
of power and rail companies is not unique to South Africa. We are learning
from others, but we are making sure that the lessons that we have learned
are adapted to our own conditions and our own situation where, for example,
the majority of black people are exluded from participation. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 4 - Home Affairs:

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, it is indeed a great pleasure
for me to introduce the debate on the Home Affairs Budget Vote
Appropriation Bill for the year 2001-02 financial year.

On this occasion, I wish to pay tribute to my former Deputy, the hon Dr
Lindiwe Sisulu. She ably shared the responsibilities of the Home Affairs
portfolio with me for two terms of office. I wish to sincerely thank her
for the support that I received from her over that period. Her professional
and hands-on approach to tackling problems will remain her legacy within
the Department of Home Affairs. I wish Dr Sisulu well in her new portfolio
as Minister of Intelligence.

I also wish to welcome the new Deputy, the hon Mr Charles Nqakula, into the
Home Affairs fold. I trust that we will work together as a team in the same
congenial manner that Dr Sisulu and I did. Mr Nqakula brings to the
department a wealth of experience which can only benefit the department and
its clients.

The Department of Home Affairs has had great achievements over the past
years. Through the hard work and dedication of many of its officials, we
have been able to perform tasks that are virtually miracles. I know how
hard many people work and the difficult conditions under which they often
go that extra mile to please our clients, who are the entire population of
South Africa.

I am very appreciative of the efforts that our people render in order to
make up for the deficiency in the structures and procedures of the
Department of Home Affairs. Most of those who work for the department are
exceptional people and are, indeed, an asset to our line functions.
However, no matter how often we can help our clients, the few times in
which we fall short are unfortunately those that are remembered and focused
on, particularly in the media.
Reports in the media recently, following the tabling in Parliament of the
Public Service Commission's Report titled Home Affairs Batho Pele and
Management Audit Investigations, leading to certain members of this House
demanding my dismissal, bear this out. That happened despite the fact that
the report was based on investigations conducted in 1999 and early 2000 and
covered a period when the department was without a director-general who, as
members know, is the chief executive officer of the department and that the
department had already embarked on a extensive programme of service
delivery improvements.

The many problems that the department is experiencing are only marginally
caused by its people. To a greater extent, they are caused by our lack of
resources. To solve the problem of inadequate resources, we must find ways
and means of doing things differently and design adequate structures to
that end. In that respect, we need a new vision which starts at the
delivery interface between our structures and our clients in respect of our
civic affairs and migration control functions. We need to find ways and
means of performing those tasks more simply and effectively and with fewer
resources.

A strategic plan can never be seen in isolation from the budget allocated
to my department. I reported in detail in the past year's Home Affairs
Budget Vote Appropriation Bill, if members can remember, on the
insufficient funding in every sphere of activity of my department.
Unfortunately, the situation this year looks no different. In fact, for the
2001-02 financial year, the budget allocation of the department, personnel
expenditure and transfer payment excluded, has decreased by 5,9% when
compared to the previous year. That is unbearable when one takes into
account the increase in the services that are expected from the Department
of Home Affairs.

For years, the challenges and delivery demands on both migration control
and civic affairs have dramatically increased while the resources available
to us to meet them have decreased in real terms. We are constantly
confronted with having to do more with increasingly less, not in relative
but in absolute terms. Every year the backlog increases thus compounding
pressures and the gap between what is needed and what is available so that
even if the underfunding was to cease this year, additional resources would
be required to bring our functions up to par.

That severe underfunding impacts negatively on all the activities of the
department and, consequently, on the level of service delivery. It has
impaired a number of the department's identified priorities such as the
upgrading of the Population Register, the upgrading of the movement control
system and the taking over of 14 border posts from the SA Police Service at
their request.

The legal cases, often arising out of deficient legislation which my
department defends, resulted in expenditure of over R3 million in the past
year. Yet, with the current budgeted allocation, only R1 million is
available for that purpose. Furthermore, although the computerisation of
departmental offices and linking them to the departmental mainframe in
order to optimise service delivery has been identified as one of the
strategic goals, the practical implementation of that will be seriously
hampered by insufficient funding. National Treasury has already indicated
that the department should consider public-private partnerships for the
funding of those priorities.

Due to those budget constraints, the department has had to place a
moratorium on the filling of all vacancies since 1998. As a result of that
moratorium and the vacancies created by a number of personnel taking
voluntary severence packages, the department had a vacancy rate of 19,2% on
its establishment for almost the whole of year 2000. The effect of that can
be seen in the statistical decrease in almost all the services that are
rendered by the Department of Home Affairs.

During the latter part of the year 2000 a stage was reached where the
department, with its existing personnel, could no longer render a
professional and efficient service to its clients. The morale amongst
existing personnel had become low during the tremendous workload and
continous working of overtime and, with backlogs increasing steadily, it
had become imperative to appoint additional staff to avoid serious
embarrassment.

Bearing in mind that vacancies as a result of voluntary severance packages
may not be filled, it was, however, imperative that the 765 ordinary
vacancies on the establishment of the department at that time be filled
without delay. However, the cost of filling those vacancies would amount to
R59 million in respect of the first year and with a carry-through effect.
Those were funds that were obviously not available. Consequently, through a
process of critical analysis, 231 posts were identified for filling and
were to be funded from savings accomplished by extreme belt-tightening
efforts elsewhere in the department. The process of filling those 231
critical posts commenced in November 2000 and will be completed within the
foreseeable future.

Despite that exercise, the department still had a vacancy rate of 16,1% on
its establishment on 31 March 2001. To render world-class service while
operating with 84% of staff establishment, determined on the basis of the
needs six years ago, is absolutely impossible. I repeat that we are
operating at 84% of the staff establishment needed six years ago when the
department was not even contemplating rising to the present challenges of
offering equally distributed and high quality civic affairs services to all
our population and running a world-class migration control system.

It has clearly become imperative that a scientifically-based staff
establishment for the department be compiled, taking into account not where
we were six years ago but where we wish to be in five to 15 years. We need
to redesign and restructure our two functions that is migration control and
civic affairs and scientifically determine, on the basis of a strategic
vision, the establishment required to exercise such functions so
restructured. The necessary funding must then be obtained to suitably fill
the posts concerned in order to render the kind of service that members of
the public expect and deserve.

I have the political will to bring about that necessary transformation of
my department. But, unless there is a concomitant political will to fund
that transformation, our clients will not receive the quality services that
they expect from us. There must also be a political will to accept my good
faith and competence in dealing with the dramatic problems confronting my
department. For too long I have found myself pulling in one direction while
others were pulling the opposite way, in fear that I might have gone the
wrong way, but without a clear understanding of the relevant issues and
solutions.

Restructuring must follow and progressively implement a clear long-term
vision for both civic affairs and migration control, which have both grown
out of their original mould.

In respect of civic affairs, following the new demarcation of
municipalities, my department has embarked on a process of re-evaluating
the present location of its network of offices, so as to endeavour to align
this with the new municipal areas. This is obviously a long-term exercise,
but is part of the ongoing efforts to improve the department's service
delivery to the public of South Africa. However, the fundamental issue of
the unequal distribution of civic affairs services across the territory
cannot be solved within the present paradigm. It requires the type of
restructuring I mentioned earlier.

Apartheid has left us with a concentration of our offices in affluent areas
and with vastly inadequate resources where the majority of our people live
and where, because of historical backlogs, the need for our services is
most intense. Where we need the greatest resources we have the least. This
problem cannot be solved by pouring resources into rural or neglected
areas, for we do not have the massive resources required and, even if we
had them, the gearing-up process would be too long and would defeat the
goal of equalising our service distribution. Similarly, the vented
simplistic idea of moving resources around is no solution, because the cost
of transferring an office often exceeds that of opening a new one, and
because it would cause a dramatic negative difference on the service
delivery quality where offices are closed without affecting the overall
need for more offices across the country.

As mentioned in the President's State-of-the-nation Address, we need a more
structured and intergrated solution. We will need to devolve the delivery
of civic affairs functions to municipalities in order to provide a long-
term, stable and sustainable solution to the problem. This is an essential
part of the overall strategy of reforming and restructuring our department
which I mentioned earlier. On the basis of the presentation I gave to the
Cabinet Lekgotla, I instructed the department to begin studying and
planning the transfer of the delivery functions of civic affairs to
municipalities and traditional authorities.

Municipalities are equally distributed across the territory of South
Africa. There is no reason why in our country one should not be able to
receive birth and death certificates, identity documents and other civic
affairs services from municipalities, as one can in most countries of the
world. It is also cheaper and more effective to build capacity and employ
resources in municipalities rather than building our own Home Affairs
capacity wherever it is required. In fact, the capacity which can be built
in municipalities by transferring to them the resources we would otherwise
utilise to open new Home Affairs offices can also be employed by
municipalities for other services, for instance either for other Government
- delegated functions, such as the delivery of welfare services, or other
municipal services which can be delivered by the same office and with the
same staff, in the same place.

Once the delivery aspect of civic affairs is devolved to municipalities,
the central Government will maintain all powers and functions relating to
the Population Register and the National Identification System, including
fingerprinting, and any policy and legislation relating thereto. In this
context, our department will help build capacity in municipalities,
maintain the integrity of the system and access protocols, ensure the
uniformity of equipment used and, generally speaking, monitor how
municipalities perform their functions, and assist them as and when
required. Simply put, as far as civic affairs are concerned, the functions
of Home Affairs can be concentrated in Pretoria and in regional offices,
without having to employ own offices to deliver to the public.

This type of restructuring is the flip side of the same coin which will
enable our department to deal with the problems and inadequacy it
experiences in respect of its function of migration control. Indeed, the
reform of migration control and the delegation of powers and functions to
municipalities are two complementary sides of the same long-term reform and
restructuring of our department. In fact, the present delivery structures,
offices and personnel of the department will be able to be directed more
suitably towards the exercise of migration control. Indeed, migration
control is less sensitive to the requirement of equal distribution of
offices across the territory, and our present allocation of resources and
offices fairly reflects the distributional needs of migration control
activities across the territory. We will start from the restructuring of
migration control, as we are in the process of overhauling the legislation
and we need a new administrative machinery to operate the new law.

The intention expressed during the past five years of policy formulation
was that of expediting this restructuring by encapsulating migration
control in a distinct statutory body, totally under the policy and legal
control of Government, the envisaged immigration service. However, Cabinet
resolved that migration control shall remain within the department.
Therefore, we hope that we will receive the necessary support and co-
operation from all stakeholders in bringing about this difficult and
sensitive restructuring, even without the flexibility that a statutory body
would have given us. The restructuring of migration control will, by
consequence, cause the restructuring of civic affairs.

While pursuing this long-term vision, and in preparation thereof, my
department has also, with the blessing of our colleagues in the Department
of Provincial and Local Government, embarked on a process of negotiating
with local and rural authorities for co-operation in the rendering of civic
services. These negotiations have met with positive responses from several
quarters. My department is also co-operating closely with the GCIS
initiative to establish Multipurpose Community Centres to integrate service
delivery at community level, especially in rural areas. These Multipurpose
Community Centres have allowed for close collaboration between national,
provincial and local government, as these centres are homes for Government
services in different spheres. The department will participate in all the
Multipurpose Community Centres and will ensure that appropriate staff is
made available for these purposes. I had the privilege of performing the
official opening, on the invitation of the GCIS, of a Multipurpose
Community Centre at Mpuluzi in the Mpumalanga province just a few months
ago.

Improving service delivery also pertains to the services that Home Affairs
renders in respect of foreigners. The department has grown used to
administering migration control in terms of the Aliens Control Act and at
times fails to accept that, from the viewpoint of our clients, the function
of migration control has become inadequate and ineffective in sustaining
present pressures and satisfying future challenges. The inefficiency and
inadequacy of migration control is one of the contributing factors
preventing our country from acquiring the skills and human resources it
needs to grow and prosper. For instance, members will notice from our
annual report that the number of work permits applied for and issued last
year has dramatically dropped from that of preceding years. A contributing
cause of this phenomenon is likely to be found in the many obstacles our
current legislation and practices have placed on such permit applications,
including the incongruous prohibition to adjust status within the country,
say from that of a visitor to that of a work permit holder, which forces
foreigners to leave South Africa first if they wish to be employed here.

After five years of intense policy formulation, a new vision for migration
control in the 21st century has been developed, which has been embodied in
the Immigration Bill which will now be tabled in Parliament. After nine
months of deliberation, last week Cabinet approved the tabling of this Bill
in Parliament. The original draft Immigration Bill was produced and
circulated for comments amongst the stakeholders and role-players beginning
from October 1999. Resulting from this process of consultation, a draft
Bill was published on 15 February 2000. The publication of this draft Bill
was itself a culmination of a consistent process of policy formulation,
during which a Green Paper was drafted on the basis of public
participation, and approved by Cabinet. Then a White Paper was formulated
on the basis of public hearings and extensive public participation and was
adopted by Cabinet, with extensive amendments, more than two years ago. The
White Paper itself became the object of extensive comments solicited after
its publication and before we began drafting the new Bill.

Since the publication of the Bill fifteen months ago, consultations
continue. The Bill was discussed at Nedlac and at an international
consultative conference which was held last July here in Cape Town. It was
then tabled in Cabinet last July and became the object of intense Cabinet
scrutiny and unprecedented interdepartmental consultations. This process
led His Excellency the Deputy President in a Cabinet committee to say ever
since he was appointed, he had never prsided over a discussion of any item
for three hours.

This process led to almost 80 amendments being made to the Bill between
July and August of last year. The Bill was then left in abeyance requiring
further reflection. Deliberations on it began again in Cabinet this year
and a workshop on the Bill was held on 24 April. During this new round of
Cabinet deliberations, it was decided that the immigration service, as
suggested by the Green and White Papers would not be established. Instead
of encapsulating migration control in a distinct statutory regulatory body,
it was decided that it should remain within the ordinary line function of
the Department of Home Affairs. It was further decided that the Immigration
Board would not exercise executive powers, but only advisory powers.

Given the length and publicity which have surrounded this tortuous process
of policy formulation, many hon members are familiar with the features and
purposes of the new Bill. The latest version of the Bill has been posted on
our website for the past two weeks. At this juncture, it shall suffice to
remind members that the main thrust of the new legislation will be that of
simplifying the processing of temporary and permanent residence permit
application, so as to attract the required skills to our country and to
move administrative capacity towards law enforcement and the prevention,
detection and investigation of illegal aliens and their removal from the
country.

The President, in his state-of-the-nation address, mentioned the urgent
review of immigration laws and procedures as one of the priority actions to
stimulate the economy of the country. The Bill has received wide support in
civil society, in spite of being part of what will always remain a
controversial field, and I trust that this Bill will pass through the
parliamentary process in the current year.

In his state-of-the-ation-address, the President has indicated his wish
that Parliament process this Bill, and the parliamentary schedule reflects
this hope. My department and the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs will
work hand in hand in processing this Bill, and I have assured the committee
that my staff and I will and I be available at all times to provide
whatever assistance the committee may require in this task, which I know
from experience to be a very difficult and complex one.

On 1 April 2001 was the first anniversary of the entry into force of the
Refugees Act 1998, and its regulations and implementation of the new
refugee status determination procedure. The Act increased the structure of
the Refugees Appeal Board from one person to three persons and broadened
the scope of the Board. Furthermore, the Act required that the powers of
the Standing Committee on Refugee Affairs be delegated and decentralised to
the Regional Directorates of the Department of Home Affairs. Five Refugee
Reception Offices were established in Braamfontien, Port Elizabeth, Cape
Town, Pretoria and Durban. Although the Department requested an additional
amount of R11,218 million to implement the Refugee Reception Offices as
required by the Act, it could only make provision for R1,3 million to fill
some of the posts at the Refugee Reception Offices.

Recently, my department has implemented a number of measures that will
enhance the situation of refugees and asylum seekers in South Africa. As
hon members may have read in press reports, some of these measures have
been controversial, including those embodied in a circular adopted without
prior consultation with me or my office, as should happen in respect of
policy matters of this nature. I have instructed the department to deal
with any matter relating to refugee affairs in terms of the strictest
compliance possible with applicable international law rules and standards,
and that such circular be reviewed in terms thereof. This has led to the
circular being withdrawn and the department having to tender costs to
settle a lawsuit challenging its validity.

The exercise to clear the backlog of asylum applications which were active
and pending at the date of the coming into force of the new refugee status
determination procedures, embarked on with the assistance of the United
Nations High Commission for Refugees and the SA Human Rights Commission,
was completed on 31 March 2001.

Turning now to civil services, I wish to say that I am proud to restate
that in the run-up to the municipal elections, my department was able to
cope with the demand for identity documents. No prospective voter was
disenfranchised as a result of my department's inability to provide the
necessary documentation on time. It is unfortunate that we never receive a
single bouquet of flowers for having performed so well, but only bricks. It
is in fact heartening to be able to say that despite the staffing levels
mentioned earlier, the department is currently able to exceed the service
delivery standards of six weeks and issue identity documents within two to
four weeks only from the date of application. In addition to the normal
issuing of identity documents, my department put special measures in place
during the year 2000 in order to assist welfare beneficiaries to obtain
barcoded identity documents in cases where pensions have been suspended. In
this respect a total number of 3 905 applications were in fact finalised.

A major challenge that the department has embarked on is the Home Affairs
National Identification System, Hanis of which most hon members will be
aware of by now. This project consisting of the automation of the
Department's manual finger printing system and the issuing of a new smart
identity card, should be seen as more than a new identity card project. It
is, in fact, the advent of electronic governance in South Africa. This card
will eventually become the key to accessing Government and other social
services.

The Department of Home Affairs has been working very closely with a number
of other departments in the arena of smart cards and e-governance. A
request for information was published in this regard in July 2000, with a
closing date of 31 August 2000. The outcome of this request for information
requesting inputs from the information technology industry and other
stakeholders, was then used to undertake a thorough investigation into the
viability of implementing smart cards as the national identity card. A
recommendation in this regard is to be submitted to Cabinet soon. It is
also envisaged that the card will eventually be used by a number of private
organisations such as banks, insurance companies, medical aid schemes and
many more to combat fraud.

The benefits of reduced fraud in these practices should result in
substantially higher profits and therefore increase revenue to the state
through taxes. Cabinet has recently approved the establishment of a
commission to monitor each stage of development and the implementation of
the Hanis project and the related procurement, to assess available options
so as to avoid any possibility of impropriety and to look into any possible
allegation from the public which may emerge at any time. This Commission is
headed by Prof Fink Haysom and he has recommended two additional
commissioners with expertise in contracts, accounting and information
technology whom I have appointed.

The possible implementation of e-governance and e-commerce will be closely
coupled to the envisaged identity card. This follows the international
trend of many countries moving towards e-governance and accepting digital
signatures for all forms of transactions. The technical interdepartmental
team is also considering how the proposed identity card can be used to
assist other departments in improving services to the citizens of the
country, by using the identity card as a key enabling factor to various
systems.

The new identity card will form part of the Hanis currently being implemted
by Maplus Consortium. The Hanis will, through fingerprint technology,
ensure that a person only qualifies for a single identity number.

Once the system has ensured that a person is not already registered with
different personal particulars, it will initiate the personalisation of an
identity card. The identity card will contain visual particulars together
with encoded data of the person. This encoded data will be used by various
systems to assist in the delivery of services once the person's identity
has been successfully verified.

The envisaged uses of the smart ID card will offer state-of-the-art
technology and utility to the citizenry, and also enable South Africa to
leapfrog, as it were, most of the world's technology competitors. The smart
ID card will be the new face of Government services, reinforcing the Batho
Pele principle to which we subscribe. It will enhance Government services
by making them more efficient and bringing them closer to the citizens, who
are our clients.

In the coming year both our department and Elect the Independents Electoral
Commission will commence important projects in the electoral field,
reviewing South African electoral legislation and practices. The department
will carry out its responsibility of piloting the substitution of the
Electoral Act of 1998 with a new one, which will also consolidate it with
the Local Government Municipal Electoral Act of 2000 into one electoral Act
and bring it inline.

This process will require important and delicate policy decisions, in
respect of which I have already written to members of the Portfolio
Committees on Home Affairs, Justice and Constitutional Development, to
ensure their attentive participation in the process of policy formulation,
leading to a new electoral law.

It was formally announced that Cabinet had approved the establishment of a
task team, comprising one representative appointed by the Minister for
Justice and Constitutional Development, one appointed by the Minister for
Provincial and Local Government, one appointed by the Chairperson of the
IEC, two appointed by myself and the Chief Director of Legal Services of
the Department of Home Affairs.

The task team, supposed to be chaired by Dr F Van Zyl Slabbert, is meant to
be appointed to draft the new electoral law on the basis of
interdepartmental co-ordination and a consultative process with relevant
role-players and stakeholders. The task team is expected to liaise closely
with the two relevant portfolio committees of this House and with political
parties. Unfortunately, in spite of such public announcement, which is the
only reason I mention this at all, the finalisation and appointment of this
task team has not yet taken place, and I have not acted on it, as I am
awaiting the resolution of a certain pending matter which rests with His
Excellency, the Deputy President who, as we know, is carrying a very heavy
load on his shoulders and, therefore, whatever delay we see, it is
something we understand, because he has a very difficult task.

I would like to say that my colleague, the Deputy Minister will deal with
matters which fall under his direct line function, for instance the
Government printing works and the Films Control Act.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Immigrants Selection Board and its
various committees, as well as the Film and Publication Board and the Film
and Publication Review Board which have again rendered excellent services
over the past year. I also wish to thank Mr Mokoena and his portfolio
committee for their inputs, enabling us to run this very complex
department.

The various statutory bodies falling under the budget appropriation of this
department fulfil their responsibilities independently and mostly with
little acknowledgement of the importance and magnitude of the tasks they
fulfil.

I also wish to thank the parliamentary committees of both Houses - I am
sorry, I have said this already - for their co-operation and the work they
have performed with regard to the affairs of my department. I thank hon
members for listening to me and trust that we can enter into a fruitful
debate. I thank hon members for being scared of the fact that I was going
to appeal to the Deputy Speaker if they made any noise during my delivery.

[Applause.]

Mr D A MOKOENA: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, hon members of the House, I rise in support of Budget Vote 4 on
Home Affairs on behalf of the ANC. On 11 May 2000, I stood here and
participated in the Budget Vote debate on Home Affairs. Obviously, I am not
going to repeat that speech. However, I would like to reiterate the main
point that I made then, and which is still relevant today.

I do this to maintain a consistent thrust of our approach to Home Affairs
as the ANC. This approach is not inspired by some naive Utopian political
impulse of constructive engagement that would result in the creation of
some melting pot wherein the identity of political parties would disappear.
Rather, it is aimed at strengthening the threads that weave the tapestry of
our inchoate, nonracial and democratic dispensation.

We in the ANC are of the view that Home Affairs should under no
circumstances be politicised, because the issues it deals with affect the
whole populace. It does not matter to what political party the Minister who
heads Home Affairs belongs. We must all maintain this consistency. Home
Affairs is the bedrock of any country. It is the heartbeat of the nation.
It is the premier ministry in any country, as one of my comrades will
illustrate later on in the debate.

However, this does not mean that MPs should not be critical of some of the
aspects of this Ministry which may well be blatantly wrong. However, in
doing so, we must try by all means to be supportive and constructive.

Let me refer to highlights. It is not all gloom and doom in Home Affairs. I
am pleased to list the following as the highlights of Home Affairs.

One, we have the Independent Electoral Commission which was established by
an Act of Parliament and accounts to parliament through Home Affairs.

Two, we have managed to deal decisively with the problems surrounding the
former director-general.

Three, we have a new, enthusiastic, dynamic and dilligent director-general
in the person of Mr Billie Masethla.

Four, we have managed to sort out the contravercies that were surrounding
the people who were running the Lindela Holding Centre in Krugersdorp.

Five, we have passed the Identification Amendment Bill that recognises the
green bar-coded ID as the sole document for voting.

Six, we have passed the Refugees Act, which came into effect on 1 April
last year, which, inter alia, enables South Africa to be in line with the
United Nations' rules that provide guidance on the handling of refugees.

Seven, we have adopted significant protocols and conventions.

Eight, we have a newly appointed Deputy Minister, the hon Charles Nqakula.
I congratulate him on his appointment. The Deputy Minister displays a
balanced disposition. His inclusion in Home Affairs will further advance
the gains already made.

Nine, I have the privilege of chairing a portfolio committee that has
developed a culture of engaging in robust debates without sinking into the
quagmire of political polemics for their own sake.

Ten, we passed the Municipal Electoral Bill 2000, which ensured the smooth
running of the first nonracial, democratic municipal elections. This has
resulted in the creation of approximately 284, municipal structures
throughout the country.

Eleven, the portfolio committee has excelled itself in producing a
comprehensive handbook on Home Affairs as a guide to MPs for parliamentary
constituency offices.

This unique publication will also be of use to the general public, research
institutions, other Ministries, etc, and will be updated from time to time.
[Applause.] I would like to thank members for the applause. The compilation
of this handbook shows how it is possible for politicians to work hand in
hand with officials for the common good. We thank the Department of Home
Affairs for helping us with the material of compilation.

Last but not least, the twelfth point is that we have Minister Mangosuthu
Buthelezi, the leader of the IFP, who was in his earlier days a capable
leader of the ANCYL. [Applause.] Dr Buthelezi has been brave and
conscientious to take the bull by the horns in starting the process that
will lead to the adoption of a credible immigration Bill soon. No, that hon
member is wrong this time.

Regarding the budget, the portfolio committee shares the serious concern of
the Ministry and the department that Home Affairs has been underfunded for
a long time. In addressing the problem of an acute underfunding, the
portfolio committee wrote a letter of motivation to the then Department of
State Expenditure to ask for R59 million, which the department required for
the 2000 local government elections. This was, regrettably, declined and
much to the chagrin and embarrassment of the portfolio committee.

In the past week after the director gerneral had briefed the portfolio
committee, we wrote another to the Minister of Finance letter and asked for
a meeting with him to discuss the underfunding of Home Affairs. The
Minister was courteous to respond timeously. Although, in terms of the
budgetary procedure, there can be no immediate remedy, he has conceded to
our concern. He said, and I quote his letter: ``We do, indeed, need to
improve the physical facilities in Home Affairs'', and he advised that the
Department should highlight this need in the June submission to the
Treasury for the 2002 Budget.

Of course, we welcome the invitation by the Minister of Finance that the
committee should submit comments and suggestions on the medium-term
allocations for 2000, 2003 and 2004 for consideration in the 2002 Budget
process.

Regarding transformation, we have noted that a great deal more needs to be
done in this area in Home Affairs. The portfolio committee is pleased to
note in the Minister's speech on 8 May 2001 that he said ``I my instruction
I also instructed the Department to abandon ideas of redesigning the
Department before we build on the plans which are already in place and fix
most of its problems and shortcomings''. We are eagerly awaiting that
report, especially in respect of salient points of actual transformation,
not only in the physical sense, but in its soul, as it is the dynamo for
social change.

With regard to the border control, in keeping with the oversight role that
we are constitutionally entrusted with, the portfolio committee visited
Beit Bridge, near Messina and Skilpadshek, near Mafikeng on 2 and 3 April
2001 respectively. A detailed report will be tabled in the National
Assembly next week, and copies will be sent to the Minister, the Deputy
Minister and the Director General.

By all accounts, we were well-received by the respective regional
directors. However, we were horrified by the appalling state of the
infrastructure of those border posts and reports of corruption.

At Beit Bridge, we found that a great deal of fraud occurred. I will
illustrate this by citing the following instances. Firstly, South Africa
has an incentive scheme for people to export goods made in South Africa.
This incentive scheme is being exploited by people in the following
manners. Firstly, a truckload -members should imagine a truckload - of
South African goods is taken through the border post to create the
impression that the goods are destined to be sold outside our border. The
goods are then brought back to South Africa at a later stage through
another border post or other fraudulent means. Such goods are then sold
back in South Africa. Apart from the profit that is made by selling them, a
VAT refund is claimed for exporting South African goods.

Secondly, a bill of entry of goods is processed without any goods ever
leaving the country. This scheme works on the basis that one dishonest
person in customs and excise, and another one in immigration are needed to
clear a bill of goods that never really existed. After the fraud has taken
place, it is nearly impossible to prove that such goods never went through
the border post.

Another form of fraud occurs when people without proper documentation bribe
either immigration officials, SAPS members or SANDF members to enter the
country illegally.

The director-general has, however, reported to the portfolio committee that
strict measures have been installed to decisively deal with corruption by
the introduction of an anticorruption unit within Home Affairs. Moreover,
what is pleasing is the fact that the Cabinet security cluster, of which
Home Affairs is part, is far advanced in setting up a computerised network
to identify anybody guilty of the violation of the law.

Again, on the issue of border control, the portfolio committee intends
undertaking an extensive tour of SADC countries during the winter recess.
One of my colleagues will expound on the strategic purpose of this visit.

As alluded to earlier in my speech, I would like to urge the Department to
prepare a special motivation to Treasury for finance to be utilised for the
physical improvement of Home Affairs offices, as these are a public face of
our country to tourists and international entrepreneurs who come here
looking for all sorts of business opportunities, particularly investment
opportunities.

Regarding the vpopulation register, the director general stunned the
portfolio committee when he addressed us on 15 May 2001 where, inter alia,
he mentioned the fact that the population register of our country is
contained in some 60 million files which are in hard copy format and not
yet computerised, and that he finds it difficult even to access some of
them, and that these 60 million files are lying somewhere on the basement
of some building.

Now, the Batho Pele principle does not only refer to the fact that people
must come first in sequential and mechanistic manner, but that those are
valuable assets of our people and the information of the whole country -
the heart of the country - We urge that, in addition, the money requested
for the improvement of the physical facilities of Home Affairs must be set
aside for the electronic posting of the population register. [Time]
[Applause.]

Mr G A J GROBLER: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon Minister and hon
members, once a year during Budget Votes debates political parties always
have the opportunity to discuss various Budget Votes. That is a time when
one debates the issues around the expenditure in the future, but also have
to look at what happened with the funds that were allocated in the previous
years.

I am going to concentrate on the Independent Electoral Commission's budget
listed under Vote N0 4 table 49: Auxiliary and associated services. In the
limited time at my disposal, I would like to draw the House's attention to
the activities, particularly around the IEC.

Members will recall that in the previous Budget Vote, much was said about
the amounts and funds set aside for the Municipal Elections in December
2000. The Minister also spent a lot of time here explaining the fact that
his Department was underfunded. But, what really is of concern to the DA
today is not so much the amount of money that was allocated to the
departments or, in this case, the IEC. But a much greater concern is the
lack of control or shall we rather say no financial control at all which is
symptomatic of so many departments in all governmental levels, ranging from
national, provincial and local government. What is new?

If one looks at the way these funds have been controlled at the IEC, it is,
to say the least, shocking.

Last week we received reports from the Auditor-General for the financial
years 1997-98, not 1999-2000. We need a miracle for that. It is no wonder
that the Minister of Finance is reluctant to give money to this department.
By not giving more moneys he, at least, makes sure that there is less money
to waste.

Let me read a few comments out the Auditor-General's report on the IEC's
financial statements, and I quote:


  The financial statements were not submitted on time. The audit was
  further delayed because of various unsolved matters. The lack of reliable
  fixed asset register and the private use of vehicles could not be
  determined, no PAYE tax was deducted in respect of fringe benefits, etc.

Is this what some Ministers once called struggle bookkeeping? Where is
Minister Omar?

Let us talk about the municipal elections. What does the lack of control
over the assets of the IEC got to do with elections, more so the last
elections? Clause 7 of the Electoral Act - a clause that the DP opposed
when the original Bill was

discussed - makes provision for a voter whose name does not appear on the
voters' roll but who can prove that he or she has registered as a voter -
provided the barcode from the zip-zip machine is in his or her document -
is eligible to vote if he or she completes the MEC 7 form.

I asked the question to the Minister whether the zip-zip machines - this is
the point I am getting to -

have yet to be returned, and how many. I received the following answer, and
I quote:


  It is at this stage not possible to determine if any zip-zip machines
  that were used for registrations or re-registration have not been
  returned.

That means any number of zip-zip machines may have been and may still be
floating around in the hands of wrong people. Why then do we have time
limits to register? If the department cannot control the usage of major
assets like motor vehicles, how can we expect them to control the usage of
smaller assets like zip-zip machines?

I would like to tell this House about what happened in the real world on 5
December 2000, in ward 8 of the Midvaal Council. It is controlled by the
DA. Fourty-three percent of the total voters in that ward voted on MEC 7
forms. Two hundred and ninety seven of the votes from the informal
settlement Sicelo voted by completing the MEC 7b form. Far more than 100%
of the voters voted in Ward 8, all with barcoded printouts in their IDs.
The voting station ran out of ballot papers and they voted on photocopies
of ballot papers. The dates, ie the years reflected on the zip-zip
printouts were 2056, 2096 and so forth, not 2000.

When we brought this to the attention of the presiding officer, she said
that she had seen it, but ``they'' - I wondered who that was - had told her
that the person who handled the machine was not familiar with the machine
and could not operate it properly. [Interjections.] Was the person trained,
or was it a floating, uncontrolled assets, hon Jannie?

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: Seeing that the hon
member is giving us so much detail, will the hon member tell us who won the
election in that particular ward?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order.
Please carry on, hon member.

Mr G A J GROBLER: He is missing a good speech; I will tell him after the
speech. The hon member must listen. He is missing a good speech.
[Interjections.]

What did we do? We filed a complaint with the relevant officials within the
time limit prescribed by law. We also contacted an attorney, who looked at
all the legal aspects. I personally delivered all the documents to the
office of Mr Norman du Plessis in Walker Street, Sunnyside, Pretoria.

But the electoral office carried on and declared the ANC candidate the
elected councillor for Ward 8. [Interjections.] After a few day we
telephonically informed our attorney that the complaint had not been
successful, because of technical reasons. The DA cannot and will not
support this Vote. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy President
and hon members, my first task when I joined the Department of Home Affairs
in January was to attend a strategy workshop of all the senior managers of
the department. The robust but serious interaction between officials and
the intelligent programme they structured, on the basis of Government's
medium-term framework, was very impressive.

I want to thank the director-general, Mr Billy Masetla and his team of
officials, some of whom are present here today, and the others in our
various offices in the country. Well done.

The strategy workshop was designed to further enrich the strategic
management approach of the department, so as to provide for an organisation-
wide, integrated focus, decision-making, consistency and comprehensive
planning. The drive towards service excellence, despite financial and other
operational difficultis as mentioned by the Minister, is a centrepiece of
the department's strategic plan. Consequently, this matter continues to
receive priority attention, to ensure always that service standards meet
the requisite levels.

In keeping with our strategic objectives and in line with Government policy
and legislation, a concerted effort has been initiated to develop a full
spectrum of consolidated training and career pathing as a means to build
human resource capacity in the Department of Home Affairs. Unfortunately,
the funds requested for this purpose have not been allocated in the current
budget.

However, we are proceeding with the establishment of a training college
that, among other things, will be responsible for the constant training and
retraining of officials in all aspects of the department's functions. It is
envisaged that this institution will be operational by the end of the
current year. We are exploring the possibility of raising some donor
funding for the college.

Our transformation programmes informs the training and retraining as well
as redeployment for best performance demands relevant to home affairs
personnel. There is no gainsay in the fact that home affairs needs to be
transformed in such a manner that its functions are properly streamlined to
enhance service delivery. The hon the Minister has dealt with some of the
thinking in this regard.

We would like to assure the House that the transformation of the department
will not lead to job losses. Our personnel retraining, among other things,
is structured in such a way that it will equip those due for redeployment,
where necessary, with the skills they will need in their new jobs.

The hon the Minister of Home Affairs has delegated me, among other
responsibilities, the Government printing works and the Films and
Publications Board, which are structures I would like to discuss at this
stage with the hon members.

Early this year Cabinet decided to reconstruct the Government printing
works and to transform it into a state-owned enterprise. The decision was
the culmination of an exhaustive discussion on whether or not printing was
a core Government function. This debate was started abroad and has already
been concluded in most countries.

We are carefully examining the lessons of those experiences and the
subsequent decisions arrived, at to ensure that what we finally do better
serve the interests of our country and our people. It should be appreciated
that the Government printing works is restricted to providing printing and
allied services to Government departments and their statutory bodies. This,
by its nature, limits the scope of its printing operation.

Furthermore, the printing works operate on a trade account. It is not
funded from the Home Affairs budget, but relies on income generated from
its clients within Government.

It is with a sense of great regret that I have to inform the Deputy
President and the deputy chairperson that our clients, at best, are very
slow in paying for the services that we render to them. At worst, they have
failed altogether to pay.

There are, consequently, considerable amounts of money that we have not
been able to recoup from our operations. The strain that this has put on us
is heavy. We have to pay for the material that we get from suppliers to be
able to fulfil our printing obligations.

We want to settle our debts before the Government Printing Works is
restructured so that the new state-owned enterprise will not have to carry
into its operations old liabilities. We want to appeal, therefore, to all
those who still owe us money to settle their accounts speedily.

The new state-owned printing enterprise will have a broader mandate that
will enable it to handle commercial printing. All things being equal, the
next three months will see the finalisation of the plans to expedite the
establishment of the enterprise.

The next phase in this process is the appointment of consultants to plan
and implement the commercialisation of the Government Printing Works. This
entails drawing up procedures and methods by which the envisaged enterprise
will operate meaningfully in the competitive profit oriented environment in
which it will find itself.

Though the process may appear cumbersome, cognisance must be taken of the
fact that transforming the Government Printing Works is an involved
process. There is no room for any margin of error in the planning stage as,
once it takes off, there will be no second chance to fall back on.

We have to re-emphasise that no workers are going to lose jobs when the
restructuring happens. Staff members who cannot be absorbed into posts that
become available where restructuring has occurred will be retrained and
redeployed elsewhere in the department. A case in point is when we closed
down the printing works in Umtata, in the Eastern Cape. Some of the
personnel from that facility were redeployed to various Home Affairs
offices while the rest took up posts with the national Government Printing
Works.

Also due for closure are the printing works in Thohoyandou, in Giyani, in
the Northern Province. In provinces where we have a closed down printing
works, we will open stationery depots, as we have already done in Bisho in
the Eastern Cape. The Northern Province depots will be established in
Pietersburg and Lebowakgomo.

It is clear to us that there are many, among the hon members of this House,
who want to help the department to complete successfully its programme of
transformation and render to the people a service that will be truly
informed by our ``people first'' principle, Batho Pele.

This is the only conclusion we can arrive at, given the report of the
Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, after visits by members of the
committee to the points of entry into our country and the offices of the
department. The chairperson, hon Aubrey Mokoena, reiterated the issue here
today. The portfolio committee came into the matter constructively.

It was not the intention of the committee members to go out there and find
faults but to do a proper assessment of the situation in order to help us
to identify weaknesses and, together, find ways and means to attack the
problem. We want to thank the hon Mokoena and his committee. [Applause.]

While it will always be his task to keep a watching brief over us, his
decision to work with us to improve our service will go a long way on our
march to a better future for our country and our people. Of course, there
will always be some of us who will come before this House, as the hon
Grobler has done, to throw before us a litany of complaints.
[Interjections.]

The Films and Publications Board is a statutory body established by the
Films and Publications Act of 1996. It is one of the functions that the
Minister has delegated to me. It replaced the old Directorate of
Publications. I want to reiterate what the hon Minister and my predecessor,
the hon Lindiwe Sisulu, have been saying since 1996 that, the Films and
Publications Board, unlike the Directorate of Publications, is not a
censorship body.

Its tasks are to classify film material, including the interactive media
distributed which are in South Africa; classify publications in response to
complaints from the public; provide the public with consumer information so
that they can choose what to view or read; balance competing constitutional
rights and freedoms in so far as films and publications are concerned;
protect children from harmful and exploitative material; and monitor and
regulate, via its executive committee, the conduct of the business of adult
premises or the so-called sex shops.

The board has processed a total of 3 149 applications since the past year.
These included a 2 201 applications for the classification of films for
general release, 392 films under the category of adult films and 68
interactive computer games. In addition, the board has processed 29
applications for exemption, and 459 registrations for distributors or
exhibitors. The board has also examined and provided opinions on a number
of videos and computer disks submitted by police who investigate child
pornography offences.

The board shares responsibility for the business of adult premises, the so-
called adult or sex shops, with local licensing authorities. Adult premises
are licensed by local authorities in terms of the Business Act 1991 and are
registered with the board in terms of the Films and Publications Act 1996.
In order to avoid confusion and conflicts between the two authorities, with
regard to the conditions under which such businesses should be allowed to
operate, the board has held several meetings with local authorities and has
gazetted regulations which define the general terms and conditions which
should apply to all such businesses while allowing for variations at the
discretion of local authorities.

From what I have said, in terms of the functions of the board, I want to
pick up the question of the protection of children from harmful and
exploitative material. All adult South Africans, including the MPs, have a
responsibility to protect this country's children from abuse through sexual
exploitation.

It is, of course, not my intention to deal with the whole spectrum of the
sexual abuse of children. For purposes of my input, I want to deal with
child pornography. This is not a new phenomenon and, until recently, was
dealt with fairly effectively by our law enforcement authorities. What is
new is the ease of production and distribution and the anonymous cover the
Internet provides these days.

There may be those, especially within the Internet industry, who may argue
that any regulation of the Internet would be a violation of the
constitutional guararantees on freedom of expression.

The truth is that all over the world there are restrictions on the
production and possession of child pornography. For instance, the supreme
court of the United States has ruled that child pornography is not a core
value protected by the first amendment. The Canadian supreme court took a
similar stance when it ruled that it is not unconstitutional to restrict
the production and dissemination of child pornographic material.

In the United Kingdom, possession of child pornography is an offence. The
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child requires signatory
states to take all measures necessary to protect children from sexual abuse
and exploitation. The treaty on cyber crime of the Council of Europe also
criminalises the possession of child pornography. There are many more
examples I could quote, but I think these suffice.

I do not know hon members' level of understanding of what child pornography
is about. As the political head responsible for the enforcement of the
Films and Publications Act, I have had to examine some samples to
familiarise myself with the nature of the problem. What I saw was so
revolting and disturbing that I am convinced the time has come for us to
deploy adequate resources, both human and material, to stamp out this
scourge. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Child pornography is not an issue of morality, but rather of child torture
and abuse. I would like to acquaint hon members with an article which
appeared in the 19 March issue of Newsweek on Italian priest, Father
Fortunato di Noto. This is what the article says:


  Four years and thousands of web searches later, Father Di Noto and three
  colleagues have uncovered evidence of mind-numbing atrocities, including
  photos of child rape involving children as young as toddlers and infants.

The fact is, thousands of children around the world have been brutally
abused to create these images, and demand for the pictures is burgeoning,
fuelled by the Internet. That, in turn, encourages more abuse.

The effects on children of child pornography, according to the report in
1986 of the United State's attorney-general's commission, include
depression, suicidal thoughts, feelings of shame, guilt, alienation from
family and friends, massive acute anxiety and often physical harm.

In May last year we arranged a workshop to which we invited law enforcement
officers involved in the investigation and prosecution of child pornography
offenders. The main aim was to discuss measures to beef up the Films and
Publications Act. Judges, magistrates, prosecutors and police officers were
among the invited participants. Also in attendance were representatives of
some of the NGOs involved in child protection programmes, as well as some
experts from both the UK and the US.

The workshop identified the Internet as the medium of choice for
poedophilia. It was resolved that amendments be effected to the Films and
Publications Act to promote the efficient investigation and prosecution of
child pornography offenders. A set of the proposed changes is currently
under consideration by the hon the Minister of Home Affairs.

Classification by the Films and Publications Board is in the public
interest, and it is essential therefore that not only our classification
decisions are made public, but also that the public understands the purpose
and significance of such classification. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Mhlonishwa Sihlalo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe woMnyango
wezaseKhaya - Ndabezitha! malungu ahloniphekileyo, kusukela onyakeni
wenqubo yentando yeningi, isabelo salo Mnyango saya ngokuncipha saze saba
ngangenso yenyoni. Phezu kobuningi kwalabo abasebenzisa lo Mnyango
nokukhuphuka kwezindleko zokubuyisela emazweni okudabuka labo bantu abasuke
bengene ngokungemthetho kuleli zwe, isabiwomali asiguqukanga ekubeni yinso
yenyoni. Nonyaka-ke asingangayo ngisho nenso yenyoni kodwa singaphansi
kwenso yenyoni ngemali eyizigidi ezingu-R649.

Nakube kunjalo, iqembu leNkatha yeNkululeko liyaseseka lesi sabiwomali,
hhayi ngobuhle baso kodwa ukuze lo Mnyango uqhubeke nokubhalisa izingane
ezizalwayo, ukukhoselisa izimbacu ezihlukunyezwa yimibuso yamazwe akubo,
ukwesula labo abasuke sebefile, futhi uqhubeke nokwenza okunye nokunye
njengokubonelela kweso elibukhali likaNgqongqoshe nomqondisi-jikelele walo
Mnyango.

Siyabakhuthaza abaphathiswe lo Mnyango ezingeni lezifundazwe futhi
siyabakhuthaza abaqaphe emingceleni. Siyabakhuthaza abaqhuba umsebenzi
emahhovisi ayingcosana akhona ezweni, angenayo nemishini yamakhompyutha,
ukuba baqhubeke nokusebenza ngokuzikhandla bebeka phambili izidingo zabantu
bakubo kunenhlalakahle yabo.

Izwe lakithi linawo wonke umnotho ongenelisa izidingo zethu thina bantu
balo. Licebile ngezimbiwa, licebile ngohlaza phezu komhlabathi, licebile
ngemfuyo yasemanzini futhi licebile nangamathalente olwazi ebantwini balo.
ImiNyango kaHulumeni kufanele icebe, yabelwe kahle izimali, ikhuluphale
futhi itshakadule ngenjabulo nxa yenza imisebenzi yayo. Lo Mnyango,
ongowaseKhaya, awunjalo. Kanti udla kuliphi idlelo wona wodwa eliwugwadule
kangaka? Wazaca kangaka lo Mnyango? Wasindwa yikhanda, wamhlathi uxhaphela
amakati, ngabe uncishweni wona wodwa uMnyango wezaseKhaya? Bathi abanye
benyathela ngogxisha, wona wazingalo zephela, kwenzenjani kuwo le engaka?

UMnyango wezaseKhaya wanqulu zingaphandle, wambambo ziyabalwa, ngabe
sigcwagcwa sini leso onaso? Wabe usacele sandisomali wathola impendulo ethi
siyaxolisa. Kwenzenjani eMnyangweni wezaseKhaya? Waba ngqongqoze
uNgqongqoshe wawo kwafana nokuphanda amanzi edwaleni? Wabathe ukhala
ezimathonsi umqondisi-jikelele kwafana nokuluthosha utalagu? Wabathe
uyagadla uNtate Mokoena wekomidi lobungqongqoshe kwafana nokuthela amanzi
emhlane wedada? Kwenzenjani eMnyangweni wezaseKhaya?

Wo, hhiya! Mawuthembele enkosini, yona ibathanda bonke abayo. Kodwa-ke
ngeke kwedlule kulesi sizukulwane lingakazihlonzi leli tulo.

UMnyango wezaseKhaya unesigatshana esilukhuni kabi sokubuyisela emazweni
okudabuka labo abathutheleka ngokungemthetho ezweni lakithi. Abaziwa ukuthi
bangaki ngikhuluma nje. Awaziwa amazwe abaqhamuka kuwo ukuthi aqhele
kangakanani. Awaziwa namakamu amaphoyisa lapho begcine khona njengoba
ngikhuluma nje? Malini-ke konje engabelwa ukubhekana naso leso sigatshana
soMthetho? Luhlelo lolu oluyogcina seluqhubeka ngokwethemba iso
lokubonelela elibukhali likaNgqongqoshe, umqondisi-jikelele wakhe nezikhulu
zonke zalo Mnyango.

Sawubongela lo Mnyango ngokulungiselela ukhetho luka-1999 ngokucophelela
okungakaya. Siyawubongela nakulo nyaka ngokulungiselela ukhetho luka-2000
loHulumeni baseKhaya ngobuciko obunjeyaya. Siyawukhuthaza nanamuhla ukuba
uqale manje ukulungiselela ukhetho luka-2004 ngokunika bonke abantu
baseNingizimu Afrika amapasi e-Hanis obuzwe.

Uma lolo hlelo lwe-Hanis seluphumelele, siyoshayela phezulu thina bantu
baseMzansi Afrika, siziqhenye futhi siziqhayise ngokuba ngelinye izwe
emazweni omhlaba ayingcosana anomshini walolu hlobo. Umhlaba, awuyikusibona
ngaleso sikhathi ukuthi sabe siphila ngenso yenyoni. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Prince N E ZULU: Madam Speaker, his excellency, the hon the Minister of
Home Affairs, hon members, since the inception of democracy in this
country, the budget for this department has been growing smaller.
Regardless of the increasing number of people who use the services of this
department and the increase in expenses concerning the deporting of illegal
immigrants, the budget has always remained small. This year it is worse off
than ever. It is R649 million worse than it was.

The IFP nevertheless supports this budget. It does not support it because
it is a good budget, but for the fact that the budget will enable the
Department of Home Affairs to continue registering new-born babies, to
accommodate the foreign war victims, to register those who have passed away
and also to continue to do important things as seen by the Minister and his
director-general.

We encourage provincial ministers, people who work on our borders and
employees who work in some offices of this department all over the country
who do not even have computers in their offices, to continue with their
hard work of putting the people's needs before their own welfare.

Our country has all the wealth to satisfy all our needs. It is rich in
mineral resources, crops, water animals, knowledge and the talents of its
people. Government departments should be given enough money. They should
not scrape by when they are performing their duties. Instead they should be
rich and perform their duties with satisfaction. But this is not the case
with the Department of Home Affairs. What pasture does it graze, that is so
dry? Why is this department so thin? It is so thin that only its head is
visible. Its flesh has dried up and only bones are visible now. Why is only
the Department of Home Affairs not funded. While other departments have big
legs, the Department of Home Affairs have arms as small as that of a
cockroach. What is going on here?

The Department of Home Affairs has protruding hips and it is so thin that
even its ribs can be counted. Why it is so unlikable? Every time it asks
for money, the reply is "sorry".  What is going on with this department?
Why is the knocking for help by the Minister of this department like trying
to dig for water in rock? Why is the crying for help of the director-
general of this department like chasing a mirage? Why are the attempts of
the hon Ntate Mokoena of the portfolio committee like running water off a
duck's back? What is going on with this department? Ho! Nonetheless it
should trust God because He helps everyone. However, this generation will
not pass on before we see the results of this situation.

One of the requirements of the Department of Home Affairs is that it has
the duty to deport illegal immigrants. We do not know how many they are at
the moment. We do not know how far away the countries are that they come
from. No one knows where the police camps are in which they are kept at the
moment. How much should be budgeted so as to implement this clause? This
project will continue only because of the sharp and considerate eye of the
hon the Minister of Home Affairs, his directory-general and other officials
in this department.

We congratulate this department on the good preparation it made for the
1999 elections. We also congratulate it on the adroit preparation it made
for the local government elections held in 2000. We encourage it to start
preparing for the 2004 elections by issuing bar-coded IDs to all people.

When the bar-coded system succeeds, we South Africans will walk tall. We
will be proud of being one of the few countries that have this type of
electronic system. The world will not realise that the department was
financially cramped when it implemented this system. [Applause.]]

Mr M R SIKAKANE: Mr Chairperson, Deputy President and Minister, I think
everybody has heard what is required from this Budget Vote, so I am going
to deal with some specifics as to why the situation is what it is.

I am happy Mr Grobler is here, seated there with Mr McIntosh, who is of the
DP. He once represented us in Claremont. He was a representative of the
Claremont township, staying in Pinetown. Those were the situations in the
past. [Laughter.] This is a good job that the hon member did.

I am going to talk for the ANC, as an agent of change. We all need birth
certificates. We all need IDs, we all need to register our births, and we
all need death certificates to remove our names from the population
register. Perhaps the DP does not need that because, after all, they do
come back as ghosts. Because of the injustices of the past, when they get
to heaven they find that they cannot get in. They can come back here and
still ask for their names to be removed, as ghosts, because of their past.

This is one area in which the DP and its allies could not discriminate
effectively, as the taste of death knew no colour. Do members still
remember the colour bar?

Do they still remember separate counters, separate doors and separate
queues at the Home Affairs? Do they still remember preferential treatment
in all walks of life, in our country?

We have changed that, but it has created big problems of overcrowding. So
we emphasise that all what has been said by Mr Grobler was caused by the DP
and the New NP. We need only one thing in this department, money.

I am happy that the Deputy President is here. I think a certain approach is
going to be developed as to the funding of this department, because this is
the face of the nation. The DP is not stupid. It is selfishly demanding
what is theirs. When they say ``fight back'', they believe that they can
still get apartheid.

They thrived in apartheid. They are what they are and are where they are
because of apartheid.

Home Affairs needs money to level the playing field. Perhaps, none of us
understood what their message ``fight back'' meant. One fights back to
regain what one lost and which one feels is legitimately theirs. From now
on comrades must please understand why the DP has voted against all the
progressive laws that have been made in this country. We have had the
Rahman vs Lewis match in the recent past. Lewis is presently fighting back
to regain his title. They are fighting back to regain what they owned -
apartheid. [Laughter.]

The ANC, led by the illustrious President Mbeki who is the President of the
ANC and thus President of the country, has in no time changed the whole of
Africa in such a way that Africa is now focused. Home Affairs is the symbol
and catalyst of this country because it is the entry and departure point.
We request money for this department from the Deputy President so that when
one comes into this country and when one goes away one should just have
money to build the infrastructure that is needed. That is all that is
needed by this department because of the problems caused by the people on
my left.

There is no president in this continent who has been able to achieve what
is seen as unachievable. It was his wisdom, the only wisdom which could
come from a walking being, which said that pharmaceutical companies should
reduce the price of those medicines and that otherwise we were going to go
offshore. We have the right to buy where they are cheaper. The pundits on
my left said in this House that that can never happen. They further said
that the pharmaceutical companies have their rights as if they were for
``Europeans Only''.

Hon members will remember that, in this country, we used to have seats and
toilets in Durban that were written ``Europeans Only''. Those were
exclusively theirs. Now, we are in this situation where Home Affairs have
to rectify all that mess which was caused by those members like Mr
McIntosh. He said that he represented me. Well, why could I not represent
myself? [Laughter.] He has never stayed in Clermont. He has never been
black. How could he represent me? [Laughter.]

In two years' time, the President has been acknowledged by the prestigious
heads of state as the most intelligent man in the continent. Therefore,
comrades should realise that it is no wonder that the onslaught is showing
its ugly head again. It is the aim of the ANC, through its President, to
awaken Africa. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms M M MAUNYE: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon Minister, hon
members and comrades, the only department in this country which cares for
one from the first day that one came to this world until the last second in
this world is the Department of Home Affairs. No other department does what
we do.

The Government and the country in general are facing budgetary constraints
that affect every department. Critical choices had to be made between
improving living standards of our people and other equally important needs
- such is the mess that the ANC Government inherited from the apartheid
government.

Before I can go any further, I want to congratulate Comrade Charles Nqakula
on his appointment as Deputy Minister of Home Affairs. I wish him well in
his new portfolio. [Applause.]

The issue of transformation is of critical importance. The decentralisation
of the resources of the department is critical to transformation. The
redistribution of resources amongst all citizens of our country is
essential.

Fa mmuso wa kgethololo o fedisa District Six, kantoro e ne le yona ya
tshwanelwa ke go tswalwa. E ne ya tloswa mo e neng e le teng, mme ya isiwa
gaufinyana le boemelafofane.

Kantoro e, e ne e thusa batho ba Nyanga, Langa le Mitchells Plain. Re
tshwanelwa ke go gopola gore batho ba le bantsi ga ba sa tlhole ba dira, ba
tswile mo ditirong tsa bona. Re itse rotlhe gore ke ka ntlha ya ikonomi. Ba
tshwanelwa ke go dirisa dipalangwa go tloga kwa ba nnang teng go ya kwa
kantoro e leng teng. Ga ke tlhaloganye gore fa e ya gaufi le boemelafofane,
e dirisiwa ke bomang gonne ga go bonolo gore batho ba fitlhe koo.

Pelaelo e nngwe ke ya Johannesburg, kwa Gauteng kwa ke nnang teng. Go na le
dikantoro tse pedi tse di mabapi, tse ke dumelang gore le motlotlegi Tona
le ena o a tlhaloganya gore e nngwe e mo mmileng wa Market, e ka nako ele
ya kgethololo e neng e dirisiwa thata ke bathobantsho. E nngwe e mo mmileng
wa Harrison. Di gaufi bobedi ba tsona. Jaanong re itirela boikuelo mo go
motlotlegi Tona gore nngwe ya tsona e tswalwe gonne go na le botlhoki bo le
bontsi thata mo bathong ba gaabo rona. E ka tswalwa mme ya isiwa kwa go
boOrange Farm kwa go senang kantoro teng. E ka tswalwa mme go tsewe le
didirisiwa tsa yona jaaka dikhomputara, mmogo le badiri ba yona gore go se
batliwe batho ba bašwa.

Motswana wa ga lowe o kile a bua a re, mangana sika loo-phage. Komiti e
etetse kwa Mpumalanga, kwa go bidiwang Mbuzini. Fa re fitlha kwa teng re
fitlhetse mathata a le mantsi. Morafe wa baaMahlasela o kgaogantswe
dikarolo di le tharo ka dinako tsele tsa maburu. Karolwana ya ntlha ya baa
Mahlasela e kwa Swaziland, nngwe kwa Mozambique, fa ya boraro e setse le
kgosi ya yona mo Aforika Borwa.

Bana ba morafe o ba tsena sekolo mo Aforika Borwa. Ba tshela molelwane mo
mosong le maitsiboa fa ba boela magaeng. Bagolo ba bona ba amogela
diphenšene tsa bona mo Aforika Borwa, e bile ba tshwere le makwaloitshupo a
mo Aforika Borwa. Le kwa Mafikeng Barolong ba ga Kgosi Montshiwa kwa
Makgobistad le bona ba na le bothata jo bo tshwanang le ba kwa Mpumalanga.
Batho ba bangwe ba setse mo Aforika Borwa le kgosi, fa ba bangwe ba le kwa
Botswana. Re utlwa go twe le kgosi ya bona e kile ya tshwarwa, ya isiwa
kgolegelong ka ntlha ya go tlola legora.

Jaanong re itirela boikuelo mo go motlotlegi Tona gore go nne le
tirisanommogo mo dinageng tse re buileng ka ga tsona, gore mathata a a
ntseng jalo a thibelwe gonne batho ba gaabo rona ga ba ya kwa teng ka go
rata, mme ba isitswe ke mabaka a mmuso ole wa tlhaolele.

Komiti e ntse e rera go tsaya loeto go kopana le mebuso e e leng maloko a
SADC, go lemosana gore re ka dirisana jang le bona go tila mathata a a
tlhagelang re le mo kgaolong ya Borwa jwa Aforika. Batho ba tloga kwa go
boMozambique ba tla ka kwano ba se na makwalo a a tshwanetseng; bangwe ba
tloga mono ba ya ka kwa, mme ba baka fela mathata. Re itemogela mathata a
batho ba ba tlang mo nageng e ya rona ba rekisa diritibatsi.

Motlatsa Tona o buile ka kgang ya bana ba ba dirisiwang ka tsela e e sa
siamang. Re na le bothata jwa bana ba ba nyamelang mme go sa itsewe gore ba
ya kae. [Nako e fedile.]
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)
[When the apartheid government did away with District Six, the office had
to be closed too. It was moved from its original venue to a new location
next to the airport.

This office was valuable to the people of Nyanga, Langa and Mitchells
Plain. We have to bear in mind that many people have lost their jobs
because of socioeconomic problems. They have to make use of public
transport to access the office. I do not understand why the office had to
move next to the airport because the place is not easily accessible for
people.

Another concern is about Johannesburg in the Gauteng province. There are
two offices which, I believe the hon the Minister knows, are close to each
other. The first one is in Market Street, which was used mainly by black
people during the apartheid regime. The other one is in Harrison Street.
These two offices are close to each other. We therefore appeal to the hon
the Minister that one of them be closed as there is poverty among our
people. It can relocate to a place like Orange Farm where there are no
offices. Its equipment, such as computers, together with staff members
could be taken to the new venue to avoid having to recruit new people.
There is an old saying that goes ``birds of a feather flock together''. The
committee visited a place called Mbuzini in Mpumalanga where we encountered
a lot of problems. The Mahlasela tribe had been divided into three groups
during the apartheid regime. The first group is in Swaziland, the second
group is in Mozambique and the third group remained in South Africa with
its chief.

Children of this tribe attend school in South Africa. They have to cross
the border every morning and evening. Their parents get their pension
grants in South Africa and also have South African identity documents. The
Barolong of Chief Montshiwa in Makgobistad in Mafikeng also have the same
problem as that encountered in Mpumalanga. One group is in South Africa
with its chief and the other group is in Botswana. There are rumours that
their chief was once arrested for tresspassing.

We appeal to the hon the Minister to ensure that there is peace and
stability in the abovementioned countries because our people did not choose
to go there but were forced there by the apartheid regime.

The committee wants to meet with members of SADC to devise strategies that
will help eliminate the problems which are currently being experienced by
the countries in Southern Africa. People come into South Africa from places
like Mozambique whilst others leave South Africa and go to other places
without the relevant documents. We experience the problem of illegal
immigrants who come into our country selling drugs.

The Deputy Minister mentioned the problem of child abuse. Children vanish
without a trace. [Time expired.]]

Mr F BEUKMAN: Chairperson, Deputy President, Mr Minister, it is indeed a
privilege to take part in the Budget Vote debate this afternoon. Minister
Buthelezi is a person that has played a vital role in the transformation of
South Africa and the establishment of a new democratic state. Together with
former Presidents F W de Klerk and Nelson Mandela he was instrumental in
laying the foundation for a peaceful transition. The mere fact that we can
debate in this Chamber the performance of the Government in a peaceful
environment is a tribute to these three founding fathers of the new South
Africa.

We should evaluate the budget allocation to the department in terms of the
allocation to the respective programmes, the actual output by the
department and the assessment by the portfolio committee at in loco
inspections. What did the portfolio committee establish from officials
during the in loco inspections that took place on 27 March, 2 and 3 April?
The answer is: A lack of money to pay overtime; a need for an independent
immigration service; problems with the Central Appeals Committee on
Immigration; reluctance to turn appeals down; same staff levels in the
Western Cape as there were in Cape Town since 1995; lack of support from
the Department of Public Works at Beitbridge; lack of computers and
outdated software in the Northern Province; shortage of staff at
Beitbrigde; no toilets and running water at Bray; no proper accommodation
at Mokopane; lack of support from head office regarding repairs at
Ramatlabama and an info system that is not connected to the head office
mainframe in the North West province.

Hierdie voorbeelde is slegs enkele uittreksels van mondelinge insette van
amptenare wat deur lede van die portefeuljekomitee aangehoor is. Een van
die mees kommerwekkende aspekte van die departement se begroting is die
gebrek aan geld vir die opgradering van die departement se
inligtingstegnologiefunksies. Dienslewering aan die publiek word erg
gekortwiek wanneer kantore se rekenaars nie aan die departement se
hoofraamrekenaar gekoppel is nie of selfs oor geen rekenaars beskik nie.

'n Bedrag van R9,78 miljoen is in die huidige begroting aangevra vir die IT-
rekenaarkoppeling van die dienspunte van plattelandse en nie-plattelandse
gebiede aan die departement se hoofrekenaar. Hierdie bedrag is nie
toegestaan nie. Dit reduseer die aanstelling van President Thabo Mbeki se
internasionale IT-adviesraad en die verbintenis tot 'n IT-gedrewe
regeringsdiens tot hersenskimme. Dit beteken dat die Havisprojek nie
behoorlik in werking gestel kan word nie.

Een van die kritiese vereistes vir die integriteit van Suid-Afrikaanse
burgerskap is die handhawing van 'n behoorlike migrasiekontrolestelsel. Die
Minister rapporteer dat die departement nie die vereiste R20 miljoen
ontvang het om die huidige stelsel op te gradeer nie. Dit blyk duidelik dat
die toedelings aan die departement se programme nie behoorlik oorweeg en
deurdink is nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[These examples are only a few exerpts from verbal contributions that were
heard by the members of the portfolio committee. One of the most alarming
aspects of the department's budget is the lack of money for upgrading the
department's information technology functions. Rendering of services to the
public is seriously hampered when the computers in offices are not linked
to the department's mainframe computer or where there are no computers at
all.

An amount of R9,78 million has been requested in the present budget for the
IT linking of service points of rural and nonrural areas to the
department's main computer. This amount was not granted. This reduces the
appointment of President Thabo Mbeki's international IT advisory board and
the commitment to an IT-driven Government service to mere mirages. This
means that the Hanis project cannot be implemented properly.

One of the critical requirements for the integrity of South African
citizenship is maintaining a proper migration control system. The Minister
reported that the department did not receive the required R20 million to
upgrade the present system. It is clear that allocations to the
department's programmes were not properly weighed up and considered.]

As the responsible accounting authorities, state Expenditure, the treasury
and the Director-General of Home Affairs should explain to Parliament why
this state of affairs has been allowed to continue. The ANC members of the
Cabinet's treasury committee are paying lip service to the principle of
adequate and equitable funding. The department, according to the Minister
and the director-general, is underfunded and underresourced. The President
and the Deputy President - and it is good that he is present here this
afternoon - should personally ensure that the Department of Home Affairs is
able to fulfill its statutory duty.

The Constitution provides, in section 214(2)(j), with regard to equitable
share and allocation of revenue, that the following factor should be taken
into consideration. It says, and I quote:


  The need for flexibility in responding to emergencies or other temporary
  needs, and other factors based on similar objective criteria.
We believe that the department qualifies as a case of emergency. The DA
can, therefore, from a financial and constitutional perspective, not
support the Budget Vote with the present levels of funding. We would be
failing in our duty to the officials of the department and the citizens of
South Africa if we supported the financial allocation from Minister Manuel
to Home Affairs.

One of the challenges facing our country, and indeed our continent, is
migration and refugee management. Patterns of migration have become much
more complex due to globalisation. The DA believes that we have to develop
a new framework to deal with migration. We have to look beyond the present
framework of ideas that is presented in the second draft Bill on migration.
People are also leaving South Africa due to restricting measures with
regard to investment and exchange control. As a specialised field,
migration management should be managed by specialists.

The present short-term approach of ``hire a Cuban doctor'', ``hire a Cuban
nurse'' or ``hire a Cuban at all costs'' by certain Government departments
is not the answer nor the solution. That is why we are in desperate need of
a new approach to managing our immigration affairs.
Weekend news reports indicated that President Thabo Mbeki personally
briefed chief state law adviser, Ingrid Daniels about what the Cabinet
wanted in the new immigration Bill. Some press reports indicate that ANC
Ministers are seen as reluctant to assign control over sensitive
legislation to the IFP leader.

We believe that ideological battles should not overshadow the need for
rapid progress on the information Bill. A good example is that of the 27-
year-old IT specialist, Mark Shuttleworth, who sold his internet security
business for 575 million dollars to VeriSign. In an interview in this
Sunday's Business Times, he indicated that rigid foreign exchange control
laws forced him to emigrate. He had no intention of leaving South Africa.
He left within weeks of the SA Reserve Bank turning down his request to
diversify his investment by moving some funds offshore.

We need a complete rethinking on the measures that are restricting talented
South Africans. The DA believes that the following approach could
contribute to breaking the current logjam on migration. Firstly, we should
establish an independent and autonomous immigration service with
administrative responsibilities in conjunction with other Government
agencies on the management of the immigration board. Secondly, the
immigration board would include representatives from the private sector,
organised labour and civil society. Thirdly, the immigration board should
launch an intensive campaign to attract skills to South Africa and
encourage South Africans to stay and build rather than leave. We should
establish an immigration service training school, based on the principle of
training of the diplomatic corps to train the employees of the service. A
special unit should be established in the immigration service to handle
applications by foreign investors.

We believe that the introduction of a point-system skills-and-knowledge-
based immigration policy to encourage entrepreneurs, innovation and
investment in South Africa is important. We also believe that a special
class of permanent or temporary visas for individuals with exceptional
skills or extraordinary qualifications should be introduced.

In conclusion, no Government department could fulfil its task without
competent and qualified staff. Leadership by the responsible accounting
officer is essential for success. The Public Service Commission report on
the department indicates that the department's performance is below
standard as measured against its own Public Service standards.

Ons neem kennis van die regstellende aksie wat sedert hierdie verslag
geneem is om die saak reg te stel. Dit is egter ook van belang dat die
President die verantwoordelike Minister die geleentheid gee om die nodige
veranderinge aan die topbestuur en leierskap van die departement aan te
bring om dienslewering te verbeter.

Die DA wil graag sy dank oordra aan die duisende hardwerkende amptenare van
die departement wat, ondanks groot tekorte, 'n las dra. Die Regering se
versuim om die departement behoorlik te finansier sal 'n struikelblok bly
om burgerlike dienste behoorlik aan alle mense te bied en ekonomiese groei
te verbeter. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We take note of the affirmative action that has taken place since this
report in order to rectify the matter. It is, however, also important that
the President should afford the responsible Minister the opportunity to
make the necessary changes to the top management and leadership of the
department to improve the rendering of services.

The DA would like to convey its appreciation to the thousands of
hardworking officials of the department who, irrespective of vast
shortcomings, carry a burden. The Government's failure to finance the
department properly will remain an obstacle to the proper rendering of
civil services to all people and to improving economic growth. [Applause.]]

Mr W M SKHOSANA: Chairperson, Minister of Home Affairs, Deputy Minister and
hon members, as we are moving into the 21st century, we need to understand
where we are coming from.

The Department of Home Affairs was used as a key by the apartheid
government from 1910 up to the 1990s. Apartheid laws were crafted and
implemented in this department, ie laws pertaining to the population
register, birth register, marriage certificates and influx control. From
1910 to 1919 Louis Botha was the Head of state and the Minister of Native
Affairs. From 1919 to 1924, J C Smuts was the Head of State and the
Minister of Home Affairs. D F Malan was the Head of State and at the same
time he was the Minister of Home Affairs from 1924 to 1933. P W Botha was a
Head of State. Before he became a Head of State, he was Deputy Minister of
Home Affairs from 1958 to 1961. Minister Viljoen was the Head of State and
at some time in his political career, he was also in the Home Affairs
department.

It is evident enough that apartheid laws were born in this very same
department. Therefore, it is important for us to look into this department
with a critical eye. [Applause.] Home Affairs was seen as an area of
investment for future heads of State by the apartheid regime. It has
invested enough in this. We therefore need total transformation in this
department.

Home Affairs touches the lives of all of us, rich, poor, married,
unmarried, employed and unemployed. I would like to remind hon members of
the NP on my left of the mandate they received during the memorandum in
1990, which wanted a ``yes'' or a ``no'' vote.

Mr I J PRETORIUS: 1992!

Mr M W SKHOSANA: Yes, 1992, thank you. Their mandate was very clear. It was
yes for transformation, yes for democracy, yes for a nonracial and
nonsexist South Africa. But because they did not understand this mandate,
they withdrew from the Government of National Unity. They were getting
confused. As a result, the head collapsed. De Klerk resigned. As they were
now moving without a head, they fell into the hands of the Nazis of Africa,
the DP. They then formed the ``Deurmekaar Alliance'', which is now in
tatters. [Applause.]

Those who understood the mandate joined the ANC. A clear evidence is that
of Dr Schoeman and Mr Oosthuizen, who have joined the ANC. There they are.
[Applause.]

South Africa was therefore born and they were defied. The youth of this
country need to be educated on the importance of getting identity
documents. The need to register and vote in the new South Africa, which is
the right of every citizen. Therefore it is very clear that we are part of
the global economy and world.

The mammoth task which faces the Department of Home Affairs is Hanis a
dynamic programme that will culminate in the introduction of state-of-the-
art technology with regard to secret civic provision in South Africa,
completed with associated advanced technology such as the auto fingerprint
identification system and smart card. Hanis will undoubtedly place South
Africa in the world-class map with regard to civic service management.

The Visa control system has already been implemented in more than 50
missions abroad. Some of the missions are already utilising internal
communication systems, such as the Internet communication system. I,
therefore, would like to thank the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the
department for a job well done. We, therefore, as the ANC would like to
support this Vote. [Applause.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Hon Chairperson and hon Minister, a year ago the UDM opposed
the Budget Vote on Home Affairs. We indicated then that we believed that
the budget for this department was completely insufficient and that the
department would fail in providing the basic services. This has now been
proven by the Batho Pele report on service delivery.

One year later, the situation is worse than ever. Realising the desperate
situation, the portfolio committee invited the Minister of Finance to
appear before the committee to explain the completely inadequate budget of
the department. nfortunately, this meeting could not take place before
today's debate, and makes academic exercises of both the debate and the
budget process.

This illustrates the little to no influence Parliament has on influencing
budget allocation and determining Government priorities - yet another
example, the umpteenth one in the past few months, of how Parliament is
incapacitated in fulfilling its duty of oversight over the executive.
Parliament has sadly lost the initiative.

The ruling party, its members highly upset in the committee over the
inadequate budget, will today again allow themselves to rubber-stamp an
executive decision, even though they do not agree with that decision.
[Interjections.] The worst part of it all is that they do not even care
that the press or the opposition parties were there when they voiced their
unhappiness vocally in public. Today they will stand here, before all to
witness and support this budget.
The Minister made a passionate plea to the committee on the inadequate
budget. Yet, his own party will today again talk against the budget, but in
the end vote for it. I plead with the Minister and hon members of the
committee to see that it is not too late to change their minds, to take a
principled decision and vote against this budget. Every person and party
who supports this budget is not only selling out every official in the
department, but becoming co-architects in the demise of the department and
the vital source of the strategic information on which Government bases its
own planning. [Interjections.]

Fact: the Department of Home Affairs operates with a staff shortage of
19,2% of a component determined on a needs basis of six years ago. Fact:
Because of a lack of resources, not much is being done in respect of
illegal immigration. Fact: The highly publicised 1 April 2001
implementation of the Refugees Act is doomed to failure. R11,2 million is
needed to implement the refugee reception offices, and a meagre R1,3
million is available.

Fact: The population register legacy of the apartheid government makes
provision for a mere 10 million people and cannot accommodate the estimated
South African population of 40 million. Fact: The movement control system
used by various other state departments, such as security agencies, the
Department of Foreign Affairs, the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism, and Statistics South Africa, designed for a period of five years
and implemented in 1998, will soon collapse. This system can no longer be
updated; it requires a rewrite.

Hon members may say, ``So what?'' The fact is that without this system in
place and effectively working, South Africa will become a free-for-all. We
will be unable to monitor who is entering our country, whether they should
be here whether they or not appear on Interpol's wanted list. South Africa
can become the criminal safe haven for those fleeing their own countries.

The Department of Home Affairs is funded for failure. It is being
systematically starved to death. Not a single government department will
fulfil their service delivery responsibilities if this department's R100
million shortfall is not provided to it. The UDM cannot support a Vote that
will result in the collapse of a department that forms the administrative
backbone of many other departments and the county as a whole. [Applause.]
Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, hon members, Home Affairs is a department
that serves people from the first day of their lives to the last. People
need documents when they are born and getting married. They also need
documents for identification, passports when they go beyond the boundries
of our country and the death certificate for verification of that death.
All these documents are a responsibility of the Department of Home Affairs.
The department has to produce all these documents with limited financial
and human resources.

The department has set itself a period of two months within which to issue
an individual's identity document for the first time. A reissue, in my
opinion, should take much shorter when one takes into account that the
information has already been captured and that there is technology at hand.

A standard set in 1998 should have been improved by now. The report of the
Public Service Commision on the department paints a pathetic picture
regarding what is going on in regions. Absenteeism is rife, sick and
unauthorised leave amount to 4,8% of available man-days, as evidenced in
1998-99. On average, it costs the taxpayer R10 million to pay people who
have stayed away from work. This is unacceptable.

The analysis indicates that officers in the department in the Western Cape
tend to take ill more than those in the other provinces. Here are the
statistics as released by the PAC: On average, in the Western Cape people
take 12,1 days sick leave, Eastern Cape 11,5, Gauteng 10,5, whereas in the
Nortrhern Province it is 5,9.

Listening to the Minister and the director-general during their respective
briefings to the portfolio committee sounded like sitting at the knees of
Jeremiah of old, who lamented the deplorable conditions in Israel. The
department is not allocated funds that behove it. Underfunding the
department impacts negatively on its activities, and obviously on its
service delivery. Border fences are porous and aliens move in and out at
their will. Surely, other role players should be called in to avert the
situation.

Government departments should mount the integrated development strategies
that the President spoke of at length, during his state-of-the-nation
address. Hopefully, the interaction of the heads of the departments, that
they had a fortnight ago, will assist in making the border fences secure.

We hope that the immigration Bill that has been so contentious, will be
laid before Parliament soon as the Minister has indicated so that the
necessary skills may be recruited into the country. It is diconcerting to
notice that, according to the annual report of the department, the number
of people who renounce their South African citizenship rose in the year
2000 as compared to 1999.

It has to be established why people decide to do so while there are many
who go to lengths of obtaining our citizenship in a stealthy manner. Those
who applied and were granted South African citizenship in 2000 are fewer
compared to 1999. Why are people fleeing South Africa? We note that there
is freedom of movement, but get concerned that the process should not end
in a brain drain rather than in the brain gain.

The Public Service Commission, in its monitoring function came across some
offices in the deep rural areas where there are no safes to keep cash and
members of the public have buy postal orders from the post office to pay
for the services of department. This implies that the reissue of an ID cost
R13 instead of R5 as R8 is the commision of the post office. It is the
poorest of the poor who are affected by these issues. We hope that some
thought will be given to this so that people who suffer in silence can be
helped out. [Time Expired.]

Mr M K LEKGORO: Chairperson, in the past seven years of our democratic
dispensation, we have known transformation at different levels of our
lives. One of the legacies of apartheid, which our democratic order has to
continue to address, is the civic services that we render to our people.

In keeping with apartheid doctrine, civic affairs were dispensed in a way
that would undermine the dignity of our people. We had to travel long
distances for a simple document like a birth or death certificate. We had
to queue for days, at the service of very rude officials, to acquire one
document or the other.

With the advent of democracy we have, to a degree, witnessed officials with
changed attitudes. We have seen queues running at a satisfactory pace.
Where Afrikaans used to be the commanding language, we are now able to
express ourselves in the languages of our choice. These are marked
improvements that came with our Government's effort to transform this area
of life.

Having acknowledged this I think that it is opportune, in this second term
of our democratic order, to raise the following questions. Have these
services reached the previously disadvantaged in their local or residential
areas? Or are they still forced to pay fares and travel long distances to
reach the nearest Home Affairs office?

In his address to the portfolio committee, about two weeks ago, the
Minister of Home Affairs said:


  Apartheid has left us with a concentration of offices in affluent areas
  and with vastly inadequate resources where the majority of our people
  live and where, because of historical backlogs, the need of our services
  is most intense.

This interpretation of the legacy that apartheid has left behind is very
true. However, the point is to change this situation in favour of the
previously disadvantaged communities. This, we should be prepared to do
even with the meagre funds that the Government gives to the department. As
we continue to fight for more, let us direct some of the little that we get
in this direction.

It is time that we ask ourselves: Within the very limited allocation from
the Treasury, how much do we direct to the previously disadvantaged
communities? We should be able to proudly proclaim that ``at this rural
village, people no longer have to travel those long distances to reach a
Home Affairs office, because we have allocated the resources to that
particular village.'' We should be able to say, ``in this previously
disadvantaged area, we can now receive a birth certificate at source as
would be the case with a white dorpie in the countryside.''

Much as the re-allocation of resources cannot be possible at all instances,
the department should examine its desirability wherever it is possible.
What good does it do to continue to serve for traditionally white areas to
continue being over resourced while the previously disadvantaged and poor
communities are burdened with the transport money to reach a Home Affairs
office?
Surely, noone among us wishes to assert that because Government does not
have enough resources or because Treasury is not allocating enough to us,
so the previously disadvantaged should stay with no resources and the
previously advantaged stay overresourced.

The deputy director-general, responding to a question in the portfolio
committee on the possibility of reallocation of resources, indicated that
people cling to what they have and are very sensitive when possibilities of
their resources being reallocated elsewhere are raised.

Is this the mind-set of what a transforming South Africa needs? I hold the
view that our country and people need a different mind-set. We, surely,
cannot afford that all affluent areas should hoard resources at the expense
of the majority of the citizens.

Let me give an illustration of this situation. I stay in Pretoria, in an
affluent area named Centurion. There are three highly-populated townships
around Pretoria, Attridgeville, Mamelodi and Soshanguve. It is from these
townships where the poor and the unemployed must pay transport to reach
Home Affairs offices in town.
In contrast, we who live in Centurion, who are well of, where there is at
least one car in each house, and who do not even need public transport, do
have a Home Affairs office on our door step. Surely, it is not out of line
to talk about relocating this resource to a needy area like Soshanguve?

Last week the director-general, in his address to the portfolio committee,
indicated that they had applied for about R98 million for office
accommodation and infrastructure. Of what they received from this
application, no funding has been allocated for the opening of new offices.
Obviously, in this situation, again those who will be hard-hit will be in
the previously disadvantaged areas. Any opening of new offices will benefit
these areas.

We feel that with the little that we were given, we could only reinforce
what already exists, important as it might have been. Nothingÿ.ÿ.ÿ. [Time
expired.]

Mr I J PRETORIUS: Chairperson, I would like to thank three of my colleagues
from the ANC, Mr Skhosana, Mr Sikakane, and Mr Lekgoro for their historical
review. We are marching back, if we keep on referring to the past.
[Interjections.]

Ek wil begin deur te sê dat dit aangenaam is om aan hierdie debat deel te
neem, maar die aandag wat die afgelope dag of twee aan 'n gevangene wat
vrygelaat is, gegee is deur die ANC en sy meelopers verstom alle redelike
mense. Die lofsange en die prysliedere wat deur die ANC teenoor die
gevangene uitgespreek word, laat 'n mens wonder wat gaan aan met die ANC se
oordeel. [Tussenwerpsels.] Wat verder verstommend is, is dat die gevangene
nog nie een keer berou getoon het, of verskoning gevra het vir sy ernstige
misstappe nie. Volgens 'n koerantopskrif sal die gewese gevangene, doktor
Boesak, vannaand 'n preek lewer. Ek wil net graag aan almal vanmiddag hier
sê dat ek vannaand beslis nie daardie preek sal bywoon nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Die onderwerp wat ek graag wil aanraak gaan oor die verskillende funksies
wat die department het, en ons weet wat dit almal is. Van die belangrikstes
is die uitreiking van identiteitsdokumente en die uitreiking van geboorte-,
huwelik- en sterftesertifikate en paspoorte. Die Minister is ook deur
middel van die Onafhanklike Verkiesingskommissie verantwoordelik vir die
voer van alle verkiesings. Ek wil graag by een baie belangrike aspek
stilstaan. Dit gaan oor die bereikbaarheid van die kantore vir alle kiesers
sodat hulle dit binne byna loopafstand kan hê.

Ek wil die Minister en die departement gelukwens dat hulle vanjaar
aangekondig het dat hulle besig is om met munisipaliteite te onderhandel
sodat munisipaliteite op 'n agentskapbasis dienste kan lewer oor die lengte
en die breedte van hierdie land. Dan sal baie van die probleme waaroor
klagtes geopper word, opgelos word.

Agb lede weet self dat toe ons verlede jaar 'n pleidooi daarvoor gelewer
het, het dit op dowe ore geval. Plaas dat ons eerder dit doen, want die
Minister is baie reg as hy sê:


  Municipalities are equally distributed across the territory, and there is
  no reason why in our country one should not be able to receive both the
  death certificate, identity document and other civic affair services from
  municipalities as one can do in most other countries in the world.

'n Ander baie belangrike aspek is natuurlik die registrasie van kiesers.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I want to start by saying that it is a pleasure to participate in this
debate, but the attention paid to a released prisoner by the ANC and its
supporters during the past day or so is amazing to all reasonable people.
The glorification and praise expressed towards the prisoner by the ANC
makes one wonder what is going on with the judgment of the ANC.
[Interjections.] What is also amazing is that the prisoner has not once
shown regret or apologised for his serious crimes. According to a newspaper
headline the former prisoner, Dr Boesak, will be delivering a sermon this
evening. I would just like to say to everyone here this afternoon that I
will definitely not be attending that sermon this evening. [Interjections.]

The subject that I would like to touch on the various functions of the
department, and we know what they all are. Some of the most important are
the issuing of identity documents and the issuing of birth, marriage and
death certificates and passports. The Minister is also, through the
Independent Electoral Commission, responsible for the conducting of all
elections. I would like to dwell on one very important aspect. This
concerns the accessibility of the offices to all voters, which means that
they should be almost within walking distance from them.

I want to congratulate the Minister and the department on having announced
this year that they are negotiating with municipalities to enable
municipalities to deliver services on an agency basis across the length and
breadth of this country. This will solve many of the problems about which
there are complaints.

Hon members themselves know that when we called for this last year, there
was no positive reaction. We should rather do this, because the Minister is
quite right in saying:


  Municipalities are equally distributed across the territory, and there is
  no reason why in our country one should not be able to receive both the
  death certificate, identity document and other civic affair services from
  municipalities as one can do in most other countries in the world.

Another very important aspect is of course the registration of voters.]
The registration of voters is an important function and should also be
performed by the municipalities on an agency basis.

I hope that the department or the Treasury will make more money available.
It is a very sensible approach that the Minister has adopted, namely that
the department must speak to the municipalities. I hope that the Minister
will be successful in convincing them to assist with these services which
should be given to the people.

Ek vertrou ook dat die onderhandelinge op sukses sal uitloop, maar ek hoop
die Minister sal ook in hierdie debat of later vir ons se wat die
uiteindelike resultaat daarvan gaan wees.

Die tweede aspek wat ek graag wil aanraak, is die kwessie van die
kieserslys. Die feit dat die kieserslys sonder adresse verskyn, is 'n
probleem vir alle politieke partye asook die feit dat die kiesersdata op so
'n laat stadium beskikbaar gestel word aan politieke partye. Dit is nie
moontlik om mens se werk behoorlik te doen nie. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[I also trust that the negotiations will be successful, but I hope the
Minister will also tell us in this debate or later on what the eventual
results of that will be.

The second aspect I would like to touch on is the question of the voters'
roll. The fact that the voters' roll contains no addresses is a problem for
all political parties, as is the fact that the voters' data is made
available at such a late stage to political parties. It is impossible to do
one's work properly. [Applause.]]

Mr M U KALAKO: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister and hon members,
today we are dealing with one of the important Budget Votes.

I want to start by just briefly responding to what Mrs Van Wyk said here.
What she said was completely untrue. She knows very well how the ANC
members in the committee were trying very hard to make sure that the
department is funded. I am sure her other members, who are African like me,
would not really agree with her when she says that they should not support
this budget.

This department has work to do and has to render services to people on a
daily, even hourly basis. If one comes here and says that this budget
should not be supported, one should know the consequences to the majority
of people of this country, especially those who are disadvantaged. In this
House we have the problem, time and again, of people who really do not want
to be reminded of their past. There is no way that we cannot do that. In
order to move forward, we must always see and look at what happened in the
past, so that we can be able to construct a clear path for our future.
[Applause.]

My colleagues mentioned here that this department was constructed in such a
way that it had to enhance the policies of oppression and exploitation of
our people in this country for decades and centuries. It is no mistake that
today - as the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the DG in his presentation
to the portfolio committee, mentioned - the problem we are confronted with
in this department is the legacy of the past.

It is a department which was not at all meant to serve the majority of the
people or the entire population of the country. It is a department which
was serving approximately 10 million of the people of the country. It is a
department which today is faced with serving about 40 million people. One
can just imagine the difficulties and the problems that are going to
confront this new Government. It is no wonder that, as the ANC, we support
this budget and we are calling for transformation. Indeed, this department
needs transformation.

It is a department that is based on and was constructed for other purposes.
But we do understand, accept and agree with the director-general and his
department that, in order for the department to perform its functions
efficiently and adequately, it needs to be funded.

Without repeating and emphasising what some of my colleagues have said
here, let me just highlight how important the role of this department is in
making sure that this country not only knows how many people die or are
born it, but at the same time also contributes to the economic growth of
this country.

It is this department that has to make sure that it creates conducive
conditions for the investors to come and invest in this country, so as to
make sure that their permits, requests and applications are processed in a
speedy way and investment can come into this country. And it is this
department that, necessarily, has to make it possible for skills and
expertise - which we do not have in this country - to come into this
country without hindrance. So it is not just a question of looking at the
department and saying it just deals with the day-to-day problems that we
see.

I must say that when the director-general made his presentation to the
committee, I was left with no other impression than the picture that says
this department will sooner rather than later collapse if we do not take
steps to avoid that. It is a task and a challenge to us. As this portfolio
committee, led by the chairperson, we will continue to go to the Treasury,
to persuade them that some functions of the department actually be funded.

Added to its task, as the DG explained to us, is the work which was
previously done by the SAPS which is now going to be taken over by this
department. We know how important the security of this country is. It was
easy before the new dispensation and the changes in this country. Nobody
knew that the things we are talking about today are taking place in this
country, because there was no transparency.
We know that this department, as I have said earlier, working hand in hand
with the Defence Force of the previous regime, was geared at manning those
borders with people who were trained in nothing else but looking for
terrorists coming into this country, and watching us when we come into this
country. It was a department manned by people who were trained in
counterinsurgency, as they termed it at that time. So one can imagine the
task that we are faced with in transforming this department.

Added to that, I am sure that Sakkie Pretorius will agree with me when I
say, as my colleague Skhosana has done, that the NP and the DP can scream
here today - whether it is the DP or NP does not make any difference to me,
whether it was a liberal party or whatever which did mini-democratic
things, they only knew democracy as something applying to white people only
- but they will agree with us that this country is today confronted with
problems that were caused by their practices. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson and hon members, I really would
like to say that the dignity with which the issues were canvassed at this
budget discussion today convinced me that we are, indeed, the portfolio
committee that has the population of South Africa as its client.

I wish to thank all the hon members who participated in this debate,
because each one of them made a very valuable contribution. Lack of time
does not allow me to answer all the points raised by the participants in
the debate. However, I will take care to provide written answers to each of
them in respect of matters which this lack of time will not allow me to
address directly here in Parliament.

I would like to thank Mr D A Mokoena, the chairperson of the portfolio
committee, who stressed that my department should not become the object of
political wrangling and that policy matters affecting it should not become
political footballs. I could not agree more, even though I feel that this
precept is often not respected, not on my side, but on the side of some of
my colleagues in this Parliament.

However, I thank Mr Mokoena for his support in seeking more funding for the
department and for the initiative he took on behalf of his committee to
interact with the Minister of Finance to increase our budgetary allocation.
These are, indeed, groundbreaking efforts in the building of our democracy.

I concur with the concerns that Mr Mokoena expressed about the lack of
resources and the corruption affecting some of the functions and, which, of
course, certain officials are guilty of. We have a unit on corruption which
has in fact been successful in some respects in unearthing some of the
corrupt acts by some of our officials, in spite of our limited funding. The
concerns of Mr Mokoena are noted and are shared by us. I hope that in
working together, in a more congenial atmosphere, we will be able to
address them.

I would also like to thank Mr Grobler who dealt with the issue of financial
controls on the expenditure of the IEC. This issue is quite serious and
needs to be dealt with seriously, without political pointscoring. We must
remember that the IEC is a Chapter 9 body and therefore it is accountable
to this House, and not to us. We are the department which has the line
function for the actions of the IEC. Its very name - the Independent
Electoral Commission - says that it is in fact independent.

We try to defend the independence of the IEC, as a guarantee of our
democracy. However, I do agree that we will have to find ways and means to
establish reliable controls within the IEC which are consistent with its
independence.

The report of the Auditor-General is about such controls which, for
example, enables us today to discuss the issue and hold the IEC accountable
before this Parliament.

I think Mr Grobler also mentioned the zip-zip machines and other matters
which, of course, were not accounted for. He even went so far as to say
that it would be a waste to give us money because of the things that he has
pointed out which are not accounted for by the IEC. I think there he was
really on the wrong track. As I said, we are not responsible for the
particular matters that he mentioned, specifically.

The hon member Mr Sikakane also reminded us of the tragic memories of the
past and the legacy which the past still has on our present and our future
- the levelling of the playing fields. This, in itself, is a social
imperative that we must pursue in the most rationale and most effective
manner. It will not happen overnight. And it will not happen if we rely
exclusively on short cuts. For this reason, we must accept that we need
more money. But that money alone will, of course, not solve the problem,
hence the need for a strategic vision which will equalise the distribution
of our services throughout the territories through municipalities, for
which we were complimented also by Mr Pretorius.

I also noted the incongrueces in the location of certain of our offices
which our sister the hon member Ms Maunye mentioned. I also noted the
problems she raised relating to people who are being divided by boundary
lines which were not drawn by the people themselves or by history, but were
the product of colonial conquests.

I am hoping that the Immigration Bill, once it becomes law, will make
generous provisions for family reunification in cross-border passes so that
people can live and work in two different neighbouring countries at the
same time.

The hon member Mr Beukman also mentioned things which I echo. I echo the
concern he has expressed for the lack of infrastructure which this
department has, especially for IT purposes. We need R20 million merely to
avoid having our movement control system becoming unusable. Funding is
required to keep the department from crashing down, especially in repect of
our investment in technology. I have always stated that we, as a country,
must invest in technology and that Home Affairs is the right place we
should start from, as our services are basic services which serve the
population of this country.

I also share the concern that Mr Beukman has expressed that the present
flaws and shortcomings of migration control have contributed to impairing
the acquisition of needed foreign skills. Some of the remarks he made in
respect of the Immigration Bill are also noted, with some points of
agreement and some points of disappointment. However, I hope that Mr
Beukman, of course, understands how our system of democracy works, and how
cabinets in parliaments work. I hope that we can continue discussion on
this issue once the Immigration Bill comes before this House and the
portfolio committee.

I also thank the hon member Mr Skhosana, who reminded us of the history of
the Department of Home Affairs as well. To none of us black people the name
``Home Affairs'' has never sounded friendly because it did express a
culture of lack of service and oppression in the past. These considerations
have had a bearing on my vision for the restructuring of the department,
including the establishment of an immigration service and the devolution of
power to municipalities.

I also thank the hon member Mrs van Wyk, who reminded us that the present
situation of the underfunding of my department - an imminent crisis - was
predicted by me during the past years, and I have often witnessed the
unfolding of disasters in spite of my advance warning. I agree with her
sentiments, even though I cannot support her conclusion that this
Parliament should vote against my budget. I also agree with her that there
comes a time when Parliament must take a leadership role in budgetary
matters such as the one that she mentioned, because it does happen in many
countries in the world that parliaments do redraft budgets.

Concerning her specific reasons that I made an impassioned plea and yet
will vote for the Bill, which she feels is inconsistent, I think the hon
member needs to understand how cabinets throughout the world operate.

She must understand the more serious point also that I am in this Cabinet
because, during most of the past conflicts between the ANC and IFP members,
where more than 20 000 blacks died in the hands of other black people,
there were more people who died than those who were killed in the Anglo
Boer war.

There is still lots of tensions between the leadership of the ANC and IFP
in KwaZulu-Natal, which was the theatre of that war of attrition. Below the
surface, there are a lot of tensions. We are trying to nurse a very turmoil
situation, and that is the reason why President Mbeki invited the IFP,
after the Government of National Unity's time expired, to still remain in
this Cabinet.

I also want to assure the hon member that, in fact, the only reason why I
have got to be big and tolerant is because of that. It is not easy,
perhaps, for Mr Mbeki to retain me there, and it is not easy for me to
remain there. I want to emphasise, for the consumption of all of us, that
there are many ANC members who do not want to nurse this relationship, and
there are many IFP people who do not want us to nurse this delicate and
brittle relationship.
I do this for the sake of peace and stability in South Africa. If this
effort aborts, then all the gains we have had since 1994 may be completely
wiped off, and that would be disasterous, not only for the ANC or the IFP,
but for South Africa.

The department, I agree, needs transformation. The statement that Mr Kalako
also made that the department could collapse, is a statement that our
director-General also made - which I also echoed - that we are in danger of
that.

Lastly, many members have, of course, emphasised that transformation is
needed in this department. One of the line functions which I gave to my
colleague, the Deputy Minister, is that of ensuring that there is
representivity in the department.

In fact, Minister Sisulu, as Deputy Minister, achieved representivity in
this department. At one time, when Dr Sikweyiya was Minister of Public
Services, he actually awarded us the Batho Pele award. We are the only
people who got the Batho Pele award, signed by Dr Sikweyiya and Dr Mandela,
because of that representivity. In fact, if one looks there, I think there
are more black faces than white faces. [Laughter.] [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

House adjourned at 19:22.
                                 __________

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly:


1.    The Speaker:


     The following paper tabled on 14 May 2001 is now referred to the Joint
     Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
     of Women:


     Report of the Women's Empowerment Unit, including the following
     annexures: Specific Agreement between the Government of Sweden and the
     Government of the Republic of South Africa on the Women's Empowerment
     Unit for the National and Provincial Parliaments of South Africa;
     Amendment to the Agreement between the Government of Sweden and the
     Government of the Republic of South Africa on the Women's Empowerment
     Unit for the National and Provincial Parliaments of South Africa;
     Proposed Extension of Agreement to SIDA; Letter for motivation for
     extension of Agreement to SIDA and Report from the Women's Empowerment
     Unit to the Speakers Forum.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


     Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council of
     Provinces on 22 May 2001 and transmitted for consideration of Council's
     proposed amendments:


     (i)    South African Weather Service Bill [B 54B - 2000] (National
           Assembly - sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements,
           Tablings, Committee Reports p 516).
           The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Environmental Affairs and Tourism for a report on the amendments
           proposed by the Council.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Supreme Court Decree, 1990 (Ciskei) Amendment Bill
     [B 15 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 22 May 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the subject of the Supreme Court Decree, 1990
         (Ciskei) Amendment Bill [B 15 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec
         75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology on the National Council for Library and Information Services
     Bill [B 44B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 22 May 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology,
         having considered the National Council for Library and Information
         Services Bill [B 44B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) and
         proposed amendments of the National Council of Provinces
         (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 332), referred
         to the Committee, reports that -


         (a)     after consultation with the Select Committee on Education
              and Recreation of the National Council of Provinces, it does
              not support the proposed amendments; and


         (b)     it recommends that the Bill be passed without further
              amendment.


Report to be considered.

