---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 March 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-03-16
---

FRIDAY, 16 MARCH 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that good health and the creation of the conditions for good
       health are vital for Africa's recovery plans;


  (2) welcomes and applauds the decision and resolution of the European
       Union Parliament to support South Africa's and Kenya's bids and
       efforts to access cheaper anti-HIV/Aids drugs;


  (3) acknowledges the concern of the European Union Parliament for
       Africa's problems in her efforts to succeed as a prosperous and
       stable continent; and


  (4) calls upon all the nations of the developed world to follow the
       commitment of the European Union Parliament in this regard, and to
       ensure that President Mbeki's efforts to keep the United States-SA
       Commission in place succeed, so that the United States itself is not
       denied the opportunity to be associated with the Millennium African
       Recovery Programme.

[Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the ANC-led Government continues to permit discrimination
       against lesbians and gays in that -


       (a)  pension benefits for surviving same-sex partners are not paid;


       (b)  both the Department of Correctional Services and the Department
           of Defence refuse full and equal medical aid benefits for
           partners in same-sex relationships;


       (c)  hon Judge Ann-Marie de Vos has had to approach the courts for
           relief in that the Child Care Act of 1983 does not allow co-
           parenting adoption for same-sex relationships; and


       (d)  full benefit schemes for same-sex couples are not paid by SAA;
           and


  (2) calls on the ANC to reassure the gay and lesbian community by
       demonstrating, through its actions, that it is sincerely committed to
       ridding the Statute Book of any discriminatory or prejudicial
       legislation and that it is committed to the values and freedoms
       enshrined in our Constitution.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, you are all standing around and talking.
This is not the way we should be conducting our proceedings. Will you all
please take your seats and remain there, and there should be no meetings in
your seats, please. This has been going on and on, and it is getting worse.


Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the importance of learning support material for both learners
       and teachers;


  (2) is concerned that some provinces have, up to now, failed to supply
       books to schools; and


  (3) urges the national Ministry to see to it that provinces execute this
       task immediately.

Mrs Z A KOTA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the DA consistently exposes its deep-rooted sexism, and
       fear of women in power by -


       (a)  failing to act against alleged child pornographer Rev Bantom for
           more than a year;


       (b)  failing to act against Peter Marais for his derogatory comments
           which caused Ms Freda Adams to resign;


       (c)  failing to develop a gender policy for the province;


       (d)  failing to discipline Leon Markovitz for sexist remarks to
           female colleagues;
       (e)  failing to fire Gerald Morkel for covering up these allegations;


       (f)  firing Ms Tasneem Essop as Public Accounts Chair;


       (g)  firing Ms Lynne Brown as Deputy Speaker; and


       (h)  firing Dr Audrey van Zyl as Health Committee Chair; and


  (2) calls on the DA to declare whether it will legalise sexism in its
       provincial constitution.

[Applause.]

Mnr A BLAAS: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met kommer verneem van die tragiese mynongelukke wat die afgelope
       week plaasgevind het by die Anglo Platinum en die AngloGold Savuka-
       myne waarin 5 mense dood is;


  (2) sy meegevoel uitspreek teenoor die naasbestaandes van die oorledenes;


  (3) verder kennis neem van die inherente gevare van mynbou en spesifiek
       die gevare verbonde aan ultra-diep mynbouoperasies;


  (4) 'n hernieude beroep doen op die Departement van Minerale en Energie
       om te verseker dat die veiligheidsvoorskrifte van die wet nagekom
       word; en


  (5) verder 'n beroep doen op alle werkers in al die sektore en op alle
       vlakke van die Suid-Afrikaanse mynbedryf om 'n kultuur van
       veiligheidsbewustheid te kweek en te onderhou en om deurlopend
       ingestel te wees op die potensiÃ«le gevare wat mynbou inhou, in 'n
       volgehoue poging om ongelukke te voorkom.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A BLAAS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the tragic mining accidents that have taken place
       in the past week at the Anglo Platinum and AngloGold Savuka mines, in
       which five people have died;


  (2) expresses its sympathy with the next of kin of the deceased;


  (3) further notes the inherent dangers of mining and in particular the
       dangers associated with ultra deep mining operations;


  (4) makes a renewed appeal to the Department of Minerals and Energy to
       ensure that the safety instructions in the Act are observed; and


  (5) further appeals to all workers in all sectors and on all levels of
       the South African mining industry to cultivate and maintain a culture
       of safety awareness, and to be continuously attuned to the potential
       dangers posed by mining, in a sustained effort to prevent accidents.]
Mr L C MOTHIBA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) is appalled at revelations in the Northern Province auditor's report
       on the pollution of major rivers such as the Letaba and the Selati in
       the Phalaborwa area and that villagers who drink water from these
       rivers suffer from kidney and stomach problems;


  (2) is alarmed and dismayed that the Northern Province environmental
       officials concede in the report that the extent of illegal and life-
       threatening water pollution in these areas was cause for concern, but
       that they have failed to find solutions for tackling water pollution
       and instead are complaining about budget constraints, capacity
       problems and staff shortages;


  (3) notes, in conclusion, that the Mozambican authorities are
       investigating whether the contamination and poisoning of drinking
       water in Gaza province is not caused by the inefficiency of the
       Northern Province officials who are failing to protect rivers; and


  (4) calls on the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to declare
       Phalaborwa an ecological disaster area and to attend to the water
       pollution problems and other natural resources which are under threat
       and which may, according to the provincial auditor's report.

[Time expired.]

Mr S T BELOT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that 24 March 2001 marks World Tuberculosis Day;


       (b)  the high rate of occurrence of this poverty-related disease in
           the DA-controlled Western Cape; and


       (c)  that the Western Cape government has developed an inadequate
           plan to combat TB and other diseases caused by poverty;


  (2) believes that access to TB treatment contributes to the fulfilment of
       the constitutional right to highest attainable standards of health;
       and


  (3) calls on the Western Cape government to develop a comprehensive and
       sustainable plan to combat diseases caused by poverty and make
       treatment for TB available to the poor.

[Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House notes that -
  (1) in the Lebaleng township of Makwassi near Wolmaransstad, a ward
       candidate of the ANC, Mr Bevin Modisane, has defected to the PAC with
       his branch members; and


  (2) the PAC welcomes this new member and hopes that many more will
       realise that their true home is in the PAC.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Dr P W A MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die VF sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis sy waardering uitspreek -


  (1) vir die deurslaggewende rol wat genl Constand Viljoen in die
       belangrike krisis- en oorgangstydperk rondom 1994 gespeel het;


  (2) vir die prominente rol wat genl Viljoen die afgelope sewe jaar in
       hierdie Huis en in die Suid-Afrikaanse politiek gespeel het; en


     3) vir die wyse waarop genl Viljoen leiding gegee het en gehelp het om
        die regse karikatuur wat van selfbeskikking en die Afrikaners wat
        dit ondersteun, geskep is, te vernietig en hierdie strewe na die
        hoofstroom van die Suid-Afrikaanse politiek gelei het.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House expresses its appreciation-


  (1) for the decisive role Gen Constand Viljoen played during the critical
       1994 period of crisis and transition;


  (2) for the prominent role played by Gen Viljoen for the past seven years
       in this House and in South African politics; and
  (3) for the manner in which Gen Viljoen took the lead and helped to
       destroy the right-wing caricature that had been created of self-
       determination and the Afrikaners who supported it, and led this
       aspiration towards the mainstream of South African politics.]

Mr J S MGIDI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Western Cape Premier, Mr Gerald Morkel, cast serious
       doubts on the statistics presented by the Public Service Commission
       showing racial and gender imbalances in the appointment of the
       managerial staff in his province;


  (2) believes that the sentiment expressed by the Premier represents the
       intransigence of the DA-controlled Western Cape government to
       confront the lack of representivity in the public sector in the
       province; and


  (3) urges the Premier to withdraw his remark and work towards ensuring
       representivity and a transformed public service in the Western Cape
       Province.

[Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with alarm the shocking report of the Institute for Security
           Studies indicating that crime and, in particular, violent crime
           has reached its highest levels in South African's history;


       (b)  that, according to this report, Johannesburg has by far the
           highest rates of both violent and property crimes in South
           Africa; and


       (c)  the disappointing and dismissive response of the National
           Commissioner of Police to this report; and


  (2) calls upon him to protect all the people of South Africa against the
       crime scourge instead of quibbling about the accuracy of crime
       statistics.

[Interjections.]

Ms M A MOLEBATSI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Sergeant Johan Roux has been nominated as Johannesburg Policeman
           of the Year;


       (b)  he has a policy of zero tolerance towards criminals; and


       (c)  he and his colleague, Sergeant Noah Motumi, have an average
           arrest rate of 20 criminals a month;


  (2) congratulates Sergeants Roux and Motumi on their outstanding arrest
       record; and


  (3) calls on all other members of the Police Service to emulate their
       example of unity in action to fight crime and serve the South African
       nation.

[Applause.]

Mnr J SCHIPPERS: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van -


       (a)  'n vergadering op 13 Maart 2001 op Gouda waartydens raadslede
           van die Drakensteinse Munisipaliteit die publiek wou inlig oor
           die raad se diensleweringsprogram, en ANC-lede -
           (i)   die vergadering ontwrig en raadslede verhinder het om die
                  program bekend te stel; en


           (ii)  die burgemeester en raadslede geÃ¯ntimideer het om dadelik
                  die terrein te verlaat; en


       (b)  die DA-raad in Drakenstein se voorneme om nie bedreig te word
           deur die onaanvaarbare optrede van die ANC nie en dat hy sal
           voortgaan met dienslewering aan die gemeenskap; en


  (2) 'n beroep doen op die ANC om demokrasie te aanvaar en nie te
       verhinder dat dienste aan die gemeenskap gelewer word nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J SCHIPPERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -
       (a)  a meeting on 13 March 2001 in Gouda during which councillors
           from the Drakenstein Municipality wanted to inform the public
           about the council's service delivery programme, and ANC members
           -


           (i)   disrupted the meeting and prevented councillors from
                  introducing the programme; and


           (ii)  intimidated the mayor and councillors into leaving the
                  premises immediately; and


       (b)  the intention of the DA council in Drakenstein not to be
           threatened by the unacceptable behaviour of the ANC and that it
           will continue with service delivery to the community; and


  (2) appeals to the ANC to accept democracy and not to prevent the
       delivery of services to the community.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:

  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with dismay and disappointment the blatant abuse of power by the
           ruling party in wooing opposition members under false pretences
           to join their ranks; and


       (b)  the destructive consequences this has on traditional
           communities, especially the Tembu tribes of the Eastern Cape;


  (2) welcomes the response from the spokesperson of the Tembu Kingdom that
       politicians, especially the ruling party, should stay out of the
       affairs of traditional leaders; and


  (3) calls on the ruling party to address the real issues affecting the
       traditional leaders instead of silencing them through co-option and
       material advances.

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that, in the light of problems experienced with the payment of
       the social security payments, the Department of Social Development
       has announced steps to immediately upgrade facilities at priority
       paypoints, including -


       (a)  the provision of water and sanitation by local government;


       (b)  temporary shelter tents to provide shelter;


       (c)  security at paypoints by the SAPS;


       (d)  the training of officials and volunteers in first aid; and


       (e)  help desks for paypoints; staffed with competent and well-
           equipped officials; and
  (2) commends the Minister and the department on the seriousness with
       which they have responded to the situation.

[Applause.]

                            SAVUKA MINE ACCIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I hereby move without notice:


  That the House-


  (1) notes that-


       (a)  South Africa has pioneered deep-level mining, and has the
           deepest mines in the world, but that this kind of mining still
           claims too many lives;


       (b)  the rock burst at the Savuka Mine on Wednesday, 14 March 2001,
           claimed the lives of three people and injured four others;
  (2) elcomes the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate's speedy response to
       investigate this incident;


  (3) calls on mining houses to take appropriate measures to address these
       serious mining hazards; and


  (4) expresses its heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families, friends
       and loved ones of those who died in the Savuka Mine rock burst.

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                    (Resumption of First Reading debate)

Mr K A MOLOTO: Madam Speaker, hon members, we should all acknowledge that a
budget of a country in a developmental stage is a key lever to direct the
national economy and the energy of the nation towards strategic national
development goals. The 2001-02 Budget, which was tabled by the Minister
before this House, underscores a growth-oriented agenda that is driven by
significant increases in infrastructure allocations and the mobilisation of
domestic savings to fuel and rekindle our industrial potential.

Let us realise the painful fact that a country with no domestic savings is
compelled to rely on foreign capital inflows, thus exposing itself to
vagarious and footloose foreign investments. This current Budget stimulates
the mobilisation of domestic savings in many ways to address our strategic
mission of creating a better life for all our people.

Let us also realise that unsustainable and huge budget deficits take away
domestic savings that could have been used to build and strengthen our
industrial base. In a period of large budget deficits fierce competition
for funds occurs in the domestic credit market, between government and the
private sector, over scarce domestic savings. In the absence of deficits,
those domestic savings could have financed investments in new factories,
machines and technology.

This Budget seeks to address this problem through a foreign borrowing
strategy that has been focused on lengthening and smoothing the maturity
structure of our debt profile and a reasonable role in our domestic bond
market. This strategy, among others, ensures that domestic savings are
released for building a prosperous nation. Foreign direct investment should
be seen as playing a supplementary role to investments by local business
people.

The Minister of Finance has done well to initiate an expansionary budget
within a broad strategic framework of reduction in budget deficits. To
accidental theorists, this exposition is a contradiction in terms. To them,
one cannot have an expansionary budget without incurring huge budget
deficits. Yes, it is possible to have both. That is the art of harmonising
the interaction between the fiscal policy, monetary policy and regulatory
framework. This is what the current Budget pursues and achieves. It strives
for the reduction of debt servicing costs, thus enabling Government to
release funds for infrastructural development and local investment, without
causing inflationary rate pressures.

Investing in human resource development, health and social grants brings
about a meaningful socioeconomic integration of the historically
disadvantaged and those who had privileges bestowed upon them by virtue of
the colour of their skin. The tax incentives provided by the Minister boost
consumer spending and stimulate the idle capacity in the industrial sector.
Demand for industrial consumption goods will generate much-needed jobs.
This Budget focuses on stimulating industrial development.

I heard the hon Ken Andrew taking a critical stance on the increase in the
skills levy. This increase is beneficial to labour, business and
Government. The processes of globalisation continue to marginalise the
unskilled worker. The world is gravitating to a knowledge-based economy. It
is to the benefit of business to claim this levy for training and to
position their companies in the fierce and competitive world.

The restructuring of state assets provides an economic framework for growth
and equity. It ensures transfer of technology and boosts our foreign
reserves. The proceeds from the sale of state assets plays a critical role
in our debt-reduction exercise. Our ability to repay local debt has a
positive impact on our international credit rating and the ability to
access foreign loans at favourable rates.

Our recent commitment to redeeming domestic debt that is due, emphasises
this point. This enables us to avoid getting into debt that we will not be
able to service. The diesel concession made to farmers ensures that farmers
are able to produce agricultural products profitably, given that the common
agricultural policy practised by the European Union does not foster equal
and free competition. The concessions that we made to business people
interested in Africa are the building blocks for the African Renaissance.

In conclusion, it should be understood that South Africa can only play a
key international role on the basis of a strong economy, to meet its
obligations in Africa. Our vision for African renewal will only be realised
if we begin to consciously build our economy. We can only begin to impact
on Africa on the basis of a strong, growing and well-managed economy. We
dare not fail in this mission. Much rests on our shoulders, and our
forebearers yearned for this moment when they resisted colonialism and
exploitation of African resources with their lives. Let us all celebrate
this expansionary Budget. It is the hope of our people. [Applause.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Madam Speaker, Minister of Finance, hon members, this year's
Budget was met with a meek response in the markets. This meek response was
despite the phenomenal turnaround strategy of the National Treasury in the
management of public finances under the Gear strategy - a turnaround that
was so evident from the figures. But the key policy challenges always lie
behind the figures.

The contribution of privatisation to this turnaround speaks loudly - from
the R12,5 billion contribution the proceeds made to the stabilisation of
debt and the reduction of the deficit. This is a contribution that needs to
be unequivocally acknowledged. It is a contribution that needs to be
unstintingly sustained and increased. This is why privatisation to fund
domestic debt was a centrepiece of this Budget.

We know that the past financial year delivered lower than expected receipts
from privatisation, ie R2,8 billion instead of R5 billion. Fortunately for
the Minister concerned, the markets opted to take solace in the projected
R18 billion target set by his fiscal taskmaster, Minister Trevor Manuel,
instead of castigating Minister Radebe for the 2000-01 target that was
missed.
The DP, having called for privatisation of between R15 to R20 billion per
annum, was heartened by the bold R18 billion due to the dramatic effect a
figure of this nature will have on our debt servicing costs. It is
regrettable, however, that the 2002-03 and 2003-04 proceeds forecast did
not display a similar bold stroke at only R5 billion each.

Understandably, the Portfolio Committee on Finance focused on how much of
the R18 billion target set would be contingent on the Telkom IPO. It is
clear that this question will continue to plaque the National Treasury and
the Minister of Public Enterprises in the context of past week's continued
roller-coaster ride in IT stocks. The warning lights are, indeed, flashing
about the prospects for the fourth quarter listing of Telkom when
considering market conditions.

This week saw one of the darkest days in Wall Street's history with the
Nasdaq falling 6,25% on Monday, bringing losses over the past year to 62%.
It is nearly a year ago that the roller-coaster rides in IT stocks started
and this contagion spread to European Bourses and the JSE in a globalised
domino effect. The director-general was also the only one, along with
Telkom's Chief Executive Officer, who raised concerns about the fourth
quarter for the listing, given the continued downturn of telecommunications
stock globally. Their words might still tirn out to be prophetic, despite
the problematic rebuke meted out to the CEO of Telkom.

On the missed privatisation proceeds target, the director-general said that
the National Treasury would first look where the other transactions are
before building it into the financing figures. It is not surprising that
the National Treasury has opted to provide for proceeds over which it has a
modicum of control and no influence: the Telkom IPO, Sasria's recent R3,2
billion dividend and Transnet's 24,1% stake in M-Cel - a far less difficult
privatisation - and the tax revenue to come from public entities that have
lost their exempt status, such as Eskom.

Ms Ramos' polite scepticism is understandable, given that the Budget
Review, comparably between 1999 and 2001, shows the difficulty of the stops
and starts in the arena of the Department of Public Enterprises. This
raises questions about commitment and speed. The cost of going slow on
privatisation is twofold: efficiency and revenue foregone and foreign
investment foregone.
The pressure is on for the Minister of Public Enterprises to deliver a
Telkom IPO on time in extremely difficult market conditions. If members
will excuse the pun, our privatisation credentials are on the line. In the
context of the duopoly and third cell licence announcements, South Africa
has a slightly more certain, albeit strikingly imperfect,
telecommunications policy environment.

Given that we have pinned our IPO colours to the mast by committing
ourselves to a date, we might be forced to list at any cost, despite
prevailing market conditions, with little foreign interest from overexposed
telecommunications operators - their balance sheets battered by recent
third-generation auctions globally. From the rumour-inspired rand nose dive
in January, we can see the dangers of not listing in our own timeframe.
With 20/20 hindsight, Telkom should have been listed long before March last
year when the Nasdaq woes started.

I would like to say to the hon Barbara Hogan that yes, South Africa has a
skills challenge to confront on three fronts. It has to retain existing
skills; it has to train its own people to meet the needs of an economy
increasingly biased against unskilled labour and shifting to the tertiary
sector of economic activity; and it has to ensure a streamlined process for
the recruitment of foreign skills to fill the gaps while the skills base is
being trained. These are three formidable challenges that have to be
tackled simultaneously. In particular, the key human capital challenge of
training our own people to ensure that they have access to new economy jobs
skills in the future, will require innovative approaches by various
Ministries and the private sector and possibly a different type of public-
private partnership in this realm.

The US Office of Technology Policy within the US commerce department has
worked on a strategy paper that embraces a few creative proposals, which we
could emulate and look towards. They include a strong emphasis on
mathematics and science education; a tax credit to open the doors of
college, known as the ``lifetime learning credit''; a school-to-work
initiative; a technological literacy programme; technology innovation
challenge grants; and funding for affordable access to advanced
telecommunications. South Africa should look to practical proposals such as
these to creatively address the acute skills shortage we have and to make
the creative and innovative policy interventions required.
The third challenge on immigration policy has been much in the news over
recent weeks, owing to differences within the governing alliance, that have
spilled into the public domain, between the IFP and the ANC. We have to
confront the key challenge of not playing politics with skills needs. One
could hardly miss the worrisome coverage over the past week that the
Immigration Bill will be subjected to further delays if not an entire
redrafting process.

While this raises interesting political questions and musings, the economic
effect of such policy delays will deliver bitter fruits to the South
African economy. There is fierce competition in the global skills market,
and if we cannot ensure a smooth entry process to foreign skills as a basic
element, we are behind the global rush for skills. In addition, a wrangle
over an arm's-length agency - the immigration service - clearly exposed the
ideological reluctance to allow the growth of agencies in the Public
Service, despite international practice in this regard and the abundantly
clear success of the SA Revenue Service.

The old adage ``failing to plan is planning to fail'' has a specific
resonance in the South African budgetary context, given the sheer size and
scale of the HIV/Aids epidemic. If we look at the possible impact of Aids
on our economy, the reality of this silent decimation of our people becomes
a stark and ghastly reality, as does the immense planning required across
all departmental Votes to deal with its impact.

The UN expects the epidemic to knock 0,3% to 0,4% off the growth rate each
year, making our GDP in 2010 17% lower than it would have been otherwise.
The DA believes that the Budget has to take account of Aids in each and
every budget projection. How will the 2 million Aids orphans by 2010 be
accommodated in the social development budget in terms of child grants or
orphanages? What will the impact be of the 2 million Aids orphans on the
education budget? How will the health budget accommodate the rapid
infection rate and, therefore, treatment rate required?

There is thus a need for a budget with a distinct ``Aids expenditure
required'' thrust in all areas. One cannot speak of a budget that
alleviates the plight of the poor in isolation from the HIV/Aids pandemic.
In addition, one cannot speak of a budget that alleviates the plight of
those stricken with HIV/Aids without a frank and free discussion of how the
possible cost escalation of South Africa's strategic defence procurement
could crowd out a consolidated budgetary approach to HIV and Aids.

These are the key policy challenges that lie behind a remarkable turnaround
strategy and a remarkable turnaround in the public financial management
health of this country, but they are key policy challenges that cannot be
ignored. [Applause.]

Mrs L MALONEY: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon the Minister of
Finance and his team for coming up with a Budget that is people-driven.
This shows that the ANC Government is committed to its Batho Pele
principle.

My subject will be based on the public emergency communication centre that
the Department of Communications is embarking upon. About R80 million has
been allocated for this project and 21 centres have been identified by the
Department of Communications. Let me give hon members the background. Until
the 1990s no single national number for reporting emergencies existed in
South Africa. This resulted in countless numbers for emergency call
centres, one for every emergency response in the service area. The
investigating committee for the instruction of a national emergency
telephone number submitted a report to Cabinet recommending that the 107
number be reserved as a primary telephone number for use in emergencies.
The present Act was promulgated in October 1993 as the National Emergency
Telephone Service Act of 1993 with minimum requirements for reporting
centres, in Gazette No 15(193).

South Africa cannot afford to have emergency numbers for every emergency
service provider. It is critical that an integrated public emergency
communication service with a single three digit toll-free number be
established for the purpose of accessing key emergency response agents,
that is the police, fire brigade, traffic department and ambulance service.
Public emergency communication centres should be established nationally and
should be accessible through fixed-line telephones, mobile phone services
such as MTN and Vodacom, and data communication such as the Internet.
National technical standards and operating procedures should be established
for public emergency calls. These standards should be applicable to all
public emergency services regardless of the discipline of the service being
provided.

A central funding mechanism should be established for purposes of
developing, planning and managing a sustainable national emergency public
communication service. An institutional capacity should be established to
manage and develop all activities pertaining to the provision of the public
emergency communication service.

La maziko aza kunceda abantu abahlala kumaphandle ukuba babenakho, ukuthi
xa befuna uncedo, batsale umnxeba besebenzisa la manani amivo mithathu,
angu-107, khon' ukuze lufumaneke ngokukhawuleza. Aza kuba luncedo ukuze
ulwaphulo-mthetho lukwazi ukuxeleka. Kuza kwaziwa ngoku apho kunokuyiwa
khona xa kufuneka kuqulunqwe ukuze kupapashwe ubungakanani bolwaphulo-
mthetho, khon' ukuze kufumaneke ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[These centres will help people who live in rural areas to use the
telephone to dial the threedigit number 107 so that they can get help. This
will enable people to report criminal activities. People will now know
where to go when crime statistics need to be published, so that the public
can get ...]

... a true reflection of the crime statistics.
Mrs I MARS: Madam Speaker, the IFP certainly has congratulated the hon the
Minister of Finance on his Budget. However, there are certain matters which
I feel have to be brought to his notice once again. The hon Barbara Hogan
has enjoined us to use very plain language when discussing the
Appropriation Bill.

In very plain language, this Bill divides the cake that is at our disposal
and, needless to say, it is not as large as we had hoped it would be. We do
acknowledge the way in which our country's finances are managed. Hopefully,
the Minister knows that we understand the many constraints that determine
the size of the slices of cake that he can allocate.

The overall Budget is progressive and will have impact in the medium to
long term. However, as I have said before, we have immediate concerns. One
of the very important matters that we have to bring to his notice is that,
as he and other speakers have mentioned, the economic imperatives are
changing and therefore this country needs a skilled labour force. The
matter of a trained labour force is being addressed by training and levies.
However, many unskilled workers, both men and women, have been made
redundant and thus are increasing the number of unemployed in our most
depressed areas. They are without the necessary resources to care for their
families.

Those of us who are always speaking on behalf of the social sector, namely
education, health and social development, know that unless we can overcome
the disparities of the past our tax base will not increase. Therefore, we
have to take a very serious look at the children of today and plan for
those of tomorrow. We should ask ourselves if we are doing all that needs
to be done to keep these children alive, healthy, ready for an adequate
education and in an environment conducive to developing their full
potential.

We in the IFP share with other parties here the very poorest of
constituencies, both urban and rural. We know of real hunger and despair.
Together with all concerned - and this does include the hon the Minister
and the Government at large - within the current resources available, can
we assure parents that their children will survive? That they will be
vaccinated, and will receive adequate treatment when they are ill? Can we
promise them a good education? All these are constitutional requirements
which demand of us that we apply our minds.
We acknowledge that much has been achieved since 1994 and much more needs
to be done. The President always refers to the high level of poverty in our
country. We know that there are many programmes planned by the Government
for diverse sectors, that are aimed at empowering people. We are also aware
that it is not only the responsibility of the social developmental sector,
but also of all the other departments of Government. But we are very
concerned that the pensions and grants available, which play such an
important part in sustaining people in the most distressed circumstances,
have barely kept up with inflation.

This has to be of great concern to this House. There are currently 17
million children under 18 years of age in our country, of whom 60% live in
extreme poverty. Of these children, 25% are severely stunted by
malnutrition. These are, we believe, the children who are, to a large
extent, dependent on the pensions and grants. We believe that there lies
the most urgent need to channel every cent that can be spared into
increasing the grants and pensions, until other interventions such as urban
and rural renewal and poverty-relief programmes from various sources take a
firm hold and improve the overall standard of living in the poorest parts
of South Africa.
We accept that the finances of our country are well managed, limitations
and constraints considered. But we have to constantly remind ourselves that
those voters whom we have the privilege to represent here have the right to
demand of us that we address ourselves to their needs. [Applause.]

Mr D J SITHOLE: Madam Speaker, the vision of the Department of Foreign
Affairs states, and I quote:


  South Africa strives for peace, stability, democracy and development on
  the African continent which is nonsexist, prosperous and united,
  contributing towards a world that is just and equitable.

This vision has guided the work of our Government on the African continent.

Umsebenzi owenziwe nguMongameli wethu kanye noMongameli waseNigeria nowase-
Algeria uyancomeka. Ukhombisa ukuthi i-Afrika izimisele ukuhlangabezana
nezinkinga zayo. [We appreciate the work that has been done by our
President together with the President of Nigeria. It shows that Africa is
prepared to face its problems.]
This vision speaks of prosperity and the unity of Africans in confronting
their problems.

Ukugxeka okwenziwa yilezi zinhlangano eziphikisayo ngokuthi uma ngabe
kunenkinga kufuneka zigxeke futhi kubulawe noma ngumuphi umuntu
ongavumelani nazo, kubonisa ukuthi lokho kuyingqondo yobandlululo. Kubonisa
futhi ingqondo emfishane nobulima bazo lezi zinhlangano.

Uma kunenkinga, kuba yibo bokuqala ekubangeni umsindo. Kodwa, ngeke ubabone
uma ngabe kukhulunywa ngenqubekela-phambili kanye nokulungiswa kwezinkinga.
Bahlalela emuva. Lolu hlelo lwe-MARP luyinqubo ebonisa ukuthi i-Afrika
izimisele ukuzibambela mathupha inqubo yokuvuselela inqubekela-phambili
yayo. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Opposition parties have shown an apartheid mentality in the way they have
criticised and their belief that anyone who opposes them should be killed.
This shows their stupidity as well as their low mentality. When there is a
problem, they are the ones who make a noise. They are silent when there are
discussions on development and problem-solving. They sit there at the back.
This MARP is a policy that shows that Africa is prepared to process its
policy of development.]

MARP speaks about the creation of peace, security and stability, not the
spilling of the blood of Zimbabweans called for by the opposition parties
and their stooges. It calls for investment in African people to enhance
good governance and improve economic growth. It does not talk about
sanctions or boycotts. What is surprising is that when the world has
recognised the need to increase investment in the continent, the Leader of
the Opposition and his uncritical followers are calling for sanctions.

Africa has resources which must be harnessed and exploited to the benefit
of all the people and not just the elite. The digital divide created by
underdevelopment, and in some instances the selfishness of the developed
nations, should be closed. To close this gap we need to increase investment
in people and information and communication technology.

The Portfolio Committee on Communications organised a hearing on Tuesday
for all stakeholders involved in this field. It was interesting to see the
commitment demonstrated by both the private and the public sectors on MARP
and the African Renaissance. We should mobilise our people to defeat the
voice of doom and failure.

I read with interest the comments made by John Dludlu, writing for Business
Day on 15 March 2001. He argues in his article that unless the plan is
managed well, ``it could stumble'', particularly over wobbly support in his
country. He goes on to cite our policy on Zimbabwe as an example of
failure. He suffers from the disadvantage that he did not read an article
by Vincent Maphai, his colleague, who made an effort to clarify issues. In
his article, Maphai demonstrates our people's commitment to fighting
against the theory of ``fight back''.

The approach by our President to Zimbabwe and the continent in general is
that of engagement and demonstrates visionary leadership and maturity.
Those who fear engagement are quick to call for blood. The involvement of
the SA Defence Force in Angola during apartheid was the result of such
short-sightedness.

It is no surprise that the Leader of the Opposition hates constructive
engagement with African countries because when he was in the former SADF
his duty was to justify its involvement in Angola. He finds it difficult to
accept the heroic role played by our new armed forces today in building a
new continent of peace and stability.

We must drag them screaming and kicking and force them to accept that they
are in Africa and they must behave like Africans. The leadership of Comrade
Mbeki demonstrates the commitment of this Government to confronting
poverty, whether in our own country or on the continent. This will be
achieved by mobilising new investments, both domestically and in foreign
markets.

It is important to mobilise all South Africans and the people of the
continent to support an improved MARP. The hosting of the Development
Calabash Conference by South Africa will advance the process of the
implementation of MARP. Our chairmanship of NAM and the hosting of the
racism conference some time this year will contribute to the achievement of
the goals we set ourselves in MARP.

The establishment of both the pan-African parliament and the African union
will add impetus to this programme. All South Africans must join the
President in selling this plan to the world and not wait to be led by
prophets of failure and doom. It is critical that we make ourselves
available to contribute both intellectually and otherwise to the
implementation and the shaping of MARP. No contribution is too small. The
ANC accepts the effort made by the Minister of Finance. [Applause.]

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Madam Speaker, hon members, I will resist the temptation
to respond to some of the more excessive statements made by the last
speaker in his diversionary excursion into Africa. I will bring us back to
South Africa and to the reality and the needs of this country at this point
in time. I would say that arguably the most important single question which
must be dealt with in this debate is the following: What must be done to
obtain investment and 6% growth per year which we need in order to be able
to reduce unemployment and poverty?

In his incisive speech earlier in this debate, the DA spokesperson on
finance, the hon Ken Andrew, posed the question as to what the missing
ingredients in investor perceptions are which are resulting in our
inability to attract either foreign direct investment or the domestic fixed
investment which we need in this country, and which we should be able to
attract. The hon Andrew dealt with some of the missing ingredients, but I
will refer to only one more, and that is the Government's inability to deal
effectively with crime in South Africa. The motion of my hon colleague
James Selfe earlier today again dramatically and tragically illustrated the
extent of that problem.

Not only does the reality of rampant criminality and our floundering
criminal justice system - if one may call it that - demoralise South
Africans of all races, but it also undermines our confidence in our own
country, inter alia as a place worth investing in. Businessmen who are
worth their salt cannot be sentimental or sloppy about what they do with
their resources. They have to be realistic and honest with themselves. That
is why in a recent authoritative survey of almost 15 000 companies in South
Africa last year crime emerged as the single most important investment
inhibiting factor for small businesses and also for larger businesses.

Because businesses are the only people who can ultimately do more than make
promises and who can actually create jobs because they do that, not
Government, their message is loud and clear. I would like to refer very
briefly to the comments of just two very prominent South African
businessmen. This appeared in the New Perspective Quarterly autumn 2000
issue. The first is Mr B Joffe of Bidvest, who said, and I quote:


  Crime is a major, vital and almost make-or-break issue in South African
  terms and all Government efforts need to be focused on eliminating crime
  from our society.

The second is Mr Herman of Investec who, when referring to the levels of
violent crime, said that crime needs to be addressed with emphasis and
vigour. He reminds us that sustaining confidence is pivotal if long-term
investment is to be ignited. He also makes the important point that
domestic confidence is every bit as important as that of potential foreign
investors on whom long-term growth will clearly depend.

Of course, the hon the Minister of Finance, with all his talents, cannot
deal with crime himself. But it is the inescapable duty of the Government
of which he is a senior member to deal with it. This Minister must carry
the message into Cabinet.

Hy moet dit tydig en ontydig doen. Die boodskap wat hy aan die Kabinet moet
oordra, lui soos volg: Gewone mense, hetsy arm of ryk, in hierdie land moet
die prys betaal vir die Regering se onvermoÃ« en onwilligheid om misdaad
effektief te hanteer en dit is onaanvaarbaar. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[He must do it constantly. The message he must convey to the Cabinet is the
following: Ordinary people in this country, whether they are rich or poor,
have to pay the price for the Government's inability and unwillingness to
deal effectively with crime, and this is unacceptable.]

In this regard, I must say that the sorry saga of the moratorium on crime
statistics is probably the most blatant attempt on the part of the
Government to conceal its ineffectiveness in dealing with crime. It has
created an untenable situation for the safety and security of our citizens
and also for the image of this country.

Against this background of what crime is doing to the image of our country,
and specifically as an investment destination, I appeal to this Minister to
try to bring his colleagues to their senses also on this important matter
in the interest, not only of our economy, but also of every single South
African. [Applause.]

Mr G C OOSTHUIZEN: Madam Speaker ... [Applause.] Madam Speaker, I thank the
ANC, the President, Comrade Mbeki and all the people in structures such as
the NEC and the National Working Committee ... [Interjections] ... for
making me feel more than welcome as an Afrikaner in the ANC movement.
[Applause.] The fact is that if an Afrikaner joins the ANC, he or she is
called a traitor, and I will deal with that later on. [Interjections.] The
fact of the matter is, if the ANC fails, this country will fail.
[Interjections.] More people should join the ANC and make their
contribution to make this country work.

As a white Afrikaner, as a South African, I had a choice before I joined
the ANC: I could have emigrated, I could have buried my head in the sand,
or I could have joined a party that really makes a difference in the lives
of all people in this country. [Interjections.] The Mandelas and the Mbekis
are defending prosperity and stability in my fatherland. I have decided to
stay in this country and to join the ANC, the only instrument in this
country for stability and change. [Applause.]
Mev die Speaker, daar kan vandag 'n verwagting bestaan dat ek hier sal
staan en vuil wasgoed was. Ek stel nie daarin belang nie. Daar kan 'n
verwagting wees dat ek na die gebrek aan visie en leierskap in die Nuwe NP
en die DA sal verwys. Ek stel ook nie daarin belang nie. Ek wil die vraag
beantwoord hoekom ek finaal besluit het om my by die ANC te skaar en by die
party aan te sluit. Die keuse was eenvoudig: dit was 'n keuse tussen Ã²f die
DA met sy ``Fight Back'' campaign, Ã²f om positief betrokke te raak by die
party wat diÃ© land na voorspoed sal lei.

My politieke pad was een van magsdeling. My politieke pad was een van
nasiebou. My politieke pad was in 'n party met leierskap wat geveg het vir
'n bydrae tot versoening in hierdie wonderlike land van ons.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Ek het my keuse gemaak en ek voel goed daaroor, want ek
wil kom om 'n bydrae te lewer om die ongelykhede van die verlede reg te
stel.

Dit was vir my as jong Afrikaner nooit 'n vraag of ek skool toe gaan nie,
of ek universiteit toe gaan; dit was daar. Die vraag is: As jy tot daardie
besef kom, wat maak jy daarmee? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Dit was 'n growwe fout van die NP om uit die Regering van Nasionale Eenheid
te loop. Ek wil hulle daaraan herinner dat hul eie manifes, Bloudruk vir
Demokrasie, vir die 1999-verkiesing praat van inklusiewe regering waar
verantwoordelikheid gedeel word om Suid-Afrika te maak werk.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Suid-Afrika, sÃª hulle, staan voor 'n keuse: 'n keuse van
Ã²f inklusiewe regering Ã²f vyandige polariserende politiek. Wat is die DA
anders as polariserende politiek waar mense en partye niks meer doen as
kritiseer en lawaai nie, geen verantwoordelikheid deel en geen werkbare
alternatief bied nie?

Die manifes sÃª ons moet ons medeburgers oortuig dat inklusiewe regering die
enigste oplossing is. Hulle sluit af deur te sÃª dat inklusiwiteit die
Regering sal versterk en ons gemeenskap en Suid-Afrika weer sal laat werk.

NÃ¡ die 1999-verkiesing was dit vir my baie duidelik dat die leierskap van
die Nuwe NP begin dwaal van hierdie pad wat hulle wou volg.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Dis bekend dat ek in strukture binne die party, by die
kongres, die hoofraad en die dagbesture my standpunt gestel het dat ons die
Wes-Kaap moet gebruik as een van die ``pivotal roles'' om weer 'n
magsdelingsmodel vir samewerking in Suid-Afrika tot stand te bring.

Wat gebeur egter? Die dag toe ek hier instap om ingesweer te word as lid
van die Nasionale Vergadering, word ek 'n verraaier genoem. Toe word ek 'n
Judas genoem. [Tussenwerpsels.] Verraad is wanneer 'n mens die waarheid
verswyg; verraad is nie wanneer jy sny met die verlede en die waarheid met
oortuiging uitleef nie. [Applous.]

Die waarheid is dat ek my nie kan vereenselwig met 'n party wat teen
transformasie is nie. Dit was die Nuwe NP wat pens en pootjies in die DP en
DA ingespring het, en wat in 'n oogwink hulle beeld as 'n rassistiese party
herstel het, want in wese nie verander nie. Die DA beywer hom toenemend vir
die herstel van die status quo en die voorregte wat mos net die witmense
voorheen geniet het. Dit is mos waar.

Die waarheid is dat hulle besig is om aan die een kant die wit kiesers te
mislei met 'n terugslaan-veldtog: Hulle is sterk manne. Hulle is gatvol.
Hulle slaan terug. Aan die ander kant probeer hulle die ander mense in
hierdie land mesmeriseer deur hier en daar 'n opportunistiese besoek aan 'n
graf of monument af te lÃª.
Die waarheid is dat ons deel is van Afrika. Ons is deel van Afrika en in
hierdie konteks is die vraag: Wat verwag ons nou eintlik van die ANC en van
pres Mbeki? Verwag ons van hom om die rand te red of verwag ons van hom om
van Afrika 'n plek te maak waar die rand homself kan red?

Die DA, soos duidelik blyk uit hul uitsprake, wil konflik met Mnr Mugabe
hÃª, wat moontlik die rand kan red, maar in die proses gaan dit 'n nuwe
Afrika-magstryd tot gevolg hÃª. Ons in die ANC wil eerder konflik oplos en
ontwikkeling en groei verseker. Konflik moet op hierdie kontinent opgelos
word: Die politieke konflik, die menseregtekonflik, die etniese konflik,
die rassekonflik, die waterkonflik, die voedselkonflik en die
mineralekonflik.

Die feit van die saak is dat pres Mbeki die geleentheid moet kry om sy
visie vir 'n Afrika Renaissance volledig te kan implementeer. Suid-Afrika
het as voorloper in Afrika ook 'n opoffering om te maak. Ons sal moet
aanvaar dat ons pres Mbeki en sy leierskap ook met andere moet deel. Ons
sal net 'n nasie kan wees, omdat daar ander nasies is. Dit is mos immers
die gees van ubuntu. Ons moet daarom as Suid-Afrikaners bevoorreg en geÃ«erd
voel dat nog 'n leier in Afrika en op internasionale gebied uit ons nasie
opgestaan het. Nkosi sikelel' iAfrika. God seÃ«n Afrika. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, there could be an expectation today that I am going to
stand here and air dirty linen. I am not interested in that. There may be
an expectation that I am going to refer to the lack of vision and
leadership in the New NP and the DA. I am also not interested in that. I
want to answer the question as to why I finally decided to come out in
support of the ANC and to join the party. The choice was simple: It was a
choice between either the DA with its ``Fight Back'' campaign, or becoming
positively involved in the party which will lead this country to
prosperity.

My political path was one of power-sharing. My political path was one of
nation-building. My political path was in a party with leadership which
fought for a contribution to reconciliation in this wonderful country of
ours. [Interjections.] I have made my choice and feel good about it,
because I want to make a contribution to rectify the inequalities of the
past.

As a young Afrikaner for me there was never a question of whether I would
go to school, whether I would go to university; it was there. The question
is: If you come to that realisation, what do you do with it?
[Interjections.]

It was a glaring error on the part of the NP to leave the Government of
National Unity. I want to remind them that their own manifesto, Bloudruk
vir Demokrasie, for the 1999 elections speaks about inclusive government
where responsibility is shared to make South Africa work. [Interjections.]
South Africa, they say, stands before a choice: A choice of either
inclusive government or hostile polarising politics. What is the DA other
than polarising politics where people and parties do nothing more than
criticise and make a noise, do not share responsibility and offer no
workable alternative?

The manifesto says we should convince our fellow citizens that inclusive
government is the only solution. They conclude by saying that inclusivity
will strengthen the Government and will make our community and South Africa
work once again.

After the 1999 election it was very clear to me that the leadership of the
New NP was starting to deviate from this path that they wanted to follow.
[Interjections.] It is known that in structures within the party, at the
congress, the national executive and the management committees I stated my
position that we should use the Western Cape as one of the pivotal roles
once again to establish a power-sharing model for co-operation in South
Africa.

However, what happened? The day I walked in here to be sworn in as a member
of the National Assembly, I was labelled a traitor. I was then called a
Judas. [Interjections.] Treason is when one hides the truth; treason is not
when one cuts one's ties with the past and lives the truth with conviction.
[Applause.]

The truth is that I cannot identify with a party which is opposed to
transformation. It was the New NP which leapt into the DP and DA with boots
and all, and which restored their image as a racist party, which did not
change in essence, in the wink of an eye. The DA is increasingly working
for the restoration of the status quo and the privileges which only the
white people enjoyed previously. This is true, after all.

The truth is that on the one hand they are misleading the white voters with
a ``fight back'' campaign: they are strong men. They are fed up. They are
fighting back. On the other hand, they are trying to mesmerise the other
people in this country by here and there paying an opportunistic visit to a
grave or a monument.

The truth is that we are part of Africa. We are part of Africa and in this
context the question is: What do we really expect of the ANC and of
President Mbeki? Do we expect him to rescue the rand or do we expect him to
make Africa a place in which the rand can rescue itself?

The DA, as is clear from their statements, wants conflict with Mr Mugabe,
which could possibly rescue the rand, but in the process will lead to a new
power struggle in Africa. We in the ANC would rather solve conflict and
ensure development and growth. Conflict must be resolved on this continent:
the political conflict, the human rights conflict, the ethnic conflict, the
racial conflict, the water conflict, the food conflict and the minerals
conflict.

The fact of the matter is that President Mbeki must have the opportunity
fully to implement his vision for an African Renaissance. As a pioneer in
Africa South Africa also has a sacrifice to make. We will have to accept
that we also have to share President Mbeki and his leadership with others.
It will only be possible for us to be a nation because there are other
nations. After all, this is the spirit of ubuntu. As South Africans we
should therefore feel privileged and honoured that another leader in Africa
and in the international arena has arisen from our nation. Nkosi sikelel'
iAfrika. God bless Africa. [Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, are you rising on a point of order?

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to find out whether it is
parliamentary for Mr Gibson to continue to brood on how to make South
Africa white? [Laughter]

The SPEAKER: Order! It is perfectly in order for members of this House to
brood on whatever they do. [Interjections.]
Sister B NCUBE: Madam Speaker, Ministers and members of the House, I would
like to begin my speech with the South African Bishops Pastoral statement
on economic justice in South Africa, entitled ``Bridging the gap between
the rich and the poor in South Africa'', issued in May 1999. The statement
said: ``The defining characteristic of our economy is that of a vast
disparity in income between rich and poor.'' It further said: ``As long as
the gap remains at its current scandalous level, the future of our country
is at risk.''

To emphasise the above statement, I also wish to echo Pope Paul VI's letter
on the Development of Peoples. On the issues of planning and reform, he
wrote:


  The present situation must be faced with courage and the injustices
  linked with it must be fought against and overcome. Development demands
  bold transformation and far-reaching innovations. Urgent reforms must be
  undertaken without delay. It is for each to take his or her own share in
  them.

The point of departure for Pope Paul VI is that, although times have
changed, the situation has basically remained the same. There are those who
still remember the fleshpots of Egypt with nostalgia, and those who see the
relevance of the pontiff's words and vow that the history of slavery should
never be repeated in their lifetime.

The above social contradictions are premised on the fact that,
historically, the wealth of our country has been distributed in a way which
discriminated against the majority of our black people. The decisive
victory by the ANC in both the national and local democratic elections of
1999 and 2000 constituted a giant step forward in the process of effecting
thorough ongoing transformation and change in our country. The opportunity
to effect transformation, accountability and development is now.

The President's state of the nation address of 2001, which received an
overwhelmingly positive response, paved the way for a dedicated discussion
to further develop a cross-sector dialogue on strategies to overcome
inequalities and the alleviation of poverty in South Africa, thus setting
the agenda for the nation. The much-applauded Budget Speech of the Minister
of Finance, Trevor Manuel, confirms the determination of the ANC-led
Government to face the challenges of economic transformation and
development. This ANC-led Government is determined to be an agent of
development, change and peace, using its popular mandate.

The Budget encapsulates key components of the Reconstruction and
Development Programme. These include poverty alleviation, job creation,
rural development, skills transfer, the empowerment of women, youth
empowerment, empowerment of the disabled, education, local economic
development, meaningful ownership and access to finance - the list goes on.
The Budget fulfils the mission of the ANC, being a fundamental transformer
of the economy, in order to empower the black majority of our country, to
eliminate poverty and the extreme inequalities generated by the apartheid
system, to generate productive employment for people and to ensure balanced
South African economic development.

The Government does not underestimate the problems it inherited from its
past history. It also acknowledges that it will not overcome them within a
short period and that it has a very long way to go in transforming the
socioeconomic situation. A significant development in the transformation
programme of our Government has been the restructuring of municipalities.
Transforming local government has opened an opportunity for South Africans
to share resources, as well as to promote equality, reconciliation and
nation-building.

The redemarcation of municipalities and ward boundaries facilitates the
financial viability of especially those municipalities which did not cover
a broad enough tax base to ensure sufficient revenue. Metro governments
were also divided between numerous different councils, and this did not
encourage integrated approaches to planning. Rural municipalities often
lacked meaningful powers, and district councils sometimes covered such a
large area that it was impossible to achieve integrated development and
accountability.

The issue is not about the drawing of lines on a map. The significance of
the redemarcation process is how these new places are to be governed,
whether the correct balance is struck between the realistic provision of
different types of services in both urban and rural areas, the promotion of
conditions that will attract investments and create jobs, and the
conservation and expansion of the local revenue bases. The restructuring of
municipalities should be seen as a step towards addressing the ills of the
past that brought about enormous suffering on the part of disadvantaged
communities. If implemented and managed carefully, this process is a
powerful instrument that could encourage equality, reconciliation and
nation-building.

The question that remains to be answered by South Africans is: What must be
done to achieve sustainable solutions? The new legislative framework of
local government facilitates racial integration and economic redistribution
and also strengthens the service delivery capacity of municipalities. The
whole transformation programme goes a long way in entrenching sustainable
solutions.

For the first time in our country's history communities can, through IDPs
and ward committees, officially participate in the process of determining
their future. Through the process of IDPs, municipalities have been
afforded an opportunity to work more effectively with communities and
convert their opinions into public policies. For the first time the ANC has
fulfilled the declaration of the Freedom Charter which says, ``the people
shall govern''.

The consolidated municipality infrastructure programme and local economic
development fund are major instruments aimed at enhancing Government's
ability to address poverty alleviation and create jobs. The Department of
Provincial and Local Government has developed policy frameworks in order to
monitor municipal finances and provide technical support to municipalities
in financial difficulties.

The allocation of R6 billion to both the urban renewal and the rural
development strategies for the next three years is definitely welcomed, and
the availability of financial resources is the key guarantee for the
implementation of these programmes. However, the ultimate success of the
new system of local government, and the acceleration of the restructuring
of municipalities, require councillors with a more developed sense of
leadership and civic commitment and equipped with a mix of financial an
legislative skills.

The initiative of the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, Sydney
Mufamadi, in appointing an advisory body is also welcomed. This body,
characterised by diverse skills and backgrounds, is indisputably a much-
needed resource. We would like to wish this advisory board success in its
oversight function of monitoring and implementing the new and complex
system of local government. Special thanks go to ... [Time expired.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Speaker and hon members, the Bill before us
represents a statement of intent by the Government for the forthcoming
year. As such, we need to evaluate whether these intentions are attainable.
I would therefore like to focus on certain matters that will be central to
the success or failure of this Budget.

The first issue that will be central to the success of the Budget is the
restructuring of state assets. The UDM supports these efforts on condition
that they benefit all South Africans, and that they accelerate the creation
of infrastructure, attract long-term investment, provide jobs and enhance
local ownership. We are satisfied that these crucial matters have been
taken on board by the Government.

We are equally anxious that these well-intentioned plans may unravel in the
implementation phase. The hon the Minister of Finance has projected
proceeds from this process for the forthcoming year to be R18 billion. If
that amount does not materialise it would be virtually impossible to keep
the Budget deficit at 2,5%. Consequently, years of building up a track
record of fiscal discipline will go down the drain.

The Budget Review indicates clearly the wide range of activities that the
Government is engaged in, and the goals that it has set. The UDM urges the
Government to balance the need to generate revenue through this
restructuring process, with the need to create jobs and infrastructure and
accommodate long-term considerations. For instance, with regard to the long-
term implications for previously disadvantaged people, what the UDM would
like to see more clearly throughout this process is the role of black
economic empowerment. Is the Government going to use this opportunity to
empower the disadvantaged people of South Africa?

Another matter that will determine the success or failure of the Budget is
the way in which it is developed. The UDM is concerned that Parliament and
other major social role-players are not adequately involved in the process
of drafting the Budget. This has serious implications because the success
of the Budget, especially the one before us, depends on the wholehearted
support of all sectors of society. This year, once again, Cosatu and a
sector of civil society boycotted the Budget, and Parliament plays more of
a rubberstamp role than anything else. This type of economic schizophrenia
is damaging not only to the implementation of the Budget, but also to the
economy as a whole.
Let us take, for instance, the restructuring of state assets that I
referred to earlier. How will the Government attain success if its social
partners do not agree on the central principles of that process? The
Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Finance has advocated a change in
this regard. The UDM fully supports this move. We believe that section
77(2) of the Constitution can and must receive serious attention for the
benefit of all South Africans. It will give all South Africans the
opportunity to participate in building a stronger, just South Africa. The
UDM supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr L V J NGCULU: Madam Speaker, members of the Cabinet, hon members, at no
other point in time have we ever been as well-placed as we are today to
take decisive steps towards the creation of a humane and people-centred
society. In the course of a mere decade we ended the entrenched and
pernicious system of apartheid white minority rule, as our President
declared last year.

In less than a decade Defence spending has come down from 13% in the 1980s
to less than 5% of total Government spending. Our Government has used the
cuts in Defence spending to allocate more resources to social spending and
to provide much-needed resources to the fight against crime.

The Government, understanding the crucial role the Defence Force has to
play in defence of our sovereignty, continues to ensure that the allocation
of the Budget meets these demands. Therefore, we heartily welcome the
appropriation given to Defence. We are certain that it will go a long way
in ensuring that our Defence Force is ready and prepared to meet its
challenges, now and in the near future.

The democratic South Africa has changed the focus and post of the SANDF.
National security is no longer viewed as predominantly a military problem.
It has been broadened to incorporate socioeconomic factors. Our foreign
policy has moved away from an adversarial and aggressive policy into one
that promotes coexistence with its neighbours. The end of apartheid has, of
course, given democratic South Africa a morally prominent position in
international relations. As South Africans we are proud to note that we are
no longer viewed as a threat to our neighbours but as reliable partners.

The expectations of South Africans are enormous. This will continue to put
pressure on our already limited Budget, and the allocations to the
Department of Defence should, therefore, take these pressures into account.
Peacekeeping operations and humanitarian missions will continue to demand
that we spend large sums of money on the South African National Defence
Force. Again we must salute our Government for the allocation of the most
needed resources to the air force and the navy. This package will not only
greatly boost the morale of the SANDF, but will equally make it even more
confident about meeting future demands.

Within a short time the SANDF has done things that will be memorable and
remain forever etched on the hearts, not only of South Africans, but also
of the whole world. In this regard it is proper to once again underscore
its role in Mpumalanga and Mozambique during the floods; its role in
KwaZulu-Natal when called upon to assist during the outbreak of cholera and
foot-and-mouth disease; and its support to the SAPS in general, and in
particular in Tsolo, Richmond and the Cape Flats. These operations have
indeed contributed to the stabilisation of these areas.

The use of our flagship Outeniqua as operational quarters for the President
in mediating peace talks in the DRC is yet another example. When Kenya
faced a crisis after a devastating bomb blast which killed many people, we
were again not found wanting. During times of pain and hardship, the SANDF
presented the human face of a caring neighbour.

We are aware of the challenges these responsibilities represent, yet these
are the responsibilities we should not shirk. Thanks to our role in
Lesotho, a ray of hope has emerged as Lesotho is moving forward to find a
new electoral system and stability has prevailed. How then can we not take
pride when these seminal and laudable displays of patriotism and
internationalism are appreciated not only by ourselves but by the whole
world?

The SANDF has received many accolades. Here in Parliament itself we were
graced by the presence of officers from the defence force, when Parliament
devoted an entire debate to recognising its role. The UK government has
honoured the SANDF with the Prince Phillip Helicopter Award. The US
government has honoured it with the Higgins and Langley Memorial Awards.
These accolades also go to our Government under the illustrious leadership
of our President, Comrade Thabo Mbeki.

In the words of the Minister of Finance, these accolades tell the story of
an irrevocable and powerful transformation, where we have sought to heal
the scars and nurture the tree; where we have sought to show our children
that we have the power to enjoy the sweet fruit of liberty - the sweet
fruit of liberty which many young South Africans could not enjoy because
they sought to remove from our country an inhumane and cruel system.

Some in this House will never understand how this ANC, which was subjected
to murder, exile and imprisonment, could still be so magnanimous. They will
never understand the organisation which, after eight decades of illegality,
can still hold dear the declaration of its founding fathers: we are one
people. We can still stand on the podium and declare that as we are one
people, no African child should ever walk in fear of guns or war. We want
the African child to enjoy the sweet fruit of liberty.

As we celebrate this people's budget, we must once more think of the
African child. Our defence force is proud to be associated with this. As we
celebrate this budget we know that the allocation by the Minister of
Finance has reinforced the resolve of the Defence Force to be committed to
peace and stability. It will march in step, to display its commitment to
our values. We will watch full of pride, as the cause we pursued is still
on course. In this journey to a better life for all we shall resonate:
Sikhokele Thabo! [Lead us, Thabo!] [Applause.]

Mrs N MAHLAWE: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon members, I rise this
morning to make my maiden speech. [Applause.] I find it pleasing that
everyone who speaks for the first time at this podium makes a maiden
speech, even if he is a male. It clearly indicates that women are powerful.
[Applause.]

On a more serious note, I would like to briefly make a few observations on
the address of the President to the nation and the Budget Speech of the
Minister of Finance. I shall refer to two extracts that bear some
similarity and which indicate that this Government is committed to
eradicate poverty in this country. The President referred to:

  ... endemic and widespread poverty and gross imbalances in levels of
  development and the distribution of wealth ... a past of an economy that
  was immersed in a crisis that was destined to worsen ... a past of the
  denial of freedom to the majority, of gross violation of human rights and
  repression ...''

The Minister of Finance, in a roundabout way, in his Budget Speech,
reversed the gloomy picture that was portrayed in the President's speech.
As he stated:


  We have sought to remove the thorns of neglect and inhumanity, to restore
  pride and dignity, to lift the crushing weight of poverty and
  disempowerment. We have sought to heal the scars and nurture the tree. We
  have sought to show our children that we have the power to enjoy the
  sweet fruit of liberty.

How sweet those words sound! [Laughter.]

To those who have wounds to be healed, this sweet Budget is a vehicle which
transports sweet fruit to millions of hungry people in this country. It has
a profound effect even on the poorest of the poor - the elderly men and
women throughout this country who stand in long queues waiting for their
grants. The increase, therefore, to R470 per month will go a long way to
address their plight. But, I dare say it is not enough, especially to those
groups who still cherish the African values of family cohesion espoused
through extended families. We also welcome the increase of the child
support grant, but I dare say that this type of grant has to be handled
with caution as it may result in abuse, especially where our teenage girls
are concerned.

This country has nine provinces whose needs differ according to their
different situations. KwaZulu-Natal, the Northern Province and the Eastern
Cape, for instance, are rated as poor provinces because of their rural
nature, the Eastern Cape being the poorest of these. The R16 billion
allocated to provinces for priority needs and service delivery is
appreciated, but the provinces should be prioritised according to their
needs. We applaud the R2,6 billion allocated to local government and, of
course, the projected increase to R3,6 billion in the 2003-04 financial
year. We hope that it will serve to bridge the gap between urban and rural
areas.

I would like to conclude by saying allocating money will not just make
visible differences. This country calls on all the members here to unite in
action in order to effect fundamental changes. We are called upon to assist
the Government in condemning those who steal the wealth and money of the
state. We heard in the media about what happened in the Eastern Cape to
some people in the department of finance. We also heard about the decision
that has been taken by the Premier of Mpumalanga.

As members of Parliament, we also have to assist in all respects to help
fight those who rob and murder, as well as those who hijack and kill
innocent victims. We have to condemn those who settle scores through the
barrel of a gun. Therefore, let us all unite in action for change,
regardless of our political affiliation. I call upon members to remember
the wise words that were spoken by the then Deputy President, now
President, at Midrand in 1998 when he said:


  The time has come that we call a halt to the seemingly socially approved
  deification of the acquisition of material wealth and the abuse of state
  power to impoverish the people and deny our continent the possibility to
  achieve sustainable economic development. Africa cannot renew herself
  where its upper echelons are a mere parasite on the rest of the society,
  enjoying a self-endowed mandate to use their political power.

[Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, hon President, first of all, let me
congratulate the Minister of Finance on his Budget Speech, which was
largely positive and showing signs of a needs-based Budget. Of course, the
proof of the sweet fruit of liberty shall be in the eating, not in the nice
words. The PAC welcomes some aspects of this Budget, especially as it
relates to tax incentives, so as to encourage small business to create
jobs.

If we must solve many of our economic problems, including unemployment, it
is logical that domestic investors must not only be encouraged with words,
but must be assisted financially through bank facilities to develop into
successful businessmen and women. Tax cuts for the poor and middle-income
earners are a step in the right direction. The lowering of the price of
paraffin for millions of the poor and that of diesel for our farmers is
good news.
With regard to education, 77,4% of the population of this country was
denied any or given an inferior education for many years. It is unfortunate
that the present Government does not realise that a nation without
education and skills of its own cannot advance rapidly and will constantly
be depending on foreign technical and professional skills, hence the PAC's
proposal for free education for students coming from poor homes.

It is when we look back at many years of African neglect, educationally,
that we conclude that the R10 billion allocated for education, though an
improvement, is not adequate. Thousands of African students are unable to
enter universities and technikons in sufficient numbers. These institutions
are underfunded and always owe millions of rands in debt.

Thousands of primary and secondary pupils attend classes in dilapidated
school buildings with hardly any laboratories, let alone libraries, in
conditions in which, in many cases, one teacher teaches over 100 children
in a class, sometimes sitting on the floor, and in situations in which
teachers are being retrenched, insecure and demoralised. This is the
opposite of tasting the sweet fruit of liberty. The PAC hopes that the bulk
of the R10 billion will be spent in the neediest communities of this
country.

In 1999 old-age pensioners earned R520. This was increased to R540 last
year. The PAC at that time proposed a monthly amount of R700. The R30
increase this year does not go far at all when inflation is taken into
consideration. In this days of high levels of unemployment, in many poverty-
stricken homes, the old- age pension is the only source of income.
Pensioners share it with their unemployed grandchildren. They help keep
many youths out of crime.

The standard that is used for raising salaries of MPs must be used when
raising the pensions of the aged and the disabled. As things stand, the
sweet taste of the fruit of liberty is monopolised by the leaders of this
country. What with the Cabinet being reported to have approved a R300
million luxury aircraft for the President of this country, whilst many of
our clinics and hospitals have shortages of medicines and drugs, and nurses
and doctors are not well-paid.

With crime escalating in this country and undermining the economy,
increasing poverty, disease and ignorance, it is clear that the R300
million could have been put to better use until the poverty that everybody
is talking about has been dented, and the economy and employment situation
are much improved. It is estimated that the R300 million, if properly used,
would buy four new vehicles for every police station in the country. Some
police stations in this country have not a single vehicle. How can our
police be expected to stop this endemic crime when they are so ill-
equipped?

For development in the rural areas, I simply want to repeat that the people
of these impoverished and underdeveloped areas cannot wait another minute.
They desperately need good roads, bridges, clean water, more land, and
training in farming. Regarding reparations of R800 million to victims of
apartheid, crimes against humanity, I am compelled to say that all our
martyrs, including Comrade Chris Hani, are turning in their graves. It is
treacherous in the extreme that after our martyrs have made the supreme
sacrifice to end the crime against humanity, our people are still treated
as if they are sub-humans.

Reparations amounting to 132 billion gold marks was paid to the Jews for
the crime against humanity committed against them. In September 1987 the US
House of Representatives voted over one billion dollars to be paid to the
Japanese as reparation for crimes against humanity committed against them.
The South Koreans have also received substantial amounts of money as
reparation for similar crimes against them.

In South Africa the crimes against humanity committed against Africans in
this country have been treated perfidiously. Our international legal right
regarding crime against humanity has been treated frivolously. We have been
treated differently from other victims of crime against humanity in other
parts of the world. In the view of the PAC, R800 million for the crime of
apartheid is peanuts. It is an insult to our intelligence.

The PAC supports the Appropriation Bill, but not as it relates to this
lousy Â£78 million as reparation for the crime against humanity committed
against the people of this country. This is a gross violation of the
natural law of justice. Justice is truth in action.

Mr G D SCHNEEMAN: Madam Speaker, Comrade President, comrades, hon members,
day by day, over the past seven years, the fruits of delivery have become
increasingly more evident.

In 1994, when the ANC was elected by an overwhelming majority of the people
of South Africa a tree of delivery was planted in every city, town and
village across our land. These trees have borne much fruit, which have been
delivered to our people in the form of schools, clinics, water and
electricity, to name but a few.

In particular I want to look at the fruit of housing. Our country was
developed in a distorted manner under apartheid policies. The majority of
our people were housed in areas away from urban opportunities, such as
economic and social activities. As a result of this, our country bears the
results of those policies today.

There was no building programme in place between 1970 and 1994. We should
therefore not pretend, as some do in this House, that simply by the marking
of a cross on a ballot paper in 1994, the development patterns of the past
suddenly disappeared. That was only the start of the rebuilding process of
this country, which this ANC-led Government is directing.
Under the leadership of the ANC-led Government, we continue to move further
away from those painful development practices of the past. During the past
seven years the delivery of houses has touched every part of our country.
As one travels the length and breadth of our land, the building programme
of houses is clearly evident. Across the country people have moved into,
are moving into, and will continue moving into, new houses.

Recently, while in Diepsloot, I talked to the people who had moved into new
houses. They told me that their lives had been changed, and that the ANC
had lived up to its promises. [Applause.] This is the message which echoes
throughout the country. But, this a message which is hardly audible here in
the Western Cape, where the lack of progress under the DA is clearly
evident. [Interjections.]

Over the past seven years the lives of over five million people have been
changed and uplifted as they have gained access to new homes.
[Interjections.] We have also seen the transfer of over 300 000 housing
units to occupants, representing an asset base of R28 billion. This is
surely a clear indication that delivery has taken place. But this is not
enough, and still more needs to be done.
The Department of Housing strives to ensure that every South African has
access to adequate housing, within sustainable settlements, that ensures
privacy and provides adequate protection against the elements. Housing
assistance to the poor is the cornerstone of the department's approach.

For the first time in the history of South Africa the poor are a priority
of Government. The poor are a priority of the ANC-led Government.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] Under the bold and visionary leadership of
President Thabo Mbeki, the ANC-led Government continues to develop new
programmes to deal with the eradication of poverty. [Interjections.]

An indication of this is the announcement by President Mbeki in his state
of the nation address of the Integrated Rural Development Strategy and the
Urban Renewal Programme. In both of these programmes we will see the
working together of all three spheres of government, and the relevant
ministries, to ensure a co-ordinated implementation process, of which
housing will be one of the issues to be addressed. [Interjections.] We will
see specific areas of our country totally transformed and properly
developed, which will result in the economic upliftment of whole
communities.

In the provision for housing, there are those who see fit to ensure that
they benefit by enriching themselves at the expense of those who wait
patiently. I am saying to those individuals in society who are involved in
these practices that they will be caught and their short-lived gains will
come to an end.

It should not be Government alone that participates in the provision of
housing. There are many spheres of society which can play a meaningful role
in this field. In particular, financial institutions need to play a more
active role by providing finance to those who do not have access to
finance. This often leads to overcrowding as landlords often seek to enrich
themselves through the exploitation of others, and it also often leads to
slum conditions developing in urban areas.

Housing developments are often delayed due to the objections of landowners
and property owners. Although some of these objections may be based on
sound reasons, they are often simply to ensure that the integration of
society does not take place. In the words of President Mbeki, people need
to be mobilised so that they become active participants in the processes
targeted at the upliftment of their own communities.

We all have to work together as a united nation to overcome the problems of
the past and to ensure that we create a better country, not only for
ourselves but also for our children. This Budget will ensure that we
continue to create a better life for all. In 1994 the majority of our
people said, to the ANC, with one loud voice: Let the building begin. In
1999, they said: Let the building continue. In 2004 they will say: Continue
building until you have finished. [Applause.]

Miss J E SOSIBO: Madam Speaker, hon President and members of the House, in
his concluding remarks during his speech on the 2000-01 Safety and Security
Vote in this House, the hon the Minister Comrade Steve Tshwete said:


  As my concluding remarks, I would like to remind hon members in this
  House that crime is not a political toy but, rather, a matter of life and
  death which impacts upon all levels of society.
Nothing can closer to the truth. As we debate this Appropriation Bill, we
need reasonable and loyal citizens of this country to take cognisance of
the fact that we have a responsibility before us to rid this country of the
scourge of crime of which those in the opposition benches want to create a
political football.

Lest they have forgotten, we wish to remind them that the voices that claim
to be concerned about an inadequate budget for the SAPS and alleged
increase in crime, which suddenly and strangely they have become champions
of, are the very same people that should be ashamed to be sharing seats
with us today to debate this Bill that aims to defeat crime. These very
people who now are pretending to be champions of democracy and the fight
against crime were the perpetrators of and accomplices in the disgusting
decisions that were taken in this House, not so long ago, which directly
impacted on and resulted in the spiralling crime rate that we are now
confronting.

Nevertheless we, the ANC, as the true representatives of the masses of
people, who not only realised and experienced the existence of crime after
1994, but who have also been subjected to more brutal and serious criminal
conditions since the apartheid era, have an obligation and a mission to
fulfil. The mission ahead of us today is to ensure that we create conducive
conditions for peace and stability and eradicate crime in all its
manifestations.

The increase in the Budget of the Department of Safety and Security in the
crime prevention aspect has to be welcomed and this will, according to
crime experts, see the deployment of almost 1 000 police officers out on
the streets to fight crime in the next three years. We will now have more
cops on the beat and also improved salaries for our men and women in blue
uniform.

In order for the police to be able to effectively fight crime, and also
prevent the occurrence thereof, they need favourable working conditions.
Much has been said in the past about the deteriorating conditions under
which our policemen and women work, as if these were a direct result of the
advent of democracy in our country.

We need to constantly remind our society by highlighting that the cause of
the disgusting mess we are now attempting to clean up in the Police
Service, which nearly demoralised the hard-working and ever active members
of the SAPS, cannot be found anywhere but in the remnants of a system whose
minority supporters are found right in this House. They should be ashamed
that we are today addressing this issue in their presence. They should also
be thankful for the wisdom of our leaders who, through the spirit of
reconciliation, are today able to sit side by side with us after causing
such horrible crimes against the majority of our people.

We are on course to ensure that the way forward, as charted by our
President, the hon Comrade Thabo Mbeki, during his state of the nation
address to Parliament, is indeed fulfilled, and that the fight against
crime remains a priority in our pursuit to building a better life for all
our people. The increase in the Budget seeks to ensure that members of the
SAPS are effectively equipped to carry out their duties. The purchasing of
more vehicles, the construction of more police stations in this coming
financial year and the employment of more reservists and administrative
personnel is, on its own, a glaring picture of how committed our Government
is to fighting, crime and creating conditions conducive to our police
members successfully executing this function.

I wish to reiterate that the fight against crime is not a political toy,
but a responsibility of all of us. The involvement of our people in
constitutionally established structures, such as Community Police Forums,
needs to be encouraged so that the campaign to deal with criminal elements
in our midst finds ground at the local level, where crime occurs.

The integrated approach, as highlighted by our hon President in his address
to the joint sitting of this House, has been able to yield tangible results
in our criminal justice system. One needs to mention here the successes
achieved by the Social Crime Prevention Strategy, which is focused on
partnership interventions in support of an integrated approach to crime
prevention and poverty alleviation in identified pilot areas.

Ours is not to claim easy victories through dubious and cheap political
propaganda seeking to score points out of a legacy of apartheid. Ours is to
deliver to the people so that they are witnesses for themselves. The people
of Mdantsane, Motherwell, Khayelitsha and Mitchells Plain, who are
beneficiaries of the urban renewal project, which has significantly
contributed to the reduction of crime in these areas through the Social
Crime Prevention Strategy, are living witnesses of this delivery. They do
not need the DP-aligned so-called political analysts and political
propagandists to tell them.

We need to give further support to this co-ordinated approach of our
successful campaign against crime as shown by the role-players involved in
the criminal justice system. We have a duty and mission to consolidate this
year our campaign against high-crime areas, organised crime, including
urban terrorism, crimes against women and children, corruption, to name but
a few.

The people gave the ANC a mandate to lead them and govern this country to
make a better life for them. We will never deviate from that mandate. The
fight against crime is an issue of national importance that needs the
support of all patriotic sons and daughters of this country. Our people,
the true patriots, will never migrate and turn their backs on their beloved
country to adopt New Zealand or Australia as their homeland, but will
continue to make every effort to ensure that the ANC succeeds in
eradicating crime and creating a prosperous, peaceful and stable South
Africa. We, in the ANC, support this Appropriation Bill. [Applause.]

Mr G E BALOI: Madam Speaker, hon President, all the Ministers represented
here, the purpose of this Bill is to appropriate an amount of money for the
requirements of the state in respect of the financial year ending 31 March
2002. The amounts of money appropriated for the requirements of the state
are taken out of the National Revenue Fund. However, because the money is
taken from the National Revenue Fund, it is the nation's asset and has to
work for its owner.

We in the UCDP say let the money be used correctly, and there should be a
report-back on what the money has done. We also join hands with the
President and the Minister of Finance - in fact, with all of them, in their
struggle of rooting out corruption in all spheres of government. Let all of
us join hands in helping the Government fight crime, which is demolishing
and crippling our new democracy.

Motsogapele a re: Mmatlakgomo kodumela, o etse mhatasediba.
Re tshwanela ke go ela tlhoko dilo tsa rona, bogolosegolo matlotlo a Puso.
Fa re lebelela Lefapha la Temothuo le Merero ya Mafatshe, re bona le filwe
go se gontsi, le fa go jalo sejo sennye ga se fete molomo. Re kopa gore
Puso e thuse balemirui ka gonne ba tlhasetswe ke komelelo. A bonnye jo
Lefapha le bo boneng bo dirisiwe go thusa ba ba maleba.

Lefapha la Tlhaeletsano le bone R487,523m. A re bone thelebisene le radio
di fitlha kwa magaeng a a kgakala jaaka kwa bophirima jwa Porofense ya
Bokone Bophirima, ka batho ba le bona ba duela dilaesense. (Translation of
Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[There is an old saying that one should be determined when one wants to
achieve one's goal. We must take care of our things, particularly the
Government's funds. Looking at the Department of Agriculture and Land
Affairs, we realise that not enough has been allocated to it. Be that as it
may, half a loaf is better than no bread. We ask the Government to help
farmers because they are experiencing drought. Let the little that the
department has been allocated be used to help those who need help.

The Department of Communications received R487,523 million. We want to see
television and radio reaching the deep rural areas such as those of the
North West province, because these people also pay their licence fees.]

The Department of Provincial and Local Government received the lion's share
totalling R4 279,165 million. We in the UCDP want to see the changes in our
provinces. We know that it still has to be allocated to nine provinces. We
are calling on the Minister in charge of this department to frequent
provinces to see whether delivery is taking place or not. We are totally
against what is happening in the provincial department of provincial and
local government in our province, North West. It brings the whole
Government into disrepute. However, it is not yet too late to rectify the
situation.

The Minister's Budget in respect of the financial year ending 31 March 2002
is the best ever. If one takes a look at the Department of Safety and
Security, one sees that the Government of the day is really committed to
creating jobs in this financial year. We in the UCDP cannot and will not
stop this nation-building mechanism. The UCDP accepts the Bill. Let the
enemies of the Government live long in order to see its progress.
[Applause.]

Mr N B FIHLA: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Ministers and hon members
of the House, the topic that I am going to deal with today is prison
population size, and about problems and solutions.

The world today is gradually changing its attitude from the retributive
justice system to restorative justice. It is looking at other methods of
punishment of offenders which, instead of brutalising and dehumanising
inmates, humanises and normalises human beings. A country is judged by its
treatment of its prison inmates. This means that other means of punishment
have to be looked at.

There is a paradox which exists concerning the function of prisons in our
society. Are prisons primarily places of detention and punishment or are
they places of rehabilitation and reparation? This is the question. The
conflicting goals of punishment and rehabilitation which the prisons are
faced with, are indeed a dilemma, not only for the prisons, but also for
the communities which set these goals. How does one punish and rehabilitate
a person at the same time? These two paradoxical concepts, punishment and
rehabilitation, lead to overcrowding in prisons.
The problems in South African prisons are not unique. Almost all countries
around the world face the same problems as a result of overcrowding. The
United States of America has one of the highest number of prisoners for
every 100 000 members of the general population in the world. Another
country with a similarly high proportion of prison inmates is Russia, which
has 695 prisoners per 100 000 members of the population. The United
Kingdom, along with Portugal and Spain, has one of the highest uses of
imprisonment amongst Western European countries. In contrast, Sweden,
Denmark and Switzerland show the lowest use of imprisonment. Canada is
outranked only by the USA in terms of its high incarceration rate. Despite
Government's policy in promoting community responsibility and community-
based sentencing, the courts continue to rely excessively on incarceration
as a punishment for crime.

Overcrowding is a problem in prisons in many South American countries. What
is interesting here is that high rates of incarceration are not
characteristic of this region. Their major problem in the region is the
high percentage of prisoners awaiting trial. In 1995 in Uruguay 80% of all
prisoners were awaiting trial. The problem of a large awaiting trial
prisoner population is mainly as a result of problems in processing in the
judiciary. The use of true alternatives to incarceration is almost
nonexistent in South America.

Overcrowding in prisons is a common phenomenon experienced in many
countries of the world today. According to some observers, overcrowding is
more than a problem in some countries as it has reached crisis levels and
is interfering with the effective administration of the criminal justice
system. South Africa is one such country. During 1999 and 2000, the average
overcrowding of prisons was 58,4%, which is an unacceptable condition. Sri
Lanka, Thailand, India, the Phillipines and Malaysia are some of the
countries suffering under the weight of prison congestion. Even countries
such as Australia and New Zealand are concerned about the dramatic increase
of the prison population. This has meant that within the Australian
prisons, doubling up of prisoners in cells designed for one person has
become the solution.

From this one can immediately surmise that developed countries may have a
different interpretation of prison overcrowding from what it means to the
developing countries. To the developing countries single-cell accommodation
in specifications considered as minimum by developed countries would be a
luxury.

The growing number of prisoners in South Africa is the most important
factor affecting the outputs and budgets of the Department of Correctional
Services. The average daily prisoner population has risen from 121 000
during 1996 to over 162 000 by September 2000. This growth in prison
numbers is due largely to the rapid increase in the number of awaiting-
trial prisoners. The delay in bring offenders to trial is the main reason
for overcrowding in our prisons. Among the convicted prisoners admitted to
South African prisons, a high number is made up of short-term prisoners,
that is those prisoners with sentences of less than two years.

Admission of persons both as awaiting-trial and convicted prisoners for
drug-related offences has turned out to be another major factor which is
aggravating the problem of prison overcrowding in our society. The courts,
due to a lack of alternatives to imprisonment sentence them to prison,
where these offenders seldom undergo effective rehabilitation. Another
major reason for prison overcrowding in South Africa - and common in most
countries - is the inability to expand accommodation in proportion to the
rapid growth of prison population.

As for measures to reduce prison overcrowding in South Africa, we have been
confronted with this problem for the past few years and throughout this
time a number of measures have been investigated with a view to finding a
solution. However, the solution to this problem cannot be confined to the
Department of Correctional Services alone. It is a problem that has its
roots in public attitude, courts, prosecutors and prisons. Therefore,
solutions have to be found through an integrated approach with the co-
operation of all agencies concerned.

The development and establishment of additional accommodation for prisoners
may appear to be one obvious solution. The Department of Correctional
Services has undertaken to construct five new correctional facilities in
the next three years, of which two are being constructed through public-
private partnership. The problem of overcrowding of prisons could also be
reduced to a great extent by resorting to alternatives to imprisonment.

Resolution 16 of the United Nations Conference on the prevention of crime
and treatment of offenders advocates the use of noncustodial sanctions.
Some countries, such as New Zealand, Australia and Hong Kong, have over the
years developed a wide range of alternatives to imprisonment. Some of the
common alternatives encompass forfeiture and confiscation, restitution and
compensation orders, home and periodic detention, electronic monitoring and
sentencing to drug rehabilitation centres. Many countries have probation,
parole and community service, which are commonly known as traditional
alternatives to imprisonment.

The known constitutional measures are mostly community-based correction. In
South Africa, community corrections are emphasised and reinforced through
the use of electronic monitoring. The department's investment in electronic
monitoring will enable it to monitor 1 050 probationers and parolees by
March 2004. [Applause.]

Nksz B P SONJICA: Somlomo, mandiqale ngokuthabatha le nxaxheba ndazise yaye
ndikhumbuze le Ndlu ukuba ukususela ngomhla we-19 ukuya kuma ngomhla wama-
25 kuMatshi iya kube iyiVeki yaManzi.

Kwicandelo lama-27(1) loMgaqo-siseko uRhulumente uchaza amanzi
njengelungelo lomntu. Loo nto ithethe ukuba uRhulumente unoxanduva
lokuqinisekisa ukuba wonke umntu uyalixhamla eli lungelo ngokuthi afumane
amanzi acocekileyo neenkonzo zamanzi ezifanelekileyo ngokwezempilo. Le ke
iya kube iyiveki yaloo nto.

Uya kuthi ke uRhulumente kule veki agqale kwezo zinto zifuna ukuqwalaselwa
ngokubhekisele kwimicimbi yamanzi. KwiVeki yaManzi kulo nyaka iphulo
likaRhulumente ligqale ekufundiseni abantu, besebenzisana noRhulumente,
ukuba bangenza ntoni na ukuzama ukunqanda nokulwa isifo esibanga ukuhambisa
kwesisu, ngakumbi kwiindawo ezinqatyelweyo ngamanzi, amanzi acocekileyo ke
ukutsho.

Nazi ke izinto endithanda ukuba siziphawule size sizenze emva kokuba
siwakhile amanzi, ngakumbi thina bantu basemakhaya, abantu abakha amanzi
emilanjeni nabantu abasathutha amanzi emadameni nabangenawo amanzi angcono
kunalawo: Xa sivela emlanjeni masithabathe nje icetshana lebleach
siligalele kulaa emele yamanzi. Ukuba ke asinayo ibleach masiwabilise
amanzi phambi kokuba siwasebenzise.

Okwesibini, masingabeki nkedama ecaleni kwamanzi okanye ecaleni kwemilambo
namadama esikha kuwo amanzi. Kaloku kuthi kwakuna ezi nkedama zikhukuliseke
ziye kungena emanzini neentsholongwane zazo, loo nto yenza ukuba sifumane
esi sifo sibanga ukuhambisa kwesisu nezinye izifo ezibangelwa ngamanzi
angacocekanga.

Okwesithathu, kufuneka sihlambe izandla zethu phambi kokuba siphathe
ukutya. Ibalulekile loo nto kuba kaloku izandla zethu zihamba ziphatha,
ngolo hlobo zithwale iintsholongwane.

Okwesine, sihlaba iikhwelo kootitshala nakubefundisi ezinkonzweni, ngakumbi
ukususela kule veki ukubheka phambili, ukuba bancedisane noluntu befundisa
ngobungozi besifo esibanga ukuhambisa kwesisu nangeendlela zokunqanda esi
sifo kwanezinye izifo ezibangwa ngamanzi angacocekanga.

URhulumente uyazama ukuba bonke abantu abangekabi nawo amanzi acocekileyo
bawafumane. Kodwa ke loo nto ayithethi ukuba njengoko uRhulumente ezama,
yonke le nto iza kwenzeka ngaxeshanye. IRoma ayizange yakhiwe ngemini enye.
Iza kuthabatha ixesha ke le nto kwiindawo ngeendawo, kwaye abantu abazi
kuzifumana ngaxesha linye ezi nkonzo. Siyabacela ke abantu ukuba
banyamezele, basebenzisane noRhulumente. Umntu ngamnye makenze igalelo
lakhe ancedisane noRhulumente kulo mcimbi. Ooceba mabancede basukume,
bakhawulelane noRhulumente ukuqinisekisa ukuba ezi nkonzo ziyakhawuleza
ukufika kwiindawo zabo.

Masiphinde sihlabe ikhwelo koongxowa-nkulu. Oongxowa-nkulu mabancedise
uRhulumente ngokuthi banike uncedo lwemali apho ludingeka khona ukuze ezi
nkonzo zamanzi zifikelele ebantwini. Kaloku oku kubambana ngezandla
kuzanywa ukuguqula iimeko awathetha ngako uMongameli kwintetho yakhe
yokuvula iPalamente, kuthetha loo nto. Kuthetha ukuba sonke masiphathisane
ukulungisa izinto ezonakeleyo kwilizwe lethu. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms B P SONJICA: Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by informing and
reminding this House that from 19 to 25 March it will be Water Week.

In section 27(1) of the Constitution the Government describes water as a
human right. That means that the Government has the responsibility of
ensuring that everybody enjoys this right by getting clean water and other
healthy water services. This week is for that.
During this week the Government will be focusing on those things that need
to be addressed with regard to water affairs. This year Water Week will
focus on educating people, in co-operation with the Government, to find out
how they can try and fight cholera, particularly in areas where there is a
scarcity of water, that is to say clean water.

The following are things that I would like us to take note of after we have
fetched water, particularly we people from the rural areas, people who
fetch water from rivers and people who still fetch water from dams and who
do not have better water resources than those. When we have come back from
the rivers, we should pour a spoonful of bleach into the bucket of water.
If we do not have bleach, we should boil the water before using it.

Secondly, we should not defecate near water or along the rivers and dams
from which we get water. When it rains the faeces with their germs are
carried into the water and that causes us to become infected by this
disease that causes cholera, and other diseases that result from unclean
water.

Thirdly, we should wash our hands before we touch food. That is important
because we touch everything with our hands and in that way pick up germs on
our hands.

Fourthly, we call on all the teachers and priests in their churches,
particularly from this week forward, to assist communities and educate them
about this disease that causes cholera and the ways in which it can be
avoided as well as other diseases that are caused by unclean water.

The Government is trying to provide clean water so that even those who do
not have access to clean water can have it. But that does not mean that as
the Government is trying all this it will be available at once. Rome was
not built in a day. This will take some time in different places and people
will not get all these services at once. We, therefore, ask people to be
patient and co-operate with the Government in this regard. The councillors
should stand up and co-operate with the Government to ensure that these
services are made available quickly in their areas.

We would like to appeal to the business sector again. The big businesses
should assist the Government by giving funding where it is needed so that
these water services could become accessible to people. The holding of
hands in an attempt to change the state of affairs that the President
talked about in his state of the nation speech to Parliament means that. It
means that we should all work together in order to rectify things that are
not in order in our country.]

This debate is about how the Government has used its limited resources to
change the lives of the poor people of South Africa, ie to close the gap
between the haves and the have-nots, while ensuring a balance in
accommodating all interests in our society. In essence, it is about how the
ANC-led Government has governed in line with its transformation agenda, an
agenda to which it committed itself at its inception in 1912, and which was
translated into a mission statement, the Freedom Charter, in 1955, finally
culminating in a world-acclaimed Constitution.

The question is: What has the ANC done to realise all those provisions in
all the documents that I have mentioned: The Freedom Charter, the manifesto
in 1994 which promised a better life for all, or the Constitution itself?
Has the ANC used the Budget to change the socioeconomic situation of the
poorest, the vulnerable and the disabled?
There is no doubt that the ANC has remained on course, as the President
once said, in using the Budget to transform the social, economic and
political conditions of the poor in South Africa. Fortunately, delivery of
water and other basic services is tangible. There is hard evidence that we
have delivered. About 9 million have clean water. A total of 1,5 million
people have improved sanitation. Indeed, we have proved that the Budget is
not about numbers, it is about the lives of the people, as Comrade Trevor
once said.

Looking at the expenditure trends after 1994, in the Portfolio Committee on
Water Affairs, there has been a clear commitment of resources to improving
water services, water supply and sanitation. This is reflected in the
expenditure trends for infrastructure development and water supply and
sanitation.

There has been a significant increase in the allocations for these
programmes, namely R580 million for water and sanitation; R2,8 billion for
the support of local government for restructuring and, most importantly,
the delivery of basic services; R7,8 billion supplementary infrastructure
investment and maintenance programmes; R85 million for repairs to flood-
damaged infrastructure. There could be no better investment than what the
ANC-led Government has done, that is investing in its people by ensuring a
better life for all, but also ensuring that that good life is sustained by
putting more money into the development of infrastructure as well as its
maintenance.

The allocation of R2,8 billion towards capacitating local government to be
better able to deliver services is highly appreciated. There will be a need
to put mechanisms in place that will ensure that there is proper co-
ordination of resources. The Minister for Provincial and Local Government
has already announced that there is such a plan in place and we welcome
that. This shows that the ANC-led government has vision, but special
attention should be given to how the equitable share is utilised.

The highlight for Water Affairs and for Government in this Budget is the
commitment to make an impact on the lives of the poor by providing a free
basic minimum of 25 litres per day to all South African citizens. We
believe that this will go a long way towards improving the lives and health
of the poor and promote their productivity. Water is life and productivity.
However, the Government should look into improving the participation of
civil society, especially in the delivery of basic services, so that its
own capacity of delivery is improved.

The Government's swift response to intervene meaningfully in cholera areas
is also appreciated, especially since there is further commitment of
resources to that programme. Obviously there would be a need for policy
review in this area.

In conclusion, I want to concur with what the President said in his state
of the nation address, namely that gradually, step by step, our country
proceeds further away from its past and as we all know, that past has bleak
memories. The ANC-led Government brings hope and prosperity for all its
citizens, regardless of their political affiliation, their social
background ... [Time expired.][Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, Government has been talking for years now about
leapfrogging South Africa and Africa into the information age and has
lately begun even to ask groups like the G8 to assist us.

Against this background, the few faltering steps in the direction of
competition unveiled on Wednesday as a framework to ``bridge the digital
divide'' are not only disappointing, they are frankly derisory. The only
way we can bridge the digital divide is by taking the leap of faith in
competition. Without that, all of the talk about Africa and the information
age is just technobabble. A crucial step in letting the private sector take
over, is to open access for everybody to the Telkom backbone which we own -
not Government- it is the backbone from which all of the tentacles of an
industry which will determine our economic fate must grow.

About a week after the hon the President announced here in February the two
star-studded advisory teams that had agreed to guide Government, one of
those stars, Larry Ellison of Oracle, said this to journalist Lesley Stones
at a Paris conference:


  Last time I saw Mbeki I told him to sell the telephone company.

The hon President can confirm this or say otherwise.


  Last time I saw Mbeki I told him to sell the telephone company. At that
  time telecommunication stocks were highly valued and it was a great way
  to raise money. It is very important to have high speed, low-cost
  communications, so my advice was to make sure that there are multiple
  phone companies in South Africa by introducing competition and
  privatising telecommunications to get more people onto the Internet.

Instead, we are to get a duopoly and there is every sign that a Telkom-2
will include Transtel and Eskom, while the 100%-owned Sentech gets an
international long distance licence. Is this managed liberalisation or
stage-managed expansion of the state's role?

It seems to me that the Government, on the eve of the IPO, is repeating the
mistake it made when it effectively sold off our family copper for R6
billion in 1997 under conditions so protectionist that we lose investment
and innovation every day and we are constantly under the threat of being
hauled before the World Trade Organisation. Governments are no good at
writing business plans. See what has happened. The cellphone take-up was
originally undercalculated at around half a million maximum, so conditions
were set for interconnection rates which to this day, 8 million cellphone
users later ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I think it is
important for you to give your undivided attention to the speaker. If you
do have pressing and important business which has to be done, maybe you
should do it outside the House. Hon Mr Smith, I am just asking the House
please to pay attention to the speaker at the podium. [Interjections.]

Ms M SMUTS: Mr Chairman, I greatly appreciate your efforts to get Peter
Smith to listen to me. [Interjections.] I trust that no time has been
taken. [Interjections.]

Cellphone take-up was undercalculated. Conditions were set for
interconnection rates. Today we have 8 million cellphone users, but that
rampant cell duopoly is still favoured by those interconnection rates, and
Telkom is hit hard by them.

Telkom, meanwhile, was set mandatory roll-out targets for which it charges
rebalanced tariffs which disadvantaged consumers cannot afford. The
cellphone players see the gap in the market and create the pre-paid system,
which accounts for 80% of the newest growth, and therefore, in other words,
what has happened is that the roll-out is happening on cell, courtesy of
the private sector. I think the information revolution is also going to
happen on cell once the charges drop because the SMS generation is halfway
to data application.

Government is particularly poor at business when it is protecting its own
dark interests. Because the roll-out does not work, Telkom has been trying
to monopolise Internet and value-added services. When the regulator
demanded, last year, that Telkom should stop its anticompetitive practices
and give the information technology sector access to the backbone, the
Minister revoked the regulations. It is unbelievable!

It is widely suspected that the shareholders' agreement between the
Government and the 30% shareholders gives Telkom exclusivities which the
Act does not allow. How else does one explain that revocation? It is either
that or it is banana republic time, but the result, either way, is zero
predictability and zero reliability. Mark Shuttleworth has said, whilst he
packed his bags, along with the 50% of young IT professionals who intend to
leave: ``Europe is the next Silicon Valley.'' In Europe, they now regulate
only the dominant incumbent, ex ante, with competition law doing the rest.
Ministers should leave it to competition, and open up. [Applause.]

Mr E M SIGWELA: Mr Chairperson, hon President, hon members, I agree with
our President when he says that: ``Ã¿.Ã¿.Ã¿. gradually, steps by step, our
country proceeds further away from its painful past.'' We only need to look
at the Budget that is being appropriated by this House to realise that
there is a serious effort by the ANC Government to propel the progress of
our country away from that past.

Just by way of example, I will focus on the Public Works Vote, Vote No 30.
I will refer specifically to one programme which is one of the pivotal
factors necessary for setting our country on the march into the era of the
African century, where we shall, in the words of our President: ``... cease
to be victims of our circumstances, but become victors''.

I am referring to the national Public Works Programme. Within this
programme, there are two very vital subprogrammes which, if properly
managed and utilised, could put our poverty-stricken people in a position
to determine for themselves the quality of the liberty they have earned
through a bitter struggle. These subprogrammes are the Community-based
Public Works Programme and the Emerging Contractors Development Programme.
I feel strongly that these programmes need a continued and even increased
support with funds from this Parliament.

We should not forget that only in the near past construction industry
legislation in this country relegated blacks to unskilled artisans and
cheap labour. The use of race as a criterion for entering the trade was so
bad that, for instance, here in the Western Cape it was a crime for
Africans to carry building instruments with the intention of using them.
They could only do so as labourers carrying them for their white masters.
No wonder, therefore, that even today, in a data base of over 450
contractors in the Western Cape, there are only two accredited African
plumbers and two electricians. We need to change this situation. We cannot
allow it. We need to apply more funds to the emerging development
programme. We need to upgrade those people.

The other programme I want to refer to, despite the constraints of time, as
I could speak more on this, is the community-based public works programme
which is aimed at poverty alleviation through job creation, capacity-
building, skills training and delivery of needed assets. In this instance
also prominence and prioritisation in terms of funding must be raised,
particularly now that the Department of Public Works seems to have overcome
the problem of management. All the vacant posts in top management have now
been filled and some of the posts were very critical for the management of
this programme. We are now sure, and I am certain, that there will be no
underspending as was the case in the year we are just ending.

I see the potential in this programme for laying a foundation for
sustainable rural development. It is possible to interlock the Emerging
Contractor Development Programme and the Community-based Public Works
Programme in projects for the creation of community assets such as small
community irrigation dams and community roads in the deep rural areas,
leading to the creation of green spots throughout the countryside of South
Africa as well as creating an opportunity for the poverty-stricken rural
community to enter the economy as commodity producers.

This is one of my pet subjects, the green spots subject, because in that
one has the opportunity to have what our people call `empilisweni' [life-
giving place]. When I grew up as a herdboy in the rural area I knew that
during times of drought in areas that were frequented by mist the grass
would always be better and we call those places places of `impiliso' [life-
giving], and during those droughts we drove the stock to such places and
built cattle folds and we built huts in order to look after them. That is
the point from which we must move when we think about green spots for our
deep rural areas.

What is necessary is good planning in the medium and even in the long term.
We should be able to have a concrete implementation plan over the three-
year medium-term period, for instance, from now to the end of the 2003-04
financial year. We should also be able to even map out what we desire to be
the situation, say, by 2015 or 2020 so that we know exactly what we are
gunning for and in doing so we would be able to follow up, step by step,
the increment of the budget of this particular programme as in fact is the
case now, because it is going to be more in next financial year and the
year thereafter. But we might even think of making it bigger.

In this programme and in the policy maybe of interlocking the Emerging
Contractor Development Programme with the Community-based Public Works
Programme there is the potential to turn the tide of peasants who are
relocating from the rural areas to the cities. For instance, we find in
some cases that people are relocating from Engcobo, Tsomo, Cofimvaba, Cala
and Lady Frere to Khayelitsha. Khayelitsha is another piece of the
Transkei. It is in the towns that those people are looking for jobs that
are not there.

The Department of Housing will also not be looking at the mirage of an ever-
growing pressure for the provision of houses in the urban areas. If one
could go there, one will find someone saying: ``I am on the list. My house
will come up in the next lot.'' That will come to an end, because, using
the words of the Minister of Finance: ``the fruits of liberty in the rural
areas will be good to look at and desirable to partake of''. I think we, as
the Government of the ANC, should take this very seriously. [Applause.]
Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chair, I was at a function the other day where a well-
known South African journalist was awarded a prize for promoting
reconciliation in this country by the Institute for Justice and
Reconciliation. It was a very moving experience for me. It represented the
best of what it is to be in South Africa today.

My party has been a critic of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, as
members might know. Our leader is still taking that commission to court for
its final report, yet there I was, extremely proud to be part of the
function organised by that body, because it was a celebration of our
cultural diversity, tolerance, of the value of talking and listening across
the spectrum, and allowing people to express different views. It was held
in an old Church, in the heart of the District Six of yesteryear, that
Bishop Tutu reminded us had been boarded up not so long ago, with people
being locked inside and outside, with rates going up and down the street.
Here was this function with people across the spectrum, from the top to the
bottom and from all parties, rejoicing in what it is to be a South African.

There is no doubt that we are united in our goals, but that we have
different ideas about how to achieve them. If we can find a way to express
our differences, to listen to one another and follow the concerns that we
mouth with actions, we will certainly go a long way towards achieving our
success.

The mere fact that our macrofundamentals are sound has been shown in the
last few weeks on the stock markets. While the world has teetered, South
Africa has shuddered, but remained strong. However, there is no doubt that
certain issues make us very vulnerable to speculations, and affect our
image overseas. We could do a great deal to change that. One of them is the
issue of race, the second one is traditional structures, the third one is
our failure to disburse poverty relief funds, the fourth one is the Aids
crisis and the fifth one is aspects of our Constitution that make it very
difficult for us to distribute health services and education, and to cope
with crime.

Let me go back to the issue of race. It is as dangerous to practise racism
as it is to use it to silence dissent. The President mentioned in his
initial address the value of certain initiatives like the ``Homes for All''
initiative. I, for one, signed that and received a lot of criticism from
white colleagues who felt that it was a politically-correct apology. But as
I pointed out then, and will do so again now, there is a big difference
between assuming guilt and acknowledging pain. That, I believe, is the
value of that document and that initiative. I want to plead with the DA to
change the perception of itself, and to come on board in that initiative.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

A great deal of racism centres around the issue of the lack of black pride,
because Africans feel that so much has been taken from under them by the
apartheid institution. A lot of African pride is rooted in traditional
structures. One cannot help remembering that their love of literature
reflected, for example ... [Interjections.] Never mind!

Last night I heard a speech by Prof Satyo in which he celebrated and spoke
much about the link of Africans to nature, to rivers and to their
traditions. Yet, we are paying lip service to respect for African tradition
and culture. Delivery in the rural areas is largely dependent on being at
one with the traditional structures and the rural leaders, and there is
nothing that this Government has done to show that it is really committed
to building up those traditional structures.

Until we are prepared to put more money than R6 billion into the local
sphere of government, and until we are prepared to show a definite
commitment to bringing the traditional structures on board, we are not
going to find delivery at the local level easy to realise.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time
has expired, and I hope the hon Mr Ramgobin's meeting has also expired.
[Laughter.]

Ms N D NGCENGWANE: Chairperson, today I feel I need to take this House back
a step in time to give them a little bit of the history of this country,
especially to the youngsters.

When the ANC fought for liberation, it won. It then liberated all South
Africans, black and white, because even the white South Africans, who
dominated everybody's rights in this country, were not liberated. They were
just free to do what they liked with the millions of lives of the people of
this country to the extent of making laws that suited their needs.

Today we are debating the national Budget that encompasses and impacts
directly on the lives of all South Africans, something that never happened
before. When the ANC-led Government took over from the previous regime, it
committed itself to improving the lives of millions of South Africans by
closing the gap between the rich and the poor.

In a statement on 8 January our President said:


  The time has come that we launch a sustained offensive to wipe out
  poverty in our country and continent. Millions of our people are still
  condemned to suffer from hunger, from malnutrition and its diseases.

Today I want the DA to understand that when the ANC said: ``A better life
for all'' that was not, and is not, an empty promise, but a commitment to
the poorest of the poor. [Interjections.] Will the DA keep quiet! How can
they talk about the poor people? Those are the people they never cared
about, because they have not experienced their poverty. They only saw the
appalling living conditions of our people when they went to the townships
to pit their minds against the ANC in order to get their votes. But at the
end of the election campaigns they forgot about them and started planning
for the future of the rich South African at the expense of the poor.
[Interjections.]
We have experienced poverty. We know how it feels to go to bed without
food, and to wake up in the morning not knowing how to start the day
without a clear indication as to where the next meal will come from.
[Interjections.] Some children in our society know, and have experienced,
how to go to school without having anything to eat.

That is why today in our societies we have people with stunted growth and
some are mentally retarded. Those were the things that went unchallenged
because nobody cared. However, today - because of our history - this ANC-
led Government is committed to correct the present situation by rebuilding
Africa's economies to ensure that they are able to generate the necessary
volumes of wealth, work for people and the capacities that will ensure that
we take our rightful place within the global economy.

I think that it must be made known that the system of apartheid was a great
evil. It robbed people of their God-given human dignity. It caused untold
suffering. It dehumanised both its victims and perpetrators. Thank God that
through the hard work and sacrifices of so many South Africans we achieved
a new, just and democratic political life in our country.
However, it would be a grave mistake to believe that this new political
justice has brought with it an end to suffering and oppression and that
full human dignity has been restored to our people. It has not yet been
restored. For this to be achieved, a second transformation is needed - a
transformation of our economic system which, as in the past, tends to serve
the interests of a minority at the expense of the rights of the majority to
one which accommodates the rightful and reasonable hopes and ambitions of
our people. It is for this reason that this ANC-led Government has called
on all the departments to put aside a certain portion of their budget for
poverty alleviation, especially in the rural areas.

Ukuba bekunokufumaneka imali ngaphezu kwale, ngekukuhle, kuba ulungiso
lweendlela phaya ezilalini lusilele kakhulu, ngaphaya kweminyaka
engamashumi amabini. [It would be nice if more funds could be made
available, because road maintenance in the rural areas lags behind by more
than twenty years.]

That is 20 years.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the other day,
when we had a meeting with the Pan-South African Language Board candidates,
a suggestion was made that due respect and decorum was not being paid to
indigenous languages, and that hon members were not availing themselves of
the interpreting service that is made available in order to understand what
a member is saying.

I would like to request that we show the courtesy to these indigenous
languages by all members who do not understand the language by availing
themselves of the facility which Parliament has made available. [Applause.]

An HON MEMBER: Including Ken Andrew.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, that statement is
out of place. Whether the hon member understands English or not is not the
issue. The issue is that one should pay due regard to the official
languages of this country. Therefore, I am requesting that if you do not
understand the language, you should make use of the interpreting facility.

Mr J J DOWRY: Agb Voorsitter, op 'n punt van orde: Dit is 'n baie goeie
verklaring wat u pas gemaak het en ons stem daarmee saam, maar dit gebeur
dikwels dat daar nie 'n vertaaldiens in die Raad beskikbaar is nie. [Hon
Chairperson, on a point of order: That is a very good statement you have
just made and we agree with it, but it often happens that there is no
interpreting service available in the House.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes, hon member, if there is no
interpretation service you will be well within your rights to request that
such a service be provided. However, my point is that when a member does
address you in a language that you are not familiar with, I would request
that you use the service when it is available and at present, the service
is available.

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairman, on a further point of order: With due
respect, you are urging us to listen to speeches in a language that we do
not understand. We have indicated that we are fully willing to do that. I
would suggest that, with respect, the onus should be on Parliament to
ensure that we are able to do what you are suggesting we should do.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I agree with you that it is
something that Parliament must do. Therefore, you will be well within your
rights to stand up and raise a point of order to indicate that the service
is not being provided.

My point is that, at present, the service is being provided. Casting my eye
over the House, I noticed that a number of people are not availing
themselves of the service. I am now requesting that, since the service is
there, you should use it.

Nkskz N D NGCENGWANE: Ezilalini, phaya, iibhuloro ziyavuthuluka. Iindlela
zikwimo nje yokuba bezingafanele kusetyenziswa, kodwa kuba abantu bakuthi
bengenazindlela zimbi zakuhamba bahamba kuzo zinjalo. Kodwa mva nje ndiye
ndafumana iindaba ezimnandi nezincumisayo zokuba iibhuloro ezazimke
namanzi, enye yazo iyiTyinirha eMpuma Koloni, ziqalile ukulungiswa.
Siyambulela lo Rhulumente, kuba amathemba abantu nezidima zabo
uyazibuyisela. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Ms N D NGCENGWANE: In the rural areas bridges are in an appalling
condition. Roads are in such a state that they should not be used at all,
but because there are no other roads that people can use, they use these in
their present condition. But recently I received very good news, that
rebuilding of the bridges that were destroyed by the heavy rains, one of
them being Tyinirha in the Eastern Cape, has started. We are grateful to
this Government because people's hopes and dignity are being restored.]

In his state of the nation address, the President emphasised investment in
infrastructure. The key areas to invest in are roads and rail. An amount of
over R1 billion was allocated to the provinces for the maintenance of all
the roads.

Kukho ingxaki esinayo kwishishini leeteksi elasoloko libanjwe ludushe.
Sithi xa sisithi kuyaqala ukulunga kuqale olunye. Lo Rhulumente uhleli
ebhula umlilo ophenjelelwa ngabantu abangaziwayo.

Kukho iinkqubo ezinjongo yazo ikukuzama ukubuyisa amathuba okuxhamla
kwiziqhamo zale nkululeko ngokuthi kusetyenziswe iiprojekhti ezifana naleyo
ibizwa ngokuba yirecapitalisation of the Taxi Industry, enjongo yayo
ikukuthabatha eziya teksi zindala kakhulu. Ezi ke zezi zithi xa zihamba
zibe bukekela, athi ubani xa ekhwele kuzo eve kuye esifubeni umsi lo uphuma
kumbhobho okhupha umoya omdaka. Ndixelele ke ukuba sinjani isifuba somqhubi
oyiqhuba imini yonke. Nalapho asincamanga. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[We have a problem with the taxi industry that is always characterised by
violence. When we start to say that all is well it starts all over again.
This Government is always trying to extinguish a fire that is kindled and
fanned by some unknown people.

There are programmes whose aims are to try to bring back opportunities of
enjoying the fruits of this liberty by using projects like the one called
the recapitalisation of the Taxi Industry, whose aim is to rid our roads of
those very old taxis. These are the ones that cannot even move straight and
whose interiors are filled with so much fumes from their exhaust pipes that
they fill their passengers' lungs. You can imagine what effect this has on
the respiratory system of the person who drives such a vehicle on a daily
basis. Even there we have not given up.]

The Department of Transport is working on programmes to bring unity to this
industry.

Umntu akancanywa, mawethu. [You do not give up on a human being.]

In a way, this taxi industry recapitalisation project would also bridge the
gap between the bus industry, which is subsidised by the Government, and
the taxi industry, which never got any subsidy from the previous
government.

Yiyo loo nto singathandi ukuba ngathi sikhetha iphela emasini kuba ...
[That is why we do not want to appear to be sidelining other people because
...]

... these bus companies are quite big companies.

To show the commitment of this Government to all South Africans, are all
aware of the Arrive Alive road safety campaign, which used to target the
festive season, but became a year-round programme from November 2000. As a
result of the Arrive Alive campaign, fatalities in the whole of South
Africa are down by 20,24%, and the vehicle statistics of accidents are down
by 31,8%.
We would also like to see the taxi owners and taxi drivers directly
involved in this campaign, so that it could be a people-driven development.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M M S LEKGORO: Mr Chairperson, hon President, Ministers and hon members,
our society is emerging from a devastating past, where its people, bound
together by history, were divided by force of law and the manipulation of
economic opportunities.

The legacy left by our past poses great challenges to both our people and
Government. And Government, more than any other role-player, has an
obligation to redress the effects of this legacy left by our past. For this
reason, Government must use all the fiscal policies at its disposal to
contribute to the improvement of the quality of life of all our people.

The Budget, in particular, is the key instrument in the hands of the state
that must be employed to attack poverty and all other social ills.
Experiences in our own continent are living evidence to demonstrate that
sustainable peace and social order are not easy to achieve against the
backdrop of poverty and deprivation.
It is for this reason that our nation and Government should remain focused
on the issue of poverty and deprivation, and Government needs to play a
catalytical role in this regard. Since the advent of democracy and the
ascendance of the ANC to power, our country has become much better.

Government efforts in the previous years have ensured that macroeconomic
fundamentals are firmly in place. This was confirmed by different
investment and credit rating institutions and recently by the International
Investment Council meeting held in Cape Town. These achievements should
serve as a beacon of hope for all our people, and for business in
particular.

The time has come for our fiscal policies to focus on strategies in the
microeconomic area to stimulate further growth in the economy. The tax cuts
in the low to middle-income groups is a positive action on the part of
Government. These tax cuts will put R8,3 billion into the hands of the
people. These tax concession will improve the purchasing power of the
thousands of taxpayers and those who depend on their income. This increase
of buying power will stimulate the demand side of the economy and
subsequently the broader economy.
These tax cuts should be praised as they also contribute to the enhancement
of the progressive nature of the South African tax system. They reduce the
current unacceptable income gap levels between the haves and the have-nots.

Some people wish to suggest that failure by the Budget to make tax cuts in
the high income group will cause the skilled to leave the country for other
competitive destinations. I think it will be sad if this happens. But I
also think that South Africa does not need citizens who are capable of
leaving the country simply because they were not given a tax concession.
South Africa needs real patriots and compatriots to the end, that is men
and women who remain South Africans irrespective of whether they are sad or
angry.

There has been an outcry in the recent past about the high cost of labour,
which most claim was responsible for the low rate of employment, even at
times when the economy showed signs of growth. This outcry was propelled
regardless of the complications borne out of the need to protect the rights
of workers against unscrupulous employers. Despite these difficulties,
something had to be done. To this end, Government has committed itself to
investigating efficient measures to encourage the creation of new jobs by
reducing the cost of hiring and training of new employees.

The private sector should exploit this opportunity to the fullest, because
it is the only sector that has the capacity to create jobs and to absorb
the army of unemployed. The wage incentive will enable the private sector
to achieve two goals, namely create much-needed jobs and maximise their
returns through a state subsidised wage.

Government has undertaken to put R3 billion aside to fund investment
incentive initiatives. The aim of the investment incentive is to encourage
companies to participate in a variety of strategic investment projects, in
which they would not invest in an ordinary situation. There is clearly a
lot of benefit for companies in this initiative. Companies should use the
scheme as it will lighten their tax burden and offer them an opportunity to
contribute to some of the national economic objectives.

Government intends to give a boost to the economy by attending to the
infrastructural needs of the different urban and rural areas. A
supplementary amount of R7,8 billion has been set aside for infrastructural
investment and maintenance over the next three years. It should be noted
that infrastructural development and maintenance is one of the strategic
areas through which our country can create economic opportunities for the
poor. This area could be utilised to create jobs and to reduce the everyday
individual and personal cost of living.

The gradual increase in social expenditure should be welcomed, because the
majority of our people, who are mostly poor, rely on the state-provided
services for a good quality of life. Also, the increase in the different
social grants should be applauded. These contributions are not entirely
insignificant, as some would like to suggest. What needs to be done is to
sustain a momentum to increase these grants and to ensure that they are not
harshly eroded by unexpected factors, such as inflation and isolated but
denting increases in the prices of specific household items used by the
beneficiaries of these grants.

It is my considered opinion and that of our organisation, the ANC, that the
Budget before us has kept its focus on the plight of the poor, and we
support it. [Applause.]

Debate suspended.

The House adjourned at 11:53.

