---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 08 June 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-06-08
---

THURSDAY, 8 JUNE 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I see there is a great deal of activity
and excitement among members. It must be the presence of all these
important portfolios. I welcome the hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers to
the NCOP.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AFFAIRS - UNIDO
                                CONSTITUTION

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                  NATIONAL YOUTH COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, I should say that I did notice
that when you were welcoming us, you looked at me and not at the hon the
Deputy Minister sitting next to me.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I particularly welcomed my father. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER: Oh all right, that is fine. [Laughter.]

Chairperson, I am particularly pleased to be here this afternoon because
this is my first appearance in the NCOP, and I hope it will not be my last.
The quicker the Chairperson invites me the better, because nobody knows
whether one will be around or not.

What we are going to be discussing this afternoon is an amendment to the
National Youth Commission Act. I commend this Bill to the House, in the
interests of the smooth functioning of arrangements and attainment of
sustainable youth development in South Africa. It is a critical area of
responsibility for the democratic Government of this country. Workable
arrangements we have sought and achieved through consensus rather than
conflict will be an investment in the future wellbeing of the nation.

The essence of the intention of this measure is contained in clause 7A, in
which it is said that there shall be a sound working relationship between
the commission and the various provinces and their structures dealing with
youth development. This is what is sought, and the legislative step
recommended today follows a process of serious consultation to this end.

There is a need to have uniformity of approach to the development of our
young men and women in South Africa. But care must be taken not to be too
prescriptive, because provincial initiative and creativity should not be
smothered but allowed to flourish. Our minds must be tidy, yes, but not
overly so.
It is a fact that some provinces have set up youth commissions, others have
not. Some have set up structures such as subdirectorates and/or have
appointed an MEC for Youth Affairs. Provinces might well have their own
particular ways of handling matters, as long as these fit in with the broad
national framework and intentions to enhance youth development.

The practical step proposed in this measure is to do away with the system
of part-time youth commissioners, both those nominated by premiers for
presidential appointment and those who were appointed on the basis of the
nomination process in Parliament. It has been found that this arrangement
was not particularly successful. For instance, there has been a measure of
distance between the provincial and national efforts, and in some cases
provincial representatives on the National Youth Commission have not
enjoyed the support of provincial structures, and, indeed, in some cases
were not even attached to statutory youth development structures in their
provinces.

There is little value in having commissioners who are excluded from
essential activity at one or other level. As a study of the amendments
shows, what will be brought about is a streamlining in the number of
national youth commissioners, which will lead to financial savings which
can be redirected to programme work instead. This means that money which is
saved will be available for concrete programmes, rather than being spent on
the proliferation of national and provincial full-time and part-time
commissioners. It is worth commending this approach, which seeks economy
and reprioritisation. It is a matter of putting first things first.

It is also specifically laid down in the Bill that the relationship between
national and provincial structures should be sound. To achieve this, for
instance, minutes of the National Youth Commission must be submitted to
provincial commissions and to MECs for youth affairs. I would appeal to
those engaged in the new streamlined operation to seek a real spirit of
accommodation and not just a formal stance of co-operation and information
exchange.

I might mention that I would be most happy should Parliament continue to
play an active part in this whole matter of seeking the best possible
structures for youth development in the interest of smooth relationships.
To this end, I would be happy to receive ideas and proposals from all
parties in Parliament, and I firmly commit myself to giving serious
consideration to these. If this means that we shall have to amend national
legislation again, then let us do so. This is not a closed matter and I
would like to appeal to those parties that may have indicated that they are
unhappy with the amendment, to rethink their position in the light of my
remarks, and to vote for the amendment proposed today. This is not a party-
political issue, but a cross-cutting one which should continue to engage
all of us in issues of fundamental importance to our nation's future. We
want to have Parliament and the provinces behind us in this matter, for a
national consensus on matters relating to the youth is the way of dealing
with it. Let us be among the nations who really love the young, because, as
someone once wrote:


  Those who love the young best, stay young the longest.

[Applause.]

Mr B WILLEM: Chairperson, I suppose I will be the only person who will be
addressing this Chamber from a wheelchair. Let me briefly comment on the
context within which this Bill is developing. This year June 16 is going to
be celebrated within the millennium context, characterised by the national
and provincial commitment to the rebuilding of our nation. The National
Youth Commission Amendment Bill should be seen as a progressive Bill,
promoting proper co-ordination, constructive policy and strategy engagement
between the National Youth Commission and the provinces.

This Bill tries to ensure that the vision we as Government had for the
responsibilities of the National Youth Commission is implemented where it
matters most. What the department has found is that the current structures
within the National Youth Commission are cumbersome and unmanageable, which
detracts from the noble objectives which the National Youth Commission has
envisaged for itself.

The vision of the National Youth Commission is clear. They are focused on
the positive development of all youth in South Africa, regardless of race,
colour, creed or religion. To succeed in this task of elevating the status
of youth in our society from a situation where they had been ignored by the
previous apartheid government, the National Youth Commission needed to have
a comprehensive restructuring of the way in which they conducted their
business. This is also in keeping with President Thabo Mbeki's directive of
more efficient and effective service delivery.

It became increasingly difficult for the National Youth Commission to
implement its mission statement, namely to promote the development of young
women and men through the design and implementation of a holistic and
integrated national youth policy and national youth development plan by
ensuring interministerial, intersectoral and intergovernmental
collaboration for the advancement of young people through the involvement
of all stakeholders. This Bill seeks to address the practical problems
brought about by the excessive number of full-time and part-time
commissioners. The Bill suggests only five full-time members of the
commission.

The Bill also seeks to ensure closer collaboration and co-operation between
provinces, so that the provincial youth commissions can work together with
their national counterpart in a more co-ordinated fashion.

What this Bill also seeks to highlight is the need to have norms and
standards that are applicable to all youth commissions, regardless of where
they find themselves. This means essentially that all provinces should have
commissions and they should all account in the same way.

These provincial youth commissions will also enjoy the same status as the
National Youth Commission, but in the office of the premier. The mechanisms
for communication are also stipulated in the Bill, in terms of which the
National Youth Commission is compelled to submit minutes on a regular basis
to its provincial counterparts. Any programme run by the National Youth
Commission will hereafter have a better chance of reaching its intended
audience in all nine provinces, with the spirit of co-operation with the
provincial youth commissions that is envisaged by this Bill.

This committee will especially monitor the youth development efforts in all
provinces, to ensure that there are equitable development patterns in all
of the nine provinces without exception. However, it is not only this
committee that has an obligation towards our youth. President Mandela made
it clear that everyone, including Government, political parties, business
and civil society, has a crucial role to play, both in ensuring that the
directives of the youth policy are carried out, and that the youth
commissions are empowered to complete their tasks effectively.

We salute the efforts of the National Youth Commission and we applaud the
Office of the President for stepping in to alleviate the problems within
the National Youth Commission.

In conclusion, I want to echo the sentiment of our former President when he
received the National Youth Policy Document in 1997. He said, and I quote:


  We must recognise the contribution young people make to our society. We
  must build upon the imagination, energy, vibrancy and talents of this,
  our most precious national asset.

[Applause.]

Mr T S SETONA: Chairperson, hon Minister in The Presidency, fellow
colleagues from the provinces and the National Council of Provinces, I am
highly honoured to be participating in this debate on the National Youth
Commission Amendment Bill this afternoon, more so when this debate is
taking place eight days before our national Youth Day, the 24th anniversary
of that fateful day of 16 June 1976, when the courageous young people took
to the streets in defiance against the introduction of Afrikaans as the
sole medium of instruction in the schools.

As we debate this amending Bill this afternoon, we should do so in fitting
honour of those young men and women who lost their lives at the hands of
the apartheid security forces on that fateful day 24 years ago.

We must do so to tell Hector Petersen, Steve Biko and many others that
their lives were not lost in vain, because we are today shaping the future
of this country in the very same chambers that carried out instructions for
their killing.

In 1985, 15 years ago, the then late President of the ANC, Comrade O R
Tambo, in his response to the continued militarisation of white youth
through military conscription, and to the continued harassment and
persecution of black youth by apartheid security forces, had this to say:
``A nation that does not value its youth does not deserve its future.''

We are here today, after 15 years, in a situation in which millions of
young people are still unemployed, illiterate, without adequate skills to
meet the challenges of the modern labour market, and continue to be subject
to and victims of dread diseases like HIV-Aids.

The ANC-led Government facilitated a consultative process, inclusive of all
youth organisations to discuss mechanisms to integrate youth at the centre
of Government processes of policy formulation and resource allocation.

The 1994 youth consultative summit agreed on the formation of the National
Youth Commission as a body that would advise Government on matters that
affect young people. The 16th of June 1996 saw the appointment and
inauguration of the National Youth Commission by the then President of the
Republic of South Africa, Comrade Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.

Allow me to highlight some of the key achievements of the National Youth
Commission in the past four years. There is no doubt that this country
never knew anything about a comprehensive national youth policy. It is the
National Youth Commission which facilitated a process for the development
of a comprehensive national policy, which is in place today. Amongst other
things, this national youth policy is charging the National Youth
Commission with the task of devising plans for the national youth service
programme. Indeed, there have been consultative processes with all
stakeholders within civil society and youth organisations across the
country for the development of this national youth service programme.

As we debate this Bill today, business plans are being processed by the
National Youth Commission on pilot projects on HIV/Aids, literacy and the
rehabilitation of Government's buildings for access by disabled people as
part of this national youth service programme. The National Youth
Commission has put in place a national youth information service, which is
a service offered free of charge to young people regarding career choices,
HIV/Aids, life-skills and other related issues that are affecting young
people on a daily basis. There is no doubt that this service has assisted
many young people on a daily basis, particularly those in rural areas.

The Youth Commission, in conjunction with the Department of Correctional
Services, has engaged in a project of capacity-building and rehabilitation
of young offenders. This project is about providing capacity-building for
young offenders in prisons, and about providing counselling for those who
are in prisons at tender ages, so that when they come out of prison, they
come out not as hardened criminals, but as people who can contribute to our
society in a meaningful way.

The amendment of the National Youth Commission Act of 1996, as the Minister
has alluded to, is nothing but the streamlining of youth development and
the building of capacity of the National Youth Commission to play its role
in surging forward the project of youth development.

It indeed befits today's debate that when we talk about the National Youth
Commission Amendment Bill, we should do so mindful that our country has,
for a long time, been polarised and divided. I have alluded to the message
of the late president of the ANC when he referred to white and black youth.
It is therefore the responsibility of all of us in this Chamber,
irrespective of political affiliation, to play a role that will ensure that
the young people of this country, people who are the architects of the
future of this country, are afforded an opportunity to play a meaningful
role in the construction of a new South Africa.

These people must be afforded an opportunity to develop themselves so that
when they are adults, they are able to play a meaningful role in our
society, a society that will not know any racism, and a society that will
not know discrimination on the basis of race, religion or sex. That is the
call and the challenge that I am making to all of us, irrespective of
political affiliation, as we deal with this amending Bill today.

It is no secret that after the 1996 inauguration of the National Youth
Commission, more than six provinces of this country followed the steps of
the national Government by facilitating processes of establishing
provincial youth commissions. Today only one province does not have a youth
commission. I do not want to debate the pros and cons of why we do not have
a youth commission in that province, because, indeed, we must salute the
Premier of KwaZulu-Natal, the hon Mr Mtshali, for having facilitated a
process of establishing this structure, which is nonpartisan and which
encompasses all youth organisations and groupings in KwaZulu-Natal. We are
challenging everyone else to follow that particular route, because there is
no way in which we can politicise this issue.

When we were listening to the debate of people who have dissenting views on
this amending Bill, the arguments were about nothing - they were purely
political. They were about who was going to be appointed to the Youth
Commission and about the dominance of certain groupings in the Youth
Commission. I do not think it is our business, in today's debate, to
discuss those issues, because when we rewrite the history of this country,
we will know that we had these structures in the former Bantustans and in
the former government of South Africa. These structures were not meant to
serve the interests of young people, but to indoctrinate them and to make
them the troopers that would spread the message of division and
discrimination amongst young people and to make them the loyal servants of
the apartheid system. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mev J WITBOOI: Mevrou die Voorsitter, agb Minister en agb lede, die Nuwe NP
glo dat die Nasionale Jeugkommissie van groot belang is, veral vir die
jongmense in Suid-Afrika. Waarmee die Nuwe NP egter 'n probleem het, is dat
daar na ons mening nie genoeg met die publiek daar buite beraadslaag is
nie. Die Nuwe NP het sulke openbare verhore voorgestel, maar dit is van die
tafel gevee. Ons het na die Minister geluister, en die Nuwe NP begryp die
belangrikheid van die wysigings aan die hoofwet. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mrs J WITBOOI: Madam Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the New NP
believes that the National Youth Commission is very important, in
particular for the youth in South Africa. what the New NP has a problem
with, however, is that in our view there has not been adequate deliberation
with the public out there. the New NP proposed such public hearings, but
this was rejected. We listened to the Minister, and the New NP understands
the importance of the amendments to the principal Act.]

Mr N M RAJU: Hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon MECs, special delegates
from the provinces and hon colleagues, the DP is satisfied that the
National Youth Commission has failed to fulfil its mandate, and therefore
the proposed Bill cannot be supported.

The party is not concerned so much with the contents of the Bill, but with
the ad hoc manner in which the Bill was presented, which left much to be
desired. Indeed, the haphazard presentation of the Bill, through the
various committee stages, is a sad indictment of the regard the committee
has for its own commission. The commission itself has not been able to
address the most pressing problem affecting the youth in South Africa, and
that is HIV-Aids.

The sum total of its concerns has been to hold high-priced conferences and
to put up illegible posters on dustbins, of all places, and perhaps the
issuing of condoms, as if the use of prophylactics is all that stands
between good health and the spread of Aids.

As regards the other scourge that confronts our youth, unemployment, what
has the commission done to address it? Owing to a lack of relevant skills
and experience, the commission itself has constantly outsourced most of its
tasks.

What the DP proposes is the repeal of the National Youth Commission Act.
Too many commissions, like too many boards in the previous regime, tend to
bog down or paralyse the way Government functions. We need a new and a bold
plan of action. A cursory reading of the website of the Youth Commission
confirms our suspicion that there is a complete lack of a viable programme
of action. Mere statements on problems and articulation of desired outcomes
is simply skirting the issue.

The Youth Commission has failed miserably to draw up a clear-cut programme
of action. In the process, taxpayer's moneys running into millions have
been spent in order to inform the young, not about what is to be done, but
about what is already known to them. Furthermore, if we are to be truthful,
the National Youth Commission is largely an unknown quantity among the
majority of youth. It has, in fact, been a classic marketing failure. Any
information on the National Youth Commission is only available to those who
have access to the Internet. [Interjections.] Such a blasé attitude to the
youth of our country and the most vulnerable and restless section of our
citizenry, cannot be condoned or tolerated.

The youth of our country must not be seen as a problem to be dealt with,
but rather as an invaluable asset which requires our prime time and our
prime investment. My party - the DP - has already put out a programme of
action, for instance, that will effectively deal with the massive
unemployment among the youth ... [Time expired.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Chair, hon House, I must say that what the DP says is,
indeed, very unfortunate and so myopic. I am saying this because I was a
party to the development of the National Youth Commission in the National
Assembly in the last term. When we voted on this, the DP was there and they
voted on it, but today they are somersaulting. [Laughter.] This is really
very unfortunate. [Interjections.]

The establishment of the Youth Commission signalled a very important
consideration that the Government and this Parliament had about the role of
the youth in our society. It actually indicated the seriousness with which
we regarded this important segment of our society. The Youth Commission has
been running for a couple of years now, and its work is there for all of
us, including the DP, to see. [Interjections.] It has been engaged in a
very important effort which seeks to address very complicated and urgent
problems and challenges that confront the youth of our country.

The Bill that we are considering today actually seeks to establish that
kind of co-ordination and further streamline the Youth Commission into a
leaner, but more effective and representative structure. It is important,
therefore, that we give our consent to the passage of this Bill as this
will help usher in a new era in the life of the Youth Commission. We hope
that this will go a long way in enhancing the effectiveness of our Youth
Commission. The hon member next to me is saying, ``What has the Youth
Commission done?'' I think the speakers before me have explained quite
clearly what the Youth Commission has done. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I am sure you will agree, hon Bhengu,
that it is very difficult to somersault in the narrow NCOP benches.
[Laughter.]

Mr G A LUCAS: Madam Chair, hon Minister and Deputy Ministers present here,
permanent delegates and special delegates from provinces, it is really
unfortunate to speak after the DP, because the manner in which they address
issues disrupts one's mind. Their narrow understanding of the Youth
Commission shows a clear lack of understanding of what the mandate of the
Youth Commission is. I think it will be important for the DP, and Mr Raju
in particular, as part of the Council, to read the mandate of the Youth
Commission.

Secondly, they need to understand that the issue of unemployment does not
only affect certain people in our country. It affects all of us. We are
clearly aware of what the causes of unemployment are in South Africa,
namely the structured economy that we dealt with and the fact that our
economy was destroyed in the past. I think that they must be aware of those
particular issues.

The input Mr Raju has made also shows the lack of interest by the DP to
address the fundamental concerns that affect young people and society at
large, especially issues of unemployment, HIV-Aids and a whole range of
other issues. The DP must get its act in order, because if it is a party
with a vision, it will know that it has to invest in young people in order
for its party to continue to exist. Otherwise, without the youth, it has no
future as a party, and that is the message that we need to get through to
it.

The National Youth Commission was established because of a particular
historical importance. That historical importance is informed by the
previous apartheid system of government which strategically worked in such
a manner as to deliberately disadvantage, isolate and destroy the future of
the majority of black young people in our society. In addition, the
establishment of the Youth Commission is a recognition by our Government of
the heroic contribution that young people have made in the attainment of
our freedom and democracy.

We therefore need to be conscious of the fact that today, as we debate the
amending Bill, it is only a few days before we commemorate the 24th June 16
anniversary. We will once more be reminded of the brutality of the
apartheid system and its masters to which the taking of the lives of our
innocent people was nothing else but an act of pride and glory. However, it
will also remind us of the sacrifices that our young people have made in
the struggle against oppression and exploitation.

When we look at the National Youth Commission Amendment Bill we should
therefore look at it from the perspective of that important role that young
people have played, and should continue to play, in the reconstruction and
development of our society. We need to acknowledge that if we seek to build
a better future for ourselves and generations to come, we should and must
invest the necessary resources and energies towards the development of
young people. We should therefore view the amendments that we are making
within this particular context.

Clearly, in terms of the amendments, the question of co-ordination is an
important aspect of our new system of governance and it is at the heart of
our President's vision and that of his executive. Therefore the amendment
emphasises the issue of national and provincial interaction in order to
ensure that those who deal with issues of youth development deal with them
in such a manner that they encourage the question of co-operative
governance. Indeed, the NCOP would be doing the future of our country and
our provinces an injustice if we were to be unable to pass this amendment.

This amendment also reinforces our policy position as Government. We must
also note that despite the tremendous achievements that we are making, we
still need to engage further on the issue of uniformity in approach towards
youth development by all spheres of government. I am referring here in
particular to the different approaches that the provinces have in
furthering the goals of youth development. We honestly cannot afford a
situation where we seem confused in addressing the concerns of young people
in a holistic manner.

We need to continue with the debate of finding appropriate mechanisms of
ensuring a united drive by all spheres of government in pursuing the agenda
of our young people. It is therefore imperative that our future interaction
should seek to find the necessary policy framework in order to regulate
youth development in our country as a whole.

The reduction of the number of youth commissioners to five will save scarce
resources and greatly contribute towards a better, efficient and proper co-
ordination of the commission's work and programmes. Public participation in
the nomination and interviewing process by the two Houses of Parliament
will greatly improve the role of South Africans in determining who our
commissioners should be. That is essential in strengthening our democratic
rights and the principle of participatory democracy, transparency and
openness, which the DP continues to advocate whilst doing the contrary.
Moreover, this will make sure that youth development takes the national
centre stage in our broader developmental agenda and therefore is able to
unleash the greatest potential amongst the young people of our society.

We as the ANC support this amendment wholeheartedly, with the intention of
furthering the interests of young people in our country as a whole.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, I would like to start by
thanking Mrs Witbooi. What she has demonstrated is that brevity can
constitute the essence of content. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] I really
want to thank her because however brief her intervention was, I found it
quite important.

I would like to address my comments to Mr Raju from the DP.
[Interjections.] Yesterday in the National Assembly the representative of
the DP said the same things. The only difference is in the words used. Mr
Raju says it is difficult to tolerate a blasé attitude. I hope he
understand that it is difficult to tolerate a blasé attitude with regard to
his simple amendment also.

The DP won about 10% of the vote in the last election. Therefore by no
stretch of the imagination could they be speaking on behalf of the majority
of the youth of this country. If one put the ANC and IFP together, that
would constitute, in the National Assembly, and certainly more here in the
NCOP, at least 77% of the votes cast in the last election.

I take it Mr Raju is talking on behalf of the privileged youth of South
Africa which constitutes 10%. [Interjections.] It would therefore not be
surprising if the National Youth Commission were an unknown entity to this
privileged youth.

Perhaps it would be more useful if the DP, instead of engaging in simple
rhetoric, tried to be more constructive and informed  their privileged
youth, which constitute 10%, about the National Youth Commission, because
they could then come with very constructive ideas about how we could
improve the work of the National Youth Commission. Quite clearly, there is
room for improvement and there are many challenges that the National Youth
Commission faces. I would be very happy, as I have said,  to receive new
and critical ideas and creative approaches in order to improve the work
that we have to do with regard to youth development.

I think it is also necessary for me to correct some incorrect facts here.
It is not true that the National Youth Commission has ignored the question
of HIV-Aids in South Africa. In fact, since its inception, one of the
critical areas of its work has been precisely on this question. If the
National Youth Commission as well as other institutions and structures in
South Africa need to do a great deal more on this question, surely that
would be the right thing to do, and all of us have to make our own
contribution.

I would like to appeal to Mr Raju to read the press release that has
recently been issued by the National Youth Commission when it launched its
Youth Month 2000 which reads as follows:


  This year, the youth sector - which means almost all of the youth
  structures, minus, I suppose the DP youth - unanimously agreed that the
  fight against the spread of HIV-Aids must occupy the top of the agenda in
  the quest for a better South Africa, hence the agreed upon theme says:
  `Youth fighting HIV-Aids into the African Century'.

That tells us that the National Youth Commission is fully aware of its
responsibilities to deal with the question of HIV-Aids.

What I would like to reiterate here is what I said when I introduced this
amendment. We have introduced this amendment with a view to trying to
streamline the functions and work of the National Youth Commission. But it
would seem to me that we should not stop here. We should see this as,
perhaps, another beginning in terms of looking at how we can improve the
relationship and the co-ordination that should take place between the
National Youth Commission and whatever provincial structures are in place.
I actually thought that the ANC speaker was going to mention Gauteng, but
it does not have a representative on the National Youth Commission.

As we work towards this goal, we must also seek to continually improve the
co-ordination that is required between the national and provincial
structures, including local government structures. In the end, it is only
if all of us work together that we will improve that co-ordination. If all
of us could, at least on some of these issues, forget our party-political
positions and acknowledge that we are facing a national problem, we could
arrive at a national consensus of dealing with this national problem of
youth development in a way which, to some extent, cuts across party-
political positions and certainly across continually making party-political
propaganda.

My hope is that this debate will, at least, cause the DP to sit and think
about what they said this afternoon, to go back and look at the amendment
again, and after this, to come up with a more constructive approach so that
all of us can do some work. It does not help to shout and repeat statements
and to fall into ritualistic, rhetoric propaganda. It does not help the
youth, and it certainly will not even help the 10% privileged youth which
the DP claims to represent. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! That concludes the debate on this
Order. The question on this Order shall be put after we have concluded the
debate on the cluster of security and justice Ministries.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                             (Review of Policy)

Vote No 18 - Justice and Constitutional Development, Vote No 6 -
Correctional Services, Vote No 17 - Independent Complaints Directorate, and
Vote No 28 - SA Police Service

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon Minister Tshwete, I have not called
you yet. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, hon members, the
strategic and operational plan of the SA Police Service for the next three
years has been developed to focus on crime tendencies, flash point areas,
threats and challenges identified in the intelligence estimate.

These include securing the local government elections and major events in
our country; addressing extremist right-wing activities, urban terrorism
and vigilantism; eradicating corruption; and making major inroads into
organised crime relating to vehicle theft and hijacking, drug trafficking,
bank robbery and the robbery of cash in transit, illegal plundering of our
marine resources, money laundering, high-tech transnational crimes and
cyber crime, commercial crime, illegal firearms and precious metals or
stones.

Special attention is also being paid to violent crimes, including gang
violence and social fabric crimes, with a specific focus on violence
against women and children. The successful implementation of this strategic
and operational plan hinges in the main on a tighter consolidation of the
criminal justice system. That means the optimisation of intelligence-driven
investigation and prosecution of crime, running hand in hand with an
elaborate system of rehabilitation of offenders.

As part of this plan, a major service delivery improvement programme is
being implemented to ensure that successes achieved in the short term are
sustained in the medium to long term. This programme entails the
development of our human resources, as well as channelling additional
resources, both human and physical, to priority areas and units.

I am also convinced that improvement of the conditions of service of
members of the SA Police Service will have a positive impact on the morale
of members, and will ensure that we are able to retain highly skilled
personnel. Discussions are currently being pursued with the relevant role-
players to put in place strategies that must address and redress the
overall situation in which members of SA Police Service have been
operating. This is a serious matter that must be attended to with all the
urgency it deserves.

Apart from a number of lateral entrants appointed to senior level, this
financial year will also see the training of 1 200 new recruits. In
addition, 600 civilians will be recruited to replace police officers
performing administrative duties, so that these fully trained officials can
be deployed to fight crime. Over and above these appointments, 600
individuals will be recruited to perform static guard duties, again
releasing trained members to fight crime in the provinces. Three hundred
new personnel will also be appointed to ensure the implementation of the
strategy to deal with the proliferation of illegal firearms.

The majority of these members will be deployed to priority areas and within
priority units to enhance the implementation of our operational strategy.
We have decided that the detective service and crime intelligence will
benefit most from these endeavours, since they play a major role in both
our geographical and organised crime strategies.

In order to ensure operational efficiency and maximum community support, it
is imperative that the SAPS must be representative of our country's
demographics. The department's targets for achieving a more representative
management cadre will be reached as soon as the senior posts recently
advertised have been filled. In other words, 50% of all senior managers,
that is director and above, will be from historically disadvantaged groups.
At the level of provincial and divisional commissioner these targets have
already been reached.

In the management echelons of the SAPS we now have 9% women at the level of
director and above, as opposed to just 4% at the end of last year. We will
continue to address gender representivity at all levels during subsequent
rounds of appointments. Also for the first time in the history of policing
in South Africa we have two women who have been appointed to the rank of
divisional commissioner.

Since our members are also our greatest asset, we need to equip them
properly, so that they can execute their responsibilities even more
efficiently. We have accordingly provided for a substantial increase on the
previous year's allocation for equipment. This will include the acquisition
of force multipliers such as additional helicopters, scanner equipment at
ports of entry and much-needed vehicles. We are providing for an increase
of approximately 17%, in comparison to what we budgeted for in the previous
year for the purchasing of vehicles.

All these initiatives are being reinforced by the assistance we are getting
from the United States, which is training our Scorpions and middle-
management police officers, the United Kingdom, where some Scorpion units
are being trained, and the European Union, which is helping with funding
for some of our human resource development projects.
Precisely because of the nature of the enemy we are fighting and defeating,
we have taken and implemented a decision, as a security cluster, to work
together with the social and economic clusters, including the National
Youth Commission, to ensure that learners stay in school, and that the
resilience of youth at risk is improved against both victimisation and
being offenders.

Again, in a shared leadership role with the Minister of Health, we as a
cluster are consolidating a national multidepartmental strategy to deal
with the hideous crime of rape. Our focus is on prevention, victim
empowerment, investigation, prosecution, court management, offender
rehabilitation and partnerships with civil society. The strategy will also
impact positively on other crimes against women and children.

All these successes notwithstanding, the problem of continued
assassinations and political intolerance in the province of KwaZulu-Natal,
and in particular the KwaNongoma-Ulundi area, where cowboyism and
lawlessness seem to be a culture of their own, needs to be addressed
frontally. The police can no longer on their own be a cutting edge against
that rampant hooliganism where members and supporters of political parties
hoard and brandish firearms of all sorts to slaughter one another, and
where members of the SA Police Service are chased away from scenes of
crime. The problem cannot be simply a matter of policing. The political
parties in that province, that is the IFP and the ANC in the main, will
have to close ranks and together fight in the front trenches to mobilise
their members and supporters against politically motivated violence and
crime.

Whilst it is true that at national level relations between these two
parties are good, the same cannot be said at the lower echelons. This
situation must be tackled immediately, and once that is done the senseless
slaughter will come to an end. Otherwise the verdict of impartial history
will be extremely harsh against these two parties.

Similarly, in the Western Cape the taxibus violence will not be resolved by
members of the SA Police Service. The impassioned appeal by the provincial
legislature for the police and SANDF to intervene smacks of the kind of
response that one experienced in the heyday of apartheid racism. The
taxibus violence, which has left many people dead and children orphaned, is
a symptom of a fundamental weakness in the provincial coalition. And that
weakness is the reluctance of the New NP and its DP ally to cross the
threshold into the new democratic era. They remain trapped in the twilight
of a past in which those African and coloured townships were just
peripheries of deprivation and denial.

The police have specific, clear instructions on dealing with any criminal
activity in affected areas. The maintenance of law and order and the
provision of safety and security to communities are the responsibilities of
the police. It does not help to prattle that commuters have a democratic
right to choose their mode of transport when the political parties in power
refuse to level the relevant field where that democratic choice is to be
exercised. Members should please help the police help the commuters. One
should not plead for their deployment to solve problems that this
province's government is shy to attend to.

The Independent Complaints Directorate has come of age. At the completion
of its third year of operation the ICD managed to register a physical
presence in all of the country's provinces. This is a source of great
pride, taking into consideration the hurdles which it had to overcome to be
where it is today.

The presence of the ICD in the provinces is part of a strategy to promote
accessibility by members of the public to the services which it provides.
Hon delegates are therefore urged to bring this information to the
attention of their constituencies so that members of the public may also
assist the ICD in its efforts to promote proper police conduct.

It is also the desire of the ICD to forge links beyond the borders of South
Africa into the SADC region. The ICD would be ready to co-operate with
these countries with regard to the concept of civilian oversight of law
enforcement.

It will be recalled that the executive director of the ICD resigned at the
end of April this year, thus necessitating the appointment of an acting
executive director. I wish to inform the House that in the interests of
transparency, the position of executive director of the ICD will be
advertised shortly. The House will be informed as soon as the appointment
of the new executive director has been made.
The ICD is committed to eradicating existing pockets of police crime,
without fear or favour. But it is also co-operating with the SAPS in the
interests of assisting it with its job of transformation. One example of
this co-operation is the formation of a task team for the purpose of
developing a strategy for the reduction of deaths in police custody, and
deaths as a result of police action. This task team comprises key
stakeholders, such as the ICD, the SA Police Service and some NGOs.

In conclusion, the ICD is in the process of forging stronger partnerships
with the SA Police Service, the secretariat, the Ministry and the cluster,
on whose behalf I am speaking right now as a whole, and, of course, civil
society, for the purpose of assisting in the fight against crime.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, it is
indeed an honour for me to present to you and this House the report of the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development for the first year of
the second democratic Parliament.

At the very outset, allow me to express my personal appreciation for the co-
operation I continue to receive from all my fellow Ministers within the
justice cluster, which comprises the Ministers and Deputy Ministers of
Correctional Services, Defence, Finance, Home Affairs, Intelligence, and
Safety and Security.

Since we were appointed last year to our respective portfolios, our
collective objective as a cluster has been to ensure that we respond to
matters relating to the criminal justice system in an integrated manner.
Thus our work as the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
has to be seen in the context of the work and efforts of our cluster.

I want to address a few issues, and the first one is globalisation. This,
needless to say, is a reality. It impacts on our new democracy in a most
dramatic fashion. Capital virtually moves at the speed of thought between
and to those markets that are regarded as favourable or profitable.

We are, today, also confronted by organised crime, the scourge of money
laundering and cyber crime, as my colleague the Minister of Safety and
Security has already said. Appropriate legislation and training of our
officials are required to attend to this. Needless to say, the unacceptably
high level of crime and the quality of the administration of justice have a
serious impact on our attractiveness as an emerging market and on our
ability to attract increasing foreign direct investment. This represents
our most pressing challenge yet. We are addressing some of these problems
in conjunction with the international community as part of both bilateral
and multilateral efforts, and, again, my colleague the Minister of Safety
and Security has referred to some of the exciting work that we are doing in
this regard.

The next area relates to the department itself. The department has embarked
on a campaign to ensure that all head office managers visit our various
offices. This will ensure that senior officials and policy-makers
familiarise themselves with those issues pertinent to the efficient
functioning of our courts. I will encourage this practice, needless to say.

We have also embarked on a redeployment project. The intention is to take a
number of suitably qualified lawyers, magistrates and prosecutors,
currently doing administrative work, out of the department and place them
back in the courts in order to reinforce our delivery processes. Needless
to say, we need to consider how to handle this sensitive matter because
these people have, in the meantime, accumulated a lot of benefits and
packages which may tend to distort the situation at the coalface if we are
not careful in the way we handle it. Nonetheless, there is, indeed, going
to be redeployment of personnel.

During our visits to a number of our courts, police stations and prisons,
we found the physical infrastructure and conditions in which people live
and operate simply unacceptable. This cannot be permitted to continue. The
upgrading of our courts will therefore be a major challenge that my
department will face.

In this regard, I am pleased to report that the allocation of R145 million
for capital works during 1999 has enabled the department to commence with
the construction of new buildings and other major works. This will take
place at centres where there were no facilities at all before, and where
service delivery was seriously hampered owing to a lack of facilities.
Despite insufficient funding, we have developed a programme to address our
immediate infrastructure needs. As a result, the largest number of major
and minor building services ever is already under construction. Most of
these worthy projects have been undertaken in previously disadvantaged
rural areas of our country. As part of this programme, for example, I went
to a launch yesterday of a court construction project at Blue Downs on the
Cape Flats. This will no doubt contribute to the department's and our
cluster's goal of bringing justice closer to our people.

We have previously publicly reported on the question of security within our
courts. I am pleased to report that we are beginning to address this
problem. We have initiated a process of outsourcing our security
requirements. In this financial year alone we have invested a further R14
million to meet this challenge.

The National Prosecuting Authority has continued to make strides in major
areas in the administration of criminal justice and the fight against
crime, in collaboration with the SA Police Service. It has continued to
strive for an efficient and effective prosecution service. The Office of
the National Director of Public Prosecutions has created new national
entities in order to begin to address some of the challenges facing the
prosecuting authority.

Having achieved the targets it had set for itself for the past year, the
National Prosecuting Authority has set itself other targets for this year.

We have already begun to see that the prosecutors are even meeting the new
targets. We are already beginning to see further increases in the average
court hours. May I pause here to say that whereas some time last year
courts were sitting an average of only one to two hours, they now, happily
so, sit for anything upwards of four and a half hours. In addition, we have
seen a reduction in outstanding court rolls, an increase in the number of
court cases finalised with a verdict, a reduction in the number of
outstanding decision dockets, a reduction in the number of prisoners
awaiting trial and a reduction in the finalisation period of matters
already in the system.

I am satisfied that the National Prosecuting Authority is well on its way
in establishing a prosecuting service that is representative, professional,
ready to fight crime, legitimate in the eyes of the people it serves and
regarded as the true ``people's lawyers''.

It is now my wish to turn my attention to some of our most difficult
challenges that affect our core business - our courts. There are two key
challenges that face us in this regard, namely effective court and case
management, and reducing the population of prisoners awaiting trial.

Our research and analysis over the past few years have shown that the only
effective solution to these problems is to adopt an integrated cluster
approach. We cannot respond to these challenges solely as, and within, the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development. The only viable
approach is to address these problems together with our partners within the
justice cluster, particularly with the Departments of Safety and Security,
Correctional Services, and Welfare. The success of this approach is borne
out by international best practice.

It gives me great pleasure to report to this House that after several years
of planning and research, we are in the process of implementing an
integrated justice system. Of greater significance is the fact that pilot
projects to develop a docket management and event notification system
between the police, prosecution, courts and prisons have been approved. The
project is referred to as the Court Process Project. The tender for this
project has been considered and we hope to announce during the course of
next week the award of a major contract for its implementation. It is
expected that the pilot project will provide us with a basis on which to
address the most critical demands made on the justice system. A central
aspect of this project, though, is the emphasis on change management.

A further project to address the more immediate and pressing problem of the
excessive population of prisoners awaiting trial has already been piloted.
I am pleased to report that this project has started yielding positive
results. Indirect savings in excess of R50 million have already been made.

This afternoon, in conjunction with the Minister of Health, the Minister
for Welfare and Population Development, and the Minister of Safety and
Security, we launched a pilot project at the J F Jooste Hospital in
Manenberg to handle victims of rape and other forms of sexual abuse with
dignity and professionalism. The project comprises dedicated police
officers and prosecutors, as well as Health, Welfare and Population
Development officials.

These are only some of the most important projects we have initiated in
this financial year. The fact that we are investing more than R140 million
this financial year alone is, if anything, indicative of our seriousness.

It would be remiss of me not to comment on another topical issue. In this
regard it would be useful to remember that, as a country, we embarked upon
the transition and, as part of our political settlement, we chose to retain
the judicial structures and personnel we inherited from our past. In fact,
but for the establishment of one new court, the Constitutional Court, we
chose to use such structures and personnel as the foundation for post-
apartheid justice.

May I say that indeed, whilst there may be many reasons for complaint, it
is advisable and indeed useful for all of us to observe that nonetheless in
our courts, both lower and higher, a lot of good work is being done. I want
to say, to this House and through this House, that as we were launching the
project that I have alluded to, we had virtually all the structures in the
criminal justice system represented. They were there to exhibit their
commitment to making a contribution towards the further building of this
country into a better society.

I know many people may cite all manner of statistics to show apparent bias
in all sorts of directions, but I just want to say that in our own
observation the complaints essentially relate to sentencing. That is why we
have actually asked, as a cluster, the SA Law Commission to address this
issue, and I am happy to say there is in circulation a draft working paper
on this issue, which will enable all of us to participate constructively in
the discussion of the issue of sentencing. Eventually we need to emerge as
a country with a sentencing policy and position which allows our courts to
treat like cases alike.

I can assure this House, and through this House the country, that we have
the total commitment of virtually all the officials that I am referring to.
As Minister over the past year I have had ample opportunity to interact
with many of them, particularly those who are at the leadership levels of
our courts, and at no point did I ever feel that I was dealing with men and
women whose loyalty to this country we should have any cause to doubt. So
indeed I am hoping that we will be able to transmit this message to our
country.

Lastly, I also want to thank all the men and women in my own department, as
well as in the cluster, who are assisting us in the performance of this
arduous task of ours. Without their participation, dedication and tenacity,
without their preparedness to do even more hours than they are required to
do in terms of their contractual obligations, I am afraid we would not be
able to tell what I believe is a better story about our criminal justice
system. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I have noticed that my
colleagues did not take their full 15 minutes at the outset. If I take more
time, I am borrowing from them! [Laughter.] I am sure they will not object
to that. We are a cluster, and that could be evidence in itself.

I must say that I am also honoured and privileged to present my
department's case in this Budget Vote debate before this Council. In case
hon members have not noticed the difference between my department and those
of my colleagues here, I may have to state it briefly, but they know it
themselves.

When it comes to the police, I always say that the police want to be
professional, they want to be effective and they want to do a good job. The
magistrates want to be good magistrates. The judges want to be effective
judges and do a good job. The soldiers want to be professional soldiers and
do a good job. There are 165 000 prisoners and none of them want to be
there. So that is an instant difficulty. The police, the soldiers, the
magistrates and the judges want to do what they do. But of the 165 000
prisoners, none wants to be there. That is an instant challenge.

I have recently come across severe criticism from human rights
organisations representing the rights of prisoners for what is perceived to
be a failure on my part to take decisive action to avert the impending
crisis in our prisons caused by overcrowding. When I introduced the
Correctional Services debate in the National Assembly on 12 May 2000 I made
a passionate plea for the recognition and acceptance of the Correctional
Services system as an integral part of the governance of this country.
I believe that as a nation we are still trapped in the legacy of our
shameful past in our understanding of the role and objectives of the
correctional system.

As far back as 1923, the role and objectives of the correctional system
were already well understood as articulated by Sir Winston Churchill, when
he remarked as follows:


  The mood and temper of the public with regard to the treatment of crime
  and criminals is one of the most unfailing tests of the civilisation of
  any country. A calm, dispassionate recognition of the rights of the
  accused, and even of the convicted criminals against the state; a
  constant heart-searching by all charged with the duty of punishment; a
  desire and eagerness to rehabilitate in the world of industry those who
  have paid their dues in the hard coinage of punishment; tireless efforts
  towards the discovery of curative and regenerative processes; unfailing
  faith that there is a treasure, if you can only find it, in the heart of
  every man. These are the symbols, which, in the treatment of crime and
  the criminal, mark and measure the stored-up strength of a nation.
These powerful words of inspiration are from one of the greatest
visionaries of our time. It is my mission, whilst serving as Minister of
Correctional Services, to inculcate and promote this vision of the criminal
justice system into a common vision shared by most South Africans.

As I discussed briefly in the NA, the prison crisis can only be understood
in terms of the political environment in which the criminal justice system
is located. In our situation, the major players representing the various
special interest groups in the correctional services system are the media,
legislators, the judiciary, human rights groups, labour unions, and
prisoners. The relative powers and/or influence wielded by these groups,
and the interests they pursue, shape the course of prison system crises.

The main functional areas of the correctional system are incarceration,
care of offenders, development of offenders and community corrections. The
incarceration function is mainly concerned with offender control by
providing security and prison services to prevent, or at least to minimise,
possibilities of escape, to ensure safe custody through good order and
discipline within prison and rendering administrative and staff services.
Traditionally, the incarceration function has always received the highest
priority in the budget allocation. Although this Budget Vote under
discussion has made some significant steps forward in transforming the
allocation of resources in the correctional system, there are still areas
of grave concern which require further improvement. Whilst the allocation
for incarceration has increased by 15%, care of offenders, which involves
the actual physical care and the health care of prisoners, has only
increased by 6,7%. A marked increase of 55,9% has been made with regard to
community corrections. Development of offenders received a satisfactory
14,2% increase, compared to the 0,1% decrease in the allocation for the
reintegration into the community.

In line with our vision for the transformed correctional services system,
we can no longer just concern ourselves with incarceration, but must also
see to it that the system adequately caters for need-based developmental
and rehabilitative offender programmes and the proper care of offenders.
The challenge ahead of us is to work out an acceptable compromise through
striking a proper balance between the competing interests of public safety
and offender care and rehabilitation within the constraints of a limited
budget.
Incarceration is paramount with regard to offenders who have committed
serious offences. It is therefore not difficult to see how a much-
publicised escape or a large-scale disturbance may precipitate a crisis
that is likely to result in an immediate shift of resources from the
provisioning of adequate conditions to the functions of security and
control. Prison security and offender control have a huge impact on our
budget, as they rely heavily on manpower, equipment, IT expertise,
architecture, categorisation of prisoners and routine procedures.

The overconcentration of resources on security and control at the expense
of offender care and rehabilitative development programmes is an
inescapable consequence of the history of where we come from as a
department. As I have already remarked in the NA on 12 May, it is an
indisputable fact that the vast majority of the inmates in our prison
system are from the previously disadvantaged groups who are unskilled and
of little value in the labour market. It is our responsibility as
correctional services to see to it that they, too, are the beneficiaries of
the new democratic dispensation, by providing them with the necessary basic
skills to better their chances of becoming economically active by getting
formal employment in the labour market, and, thus, helping to break the
cycle of crime. I think hon members are very familiar with this one.
Whether an ex-prisoner is skilled to do any kind of work within the
community, be it carpentry, painting or whatever the skills the person has
acquired from prison, immediately he steps out of prison and tries to look
for work, he is already disadvantaged, because he is stigmatised. Once
everybody knows, or the potential employer knows, that this person has been
to jail and he acquired the certificate and the skills from prison, he is
not going to employ him or her. The person goes from door to door and after
three months he still does not get work. What happens to his or her
children? Then the person goes back to the life of crime. After all, he was
getting three meals a day in prison and he had friends who were talking and
joking with him. It was all right. He gets back to the community and he is
shut out, simply because he was in prison.

We cannot compromise on any of the above-mentioned fundamental areas of the
department without jeopardising our core business objectives. It would
therefore appear that, unless a corresponding increase is made to our total
budget allocation in line with the ever-increasing population of inmates in
our prisons, we are soon reaching a stage where the system will completely
collapse. We are, of course, mindful of the fact that we are not the only
department that is operating under severe financial constraints. Therefore,
whilst insisting on increased funding, we must simultaneously focus our
efforts on developing appropriate reductionist strategies to counter the
problem of overcrowding and diminishing resources to enable us to meet both
our constitutional and international obligations regarding the treatment of
offenders and prevention of crime.

As I have outlined briefly in the NA, the problems facing the correctional
system cannot be viewed in isolation from what is taking place in the other
core departments of the criminal justice system. The Minister has said a
lot about that.

President Mbeki's visionary intervention in June last year to establish
ministerial clusters has been the single most important step forward in
bringing about the much-needed co-operation between the core departments of
the criminal justice system to develop an integrated, interdepartmental
approach to crime prevention. Already, through the clustering approach, we
have been able to formulate and embark on the following strategies to
combat overcrowding in prisons. There are multisectoral teams to identify
blockages and devise solutions to the awaiting-trial prisoner problem;
early release of offenders who have committed less serious crimes, after
they have served a minimum period of their sentences; thirdly, alternatives
to imprisonment, which involve serving sentences within the community under
supervision; and, lastly, fast-tracking of prison construction projects
currently under way and the use of public-private partnership initiatives
for the provision of additional prison accommodation.

We also intend to intensify our self-sufficiency programmes through the
optimal utilisation of prison labour to augment our budget. We will reopen
the debate on the retention by the prison system of income generated
through prison labour, and the costing and marketing of prison products.

We also intend to take over the maintenance of facilities from Public Works
to take direct control and accountability for ensuring conditions
consistent with human dignity in prisons. I am saying this because, I am
sure, most hon members saw the report on Pollsmoor about overcrowding and
the conditions of juveniles in there who are awaiting trial. But for some
of the things, we can say that we will look up to the courts, as the courts
are doing that. The Minister has been saying that.

However, I am sure that after seeing the leaking taps and the conditions
under which these children live, members are not convinced that another
department, not Correctional Services, is responsible. I am saying that we
have to take charge of that because we do budget for that type of thing,
but we do so through other departments which are responsible for the
maintenance of these buildings.

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, would the hon Minister take a question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Are you
prepared to take a question, hon Minister?

The MINISTER: Yes, I am.

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, yesterday we had the new commissioner in the
committee and he told the committee that they were going to have
negotiations with the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
yesterday afternoon about the whole situation of overcrowding. The
committee specifically asked the commissioner if he could give the Minister
feedback on those negotiations and on whether anything was achieved.

My question to the Minister is whether he can give us some feedback on
yesterday's result of the negotiations with the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development with regard to what he has just mentioned now.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, I am aware that negotiations are taking place,
but I have not been informed as to where they are at the moment. However,
in my speech I did say that some of these negotiations would be around what
I said under the first point, that there are multisectoral teams that will
identify blockages and devise solutions to the awaiting-trial prisoner
problem. These include not only Justice and Constitutional Development, but
also other departments which should look at the problem of overcrowding.

Regarding awaiting-trial prisoners, there is an alarmingly high number of
awaiting-trial prisoners in our custody, which at the end of April 2000
stood at about 63 964 and constituting approximately 40% of the total
number of prisoners in our facilities. This figure has grown to about plus
64 000. From January 1995 to February of this year, the number of awaiting-
trial prisoners increased by 158%, compared to an increase of only 15% for
sentenced prisoners over the same period.

On 22 May 2000 I delivered a keynote address at an official opening of a
senior management departmental workshop, in which I urged my officials to
take an active role in promoting the work of the multisectoral task team
set up to identify these blockages and devise solutions to the awaiting-
trial prisoner problem.

The newly appointed Inspecting Judge, Mr Justice Fagan who is a retired
judge, has indicated that the problem of awaiting-trial prisoners will
receive priority attention from his office as well, and that he intends
using his influence as a retired judge to sensitise the Bench of the
problems of overcrowding in prisons, to which the Minister has also
referred. He has also indicated that he intends fast-tracking the
implementation of the Correctional Services Act of 1998 with regard to the
appointment of Independent Prison Visitors.
The implementation of the new system of parole boards is also receiving
priority after a minor setback due to the unavailability of full-time and
ex officio members from the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development and the SAPS, as required in terms of the Act, because of the
budgetary constraints experienced by the two departments. As per agreement
by all three departments concerned, a suitable amendment of the Act that
would enable the co-option of members of the SAPS and the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development on an ad hoc basis, depending on the
security aspects and/or other sensitivities with regard to a given
application, would be submitted to Cabinet in the near future. As is
required in terms of the Act, the National Council for Correctional
Services has already voiced its support for a draft amendment submitted to
it for comment and advice.

The issue of alternatives to incarceration has been the subject of debate
in many countries for many years. As far back as 1910, there was already a
determination within the English home office to effect a reductionist
policy, and the principal initiative in setting this direction was taken by
Sir Winston Churchill. Similarly to our own situation, the reductionist
lobby in the English prison system was a reaction to the problem of
overcrowding, in that by 1908 their prison population stood at 22 000, only
marginally below the certified capacity of their prison system at the time.

In a memorandum to the prime minister in September 1910, Churchill
described the main problem as being, and I quote:


  ... the immense number of committals of petty offenders to prison on
  short sentences.

We have a large number of petty offenders in our prison system, especially
young offenders. The 55,9% increase in the budget for community corrections
sends a clear message about our intentions to use community corrections as
a viable alternative to incarceration.

The use of electronic monitoring to strengthen and enhance community
corrections as a viable alternative to incarceration in dealing with less
serious offences has been tested and found to be a viable option as opposed
to incarceration in the South African situation. As I put it in the
National Assembly, we view this project as an important milestone in the
transformation of our correctional system. When I delivered my keynote
address at the workshop of senior officials of the department on 22 May, I
gave specific instructions for the preparation and submission to me of an
action plan that would guarantee the implementation of the system
countrywide by the end of the financial year.

Despite the problems and crises we are facing due to insufficient
resources, we have nonetheless made tremendous progress in the fight to
prevent, or at least to minimise, prison escapes. As we know, even the
ultimate in fortress-like prisons, such as the American prison Alcatraz,
have not been immune to escapes. No doubt many of us in the eighties
watched in utter amazement how in the movie Escape from Alcatraz people
escaped from that fortress.

Following my direct personal intervention to hold anti-escape workshops in
November and December of last year in all nine provinces, we have managed
to drastically reduce the number of escapes within a short space of time.
We were able to identify the main causes of escapes and acted upon them.
The following areas were identified as the main causes of escapes:
negligence on the part of officials; corruption, which includes aiding of
escapees; old and weak prison structures; and shortage of staff.

Since January 2000 serious disciplinary steps have been taken against any
official whose negligence or gross negligence led to an escape from prison.
Although I believe it really is still too early to draw any conclusive
deductions regarding the success of the implementation of the strategies
adopted at the workshops, the following national figures on escapes are
very encouraging and show that we can do something about this problem. In
January 1999 we had about 39 escapes, in the same month this year, 13; in
February 1999 we had 34, in the same month this year, 14; in March 1999 we
had 48, in the same month this year, 26 - that is a little bit of an
increase; in April 1999 we had 18, in the same month this year, 22 -
another little bit of an increase. In total, in 1999 there were 139
escapes, and this year we had 75. This shows that there has been a
remarkable reduction.

We have also been able to focus on and intensify the battle against HIV-
Aids in prisons. I remember I was asked this question in this House last
week or two weeks ago, and I think I need to answer it fully.
Notwithstanding our liberal policies regarding the prohibition of mandatory
testing for HIV-Aids and maintaining separate facilities for HIV-Aids-
infected offenders in prisons, which is in keeping with the
constitutionally protected rights of bodily integrity and equality before
the law, we have managed to implement effective HIV-Aids prevention
programmes in prisons. Health education on STDs and HIV-Aids prevention on
admission and constantly throughout incarceration is provided to offenders.
Condoms are made freely available in the event of consensual sexual
relations. Gang-related incidents and activities are closely monitored and
the separation of vulnerable offenders, including transfer, is encouraged.

An effective HIV-Aids prevention programme is firmly in place, with HIV-
Aids focal persons appointed at each prison in order to promote awareness,
support and capacity-building efforts.

There is also a provincial health co-ordinator for each province to monitor
and ensure the implementation of the HIV/Aids programme. Offenders who
allege to have been raped are referred to a medical doctor for examination
and treatment and, depending on the outcome of the medical examination, the
affected offender will be taken for counselling and also monitored for
possible sexually transmitted diseases.

We are involved in a collaborative programme with Howard University in the
United States in the area of policy development studies. As part of this
programme, we will be cohosting a conference which will be held from 1 to 5
July 2000 in Cape Town titled ``Substance Abuse, Crime, Violence and HIV-
Aids as consequences of Poverty: Strategies for Prevention, Intervention
and Treatment in the United States and South Africa.''

Significantly, this conference was timed to precede the World Aids
Conference to be held in Durban by just a few days. Furthermore, as a
member of the International Corrections and Prisons Association which will
be holding its annual conference here in Cape Town on 27 to 31 August, we
have again been requested to co-host this year's conference, whose theme is
``Criminal Justice as a Career of Choice: Achieving our Full Potential.''

As one of the outcomes of the departmental senior management workshops held
on 22 to 24 May, the department will submit an action plan setting out
proper timeframes and targets for each of the strategies discussed above in
order to combat overcrowding. The department will also plan for and hold a
national symposium on correctional services to be attended by all
stakeholders in the correctional services system and other key players in
the criminal justice system. It is envisaged that this symposium is
expected to take place at the end of July this year and that it will serve
as a precursor to a fully fledged White Paper on correctional services,
which will cover policy aspects relating to the management of prisons and
community corrections.

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to pledge my commitment to
working closely with provincial and local government structures, in line
with the principles of co-operative governance and intergovernmental
relations as championed in Chapter 3 of the Constitution. As Correctional
Services, we are mindful of the fact that the successful implementation of
our policies depends on the co-operation and support we receive with regard
to awareness created at both provincial and local levels to the real issues
facing the correctional system.

We are part and parcel of the safety and security establishment of this
country and we fully recognise and appreciate our partnership with the
public to provide a safe and secure environment for all. In this regard, I
take the opportunity to recognise the efforts of Prof Kambule, the National
Youth Commission and others for their crime prevention initiatives, by
exposing homeless children to prison conditions in order to motivate them
to pursue their studies and turn their backs on crime.

Similarly, I would like to congratulate and express my sincere thanks to
the KwaZulu-Natal provincial department of education for their
participation in the Ncome Prison awareness campaign to discourage youth in
schools from engaging in criminal activities. These initiatives are,
indeed, both exemplary and noble and the Department of Correctional
Services must adopt them as part of its strategy for crime prevention.
[Applause.]

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, I am certain that our discussion today will
help all of us, amongst other things, to better understand the objectives
and processes of the criminal justice system, and its positive and negative
features. Having gained that understanding, I also believe that we would be
better placed to respond to urgent and important challenges this poses
without getting excited.

The steps we have taken towards vigorous and practical implementation of
these strategies adopted in the policies of the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development, the Department of Safety and Security and the
Department of Correctional Services, together with the suggestions that we
have made relating to the fundamental issues of democracy, good governance,
the recovery of human value, and peace and stability, would constitute an
appropriate response to the challenges posed by the environment in which we
find ourselves.

The challenge facing South Africa's criminal justice system is to protect
the rights enshrined in the new Constitution, whilst ensuring public
safety. I want to agree that crime in South Africa must be addressed
through a practical initiative that not only has an immediate local impact,
but also influences national policy. There is therefore a need to
continually evaluate our strategies and to find creative and innovative
ways to deal with these situations involving the increasingly sophisticated
criminals.

One legacy of apartheid is that many young South Africans do not have the
skills to reform the criminal justice system and, indeed, the opportunities
to acquire these skills remain limited. We cannot easily forget that
historically the South African criminal justice system was very corrupt and
oppressive. We are therefore again challenged with becoming our own
liberators from the scourge of violence and criminal behaviour of some of
the members of our society.

Governance does not mean government. It means the framework of rules,
institutions and established practices that set limits and give incentives
for good behaviour of individuals, organisations and institutions. Without
strong governance, the danger of conflict could be a reality during our
time. Trade wars promote national corporate interests, uncontrolled
financial volatility, which sets off civil conflicts, and untamed global
crime which infects safe neighbourhoods and criminalises politics and
politicians, business and the whole of the justice system.

The fight against crime and the creation of a just society based on
principles of equality and freedom are a collective responsibility of a
responsible society. Crime and criminality are a menace against which all
of us should close ranks, and one which we must confront head-on.

This Parliament passed the Prevention of Organised Crime Act in 1998 and,
as a product of this Act, the office of the National Directorate of Public
Prosecutions, together with other structures, such as the Asset Forfeiture
Unit, etc were established. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development has referred to these structures.

This was indeed a brilliant innovation by our Government. By this we sent
and continue to send a clear message to the organised criminals that South
Africa will not tolerate any kind of corruption, especially the activities
of the kingpins of these criminal syndicates. We would like to commend the
Ministers for instituting and leading a successful prosecuting regime that
found a collaborative solution which helped prosecutors to lead
investigations, bring cases to trial and win convictions by working with
the police and communities in partnership against crime.

We stand here to commend the department for the good work it has done. We
are all aware that the road has not been easy from many angles, such as the
structures of the justice system, where some of the judges have shown their
reluctance to implement these initiatives, because, among other things,
they viewed some of these laws as draconian, and that includes some hon
members who also joined forces with them, saying that some of the laws were
unconstitutional.

I am indeed heartened by the uncompromising attitude of both the Minister
of Justice and the Minister of Safety and Security, who are prepared to
take the war to the boardrooms, bars, bedrooms and lounges of criminals. I
also want to express our unwavering support to the Ministers for their
principle of zero-percent tolerance for criminality in our country.
Criminals must, in the words of Minister Tshwete, indeed be suffocated and
allowed no space in our society.

We welcome the initiatives and strategies adopted in identifying flash
point areas where there is a high level of crime and making a deliberate
effort to deploy resources in those areas and flush out criminals. I am
indeed happy to announce here that during constituency weeks, when I am in
the province, I do visit certain police stations, talk to station
commanders and ask them how we can lend our assistance in dealing with
crime.

As I am talking to members, we are having a crime summit in one of the
villages in Mpumalanga next week to discuss this whole question of crime.
This is indeed an initiative of a station commander. We invited to this
summit police, prosecutors, magistrates, political formations, local
councillors, NGOs, CBOs, business, taxi associations, principals,
traditional leaders and religious leaders. The purpose of this summit is to
attempt to get all and sundry to discuss the crime issue, and together to
find a solution to get rid of crime. We believe that this approach and
others will indeed work.

As a result of other innovative efforts between ourselves as politicians
and communities certain fruits are being reaped by our communities. Some of
the criminals have already been exposed and are behind bars and others will
still be arrested.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity to thank our men in
uniform, as well as our women in uniform, Commissioner Selebi in his
uniform this afternoon in our Chamber, Minister Maduna and his directors-
general, the Minister of Safety and Security, the Department of
Correctional Services, Minister Skosana and his director-general, and all
our officials who have until now made us proud as South Africans. I want to
say here, from the NCOP, that we are indeed behind them in all their
efforts. They should please gain strength in the knowledge that millions of
South Africans out there, including our neighbouring countries, are looking
to them to keep our country clean and uninfected. [Applause.]

Mr S ASIYA (Northern Cape): Chairperson, in the few years after and prior
to the establishment of our new democracy, South Africa has experienced a
tremendous upsurge in crime. Numerical factors based on historical,
political, economical, social and physical causes can be used to explain
this phenomenon. The intolerably high rate of violent crime and white-
collar crime often seem to threaten our democratic and constitutional
achievements.

At the same time that the country seemed plunged into an abyss of crime,
South Africa developed one of the most liberal and progressive bills of
rights in the world. The Constitutional Court gave numerous rulings in
matters concerning criminal justice. The death penalty was abolished,
corporal punishment declared unconstitutional and the rights of the accused
in criminal procedural matters were extended. This was an indication of a
commitment to human rights.

Violence and crime are usually results of inequality and poverty, and they
certainly breed fastest in a society characterised by extremes of
inequality and social exclusion. Ultimately, only measures that protect
communities from the deprivation of joblessness, injustice and insecurity
will also make them safer from crime.

The role of the civilian secretariat, inter alia, is to promote democracy,
accountability and transparency in the service and to research any policing
matters in regard to the Police Act.

It is common knowledge that the sociopolitical transformation and
tremendous change this country has undergone and is still undergoing change
since the election of 27 April 1994, together with the prevailing level of
crime, necessitated a new vision and fundamental change to policing in
South Africa.
When the South African society conceived democracy during the negotiation
process, a vigorous revolution took place within the SA Police Force. The
South African Police adopted a new ``surname'', namely ``Service''. This
precipitated a fundamental transformation within the SAP. A new philosophy
came into being, that of community policing.

Regarding the redistribution of resources, the racial bias in public
resource allocation is still a matter of grave concern to us. The delay in
the building of police stations in terms of the RDP programme is also a
matter of grave concern to the province, as it is affecting the effective
delivery of social justice. Resources such as community service centres, or
``police stations'', are still far away from where they are needed most,
where the high rates of crime are experienced on a daily basis.

Transformation in the SAPS cannot be seen as separate from the entire
process of transformation of the Public Service. It should be a people-
driven process and is not concerned with police management only.

Demilitarisation, deracialisation and depoliticisation in the SAPS should
be treated as a matter of urgency, with emphasis on the transformation of
the service into an efficient, effective and representative service which
upholds and protects the fundamental rights of the people.

With regard to municipal policing, section 206(7) specifically prescribes
that national legislation must provide a framework for the establishment,
functions and control of municipal police services.

The National Crime Prevention Strategy and the White Paper identifies
socioeconomic and environmental factors, especially in poor communities, as
factors that contribute to crime. Both documents stress that economic
growth and social development must ensure that the causes of and
opportunities for some categories of crimes are limited.

Another focus area is to develop a social crime prevention framework for
the areas which will identify interventions and focus on short-term, medium-
term and long-term intervention strategies, because the seriousness of the
continued attacks on rural communities, especially farming communities, in
South Africa is calling for intervention.

In conclusion, I can articulate with pride that various attempts are made
by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development and the Minister
of Safety and Security to restore the legitimacy of the criminal justice
system. I have good reason to believe that we may eventually succeed in
bringing down the high levels of crime. We must carry on the fight against
crime. I can quote what a famous person, Winston Churchill, said during
World War II, one of Britain's darkest hours:


  We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, we
  shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the
  hills, we shall never surrender.

We should remember that the future belongs to those who believe in it and
who are working for success. [Applause.]

Mr B M RADEBE (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, I am not surprised at this.
Even in my province, every time I stand up to speak there is something
happening in the room, so I am used to it. [Laughter.] My MEC is also
laughing because he knows that something will always happen when I rise to
speak in KwaZulu-Natal.
Chairperson, thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak in this
House. In other provinces the issue of security is priority number one, but
in our province, KwaZulu-Natal, it is number one plus the stars, because
KwaZulu-Natal is one of the most powerful provinces in the country.
Whatever we do in KwaZulu-Natal, we make sure that we do it thoroughly.
[Laughter.] So if we are engaged in a war, we fight, but if we are engaged
in a peace process, we negotiate peace.

I am saying this because the Minister of Safety and Security referred to
some areas in KwaZulu-Natal, Nongoma in particular. We have been praying
that one day peace will come to KwaZulu-Natal. As the two major parties in
KwaZulu-Natal, the IFP and ANC, we have been working on the peace process.
Then there is this issue of demarcation which also caused tension in
KwaZulu-Natal, but our leadership met and discussed it. Now there is the
problem of Nongoma, and I think the Minister of Safety and Security must
take extraordinary measures to deal with it.

As one of the co-chairpersons of the provincial peace committee in KwaZulu-
Natal, I just want to give members a brief history of that province. We had
a conflict in my township, Mpumalanga - not the Mpumalanga of Bab' uMabona
[Mr Mabona] - the real Mpumalanga. [Interjections.] On 27 November 1989,
from 3:00 to 3:15, 68 people were killed in 15 minutes. I am trying to
emphasise the point that it is crucial that the national Minister does
everything in his power to make sure that the area of Nongoma is contained.

Secondly, while we were surprised by the gunning down of the mayor of
Nongoma, tensions started to rise. So in KwaZulu-Natal we are not just
talking about criminals, we are talking about political criminals, and a
process in which IFP cadres are used to destroy and attack other parties,
and in which ANC cadres are used to attack other parties. So most of what
is happening in KwaZulu-Natal is more criminal in nature than political.

Furthermore, we believe that unless we deal with the political violence,
particularly in our province, there will be no peace in this country. When
the conflict started in KwaZulu-Natal it involved the IFP and the ANC. Full
stop. We fought for four and a half years in my township and we lost more
than 3 000 lives. Then after the former premier of the province, together
with the former leader of the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal, now the Deputy
President of this country, told the structures of the ANC and the IFP that
there was somebody perpetrating that violence, the violence shifted to
Gauteng.

In KwaZulu-Natal the conflict was between the IFP and the ANC. Full stop.
In Gauteng it involved Zulus and Xhosas, and not so much the IFP and the
ANC. When the leadership of Gauteng stood between the IFP and ANC and said
that there was a third force element involved, the violence shifted to the
mines. [Time expired.]

Mr M R MZOBE (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, the province of KwaZulu-Natal
forms an integral part of the Republic of South Africa. Fighting crime is
becoming more complex and more challenging. Criminals operate with very
little regard for national boundaries. As organised crime becomes
increasingly globalised, foreign criminal groups are extending their
operations, and South Africa is no exception to this tragedy. For these
reasons, the SA Police Service is faced with new challenges, with the
international crime arena becoming increasingly sophisticated and
technologically advanced.

In order to fight criminality from a position of strength, we need to
develop our human resources in terms of our ability to meet the challenges
of constantly changing criminal strategies.

It must not only be acknowledged, but also fully accepted that police
officers in South Africa have a greater chance of being victimised by
violence than society itself. It will be recalled that during the
liberation struggle the apartheid regime did not use the then SA Police for
law enforcement purposes only, but also used them to achieve and accomplish
their hidden agenda which morally, socially, politically and otherwise
affected the oppressed black masses of South Africa who were engaged in the
process of freeing South Africa.

It would be recalled, again, that subsequent to the old order's ulterior
motives, the police were declared, considered and viewed by the people of
South Africa as the ardent enemy of humanity and democracy. This culminated
in the most unprecedented animosity between the police and the citizens of
South Africa. The end result was that the police were systematically
targeted for assassination. It is therefore my strongest contention that
the police cannot work effectively and efficiently without the co-operation
and assistance of the community on the ground. The police must be supported
and assisted so that they can achieve high levels of delivery to the
public.

It looks as though some of us have lost sight of the commitment and huge
sacrifices being made by thousands of policemen and policewomen. We need to
appreciate and encourage the efforts of the police officers who go beyond
the call of duty to ensure the safety of their fellow citizens.

To combat further deterioration in human ethics, the Government is hereby
requested to collect all the unlicensed firearms that are currently
circulating in our communities. I am very heartened by the fact that the
sister Ministries, with their Ministers, are engaged in combating crime.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs C NKUNA: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members of this House, I
wish to thank you for the opportunity to reflect on certain critical issues
concerning the criminal justice system in our province. However, before I
do so, allow me to congratulate the Ministers of Safety and Security,
Justice and Constitutional Development, and Correctional Services on the
outstanding achievements in transforming our criminal justice system from
the main bastion of protection of white minority rule into one that is
responsive to the needs of the majority of our people.

What makes their achievement even more remarkable, is the fact that this
transformation has been achieved against great odds, such as limited
resources and opposition from the conservative, pro-apartheid officials who
refuse to accept change.

These people who refuse change do want the Government to protect them, but
on the other hand, they violate human rights to the worst extreme. It is
time that they do some introspection, take out what is wrong in themselves,
and retain and implement what is right. By so doing they will make it
easier for the Government to eradicate quite a number of cases.

I am pleased to say that the positive changes made at national level have
filtered down to our province as well. These changes presented us with the
opportunity to reduce crime and to ensure that the people in our province
enjoy greatly improved levels of security in line with our Government's
commitment to a better life for all. Allow me to say that farmworkers do
not enjoy this. Their living conditions are still terrible.

The Northern Province covers a vast area and has a population of
approximately 6,1 million. It is divided into four policing areas and has
91 police stations, with a total staff complement of 8 094 police members
and 883 civilians. Our provincial government plays a key role in initiating
and co-ordinating social crime prevention strategies through the Department
of Safety, Security and Liaison. The department has identified a number of
programmes and activities through which it hopes to prevent social crime.
It is currently drafting a manual for community-based crime prevention in
the province. The aim of the manual is to assist local authorities to
design their own crime prevention plans.

The province takes its monitoring and oversight role over the police very
seriously. To this effect it has established community policing forums at
most police stations in the province. Through these forums the provincial
government is able to monitor adherence to Government policies by the
police. These forums also provide the province with a platform to establish
community needs in terms of safety and security.

The police's rural protection plan is aimed at the protection of farms and
smallholdings, and all other rural communities. The reality, however, is
that police take little cognisance of other rural communities and their
need for protection against crimes such as stock theft and the theft of
water equipment, which are major problems in some of our rural communities.


Given the rural nature of our province, as well as the current distribution
of police stations and resources, it is suspected that a large number of
these crimes never get reported due to the inaccessibility of the police to
such areas. This naturally affects the quality of life of our people living
in these remote rural areas.

Our experience with witchcraft violence has shown that awareness campaigns
and rallies remain the most effective way of reaching the community to
convey the message to stop participating in this form of crime. We can
unequivocally state that the occurrence of witchcraft violence has abated
in the province. A new scourge has now reared its ugly head in the
province, namely that of domestic violence, which has been the cause of
most murders reported during 1999. The Department of Safety, Security and
Liaison is morally obliged to go out to the communities to add its voice to
that of the provincial legislature and the Commission on Gender Equality to
stop this crime in the province.

It has also solicited support from the Social Services Cabinet Committee to
encourage agencies involved in development projects on behalf of Government
to obtain court interdicts where persons are found to be interfering with
or damaging development projects, and to encourage development agencies to
lay formal charges at the nearest police station should theft or damages
occur at these development projects.

Although our provincial department is trying very hard to ensure that the
people in our province enjoy adequate levels of safety and security, we do
experience some problems, including an inadequate level of funding. In
spite of these problems, the department remains committed to carrying out
its ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, in recent World Bank research among 325 big
South African businesses, 94% of the respondents indicated crime and
violence as the biggest stumbling blocks in the South African economy. When
the man regarded as the world's most influential emerging markets investor,
Mr Mark Mobius, President of Templeton Emerging Markets Group of the United
States of America, says that the negative image of South Africa, which the
high levels of crime has created abroad, scares his investors and board of
directors, we cannot only sit up and take note. We have to act, and act
effectively, in order to drastically reduce the totally unacceptable high
levels of crime.

I wish to congratulate Commissioner Selebi and all police officers and
members with their recent successes with Operation Crackdown. I am also
encouraged by the fact that at long last the police now have a three-year
strategy which will primarily focus on the approximately 140 station areas
where more than 50% of the serious violent and organised crimes occur. It
is, however, important that capacity be built to deal with management of
crime, not only in these police areas, but at all police stations, so that
the criminals do not just run from one area to another.
The work of the police is, however, being seriously hampered by the
shortage of at least 7 000 trained personnel, 7 860 vehicles and other
equipment to the value of R85,2 million. This situation is totally
unacceptable and I have written to the Minister of Finance in this regard,
requesting that the amount of R928 million be made available to the police
immediately to enable them to address these shortages.

The murder of police members has become a national disaster which simply
cannot be allowed to continue. There should be no doubt that the
uncertainty created by the new section 149 of the Criminal Procedure Act
has contributed towards this, even though it has as yet not been
implemented. In this regard, I am glad that my written request last year,
through the then Secretary for Safety and Security, asking that the new
section not be implemented in August 1999, was complied with. I now ask
that the second part of my request, namely that the section be referred
back to Parliament, should also be complied with as a matter of urgency.

The situation in respect of the salaries and other benefits of police
members is totally unsatisfactory and should be addressed immediately. In
this regard I would appreciate it if the Minister of Safety and Security
could give us details of how the salaries of members of the SAPS compare
with the salaries of the municipal police of Durban, for instance, and with
that of the Scorpions at entry level and for comparable ranks.

I now wish to deal with Correctional Services and Justice. We clearly have
a national crisis of major proportions on our hands in respect of the
overpopulation of our prisons. The accommodation capacity of our prisons is
100 384 prisoners, and the current number of prisoners inside our prisons
is 172 271. In other words, this is an overpopulation of 71,61%.

Sixty-three thousand, nine hundred and sixty-four are awaiting-trial
prisoners. A prison like Pollsmoor is 180% overpopulated. The Western Cape
Bureau of Correctional Services even threatens to close all prisons in the
Western Cape if the crisis in respect of overpopulation is not addressed
immediately.

Although awaiting-trial prisoners are, by law, the responsibility of the
management of the Department of Justice, the Department of Correctional
Services is responsible for keeping them in custody and, therefore, must
have a definite and clear plan of action to deal with it. This is clearly a
problem for both these departments which calls for urgent and extraordinary
measures. What is more, if the police are going to continue to be
successful in arresting many thousands of criminals with Operation
Crackdown, then the number of prisoners in our prisons is going to increase
dramatically. Apart from the massive overpopulation, correctional services
also has a serious staff shortage. It was indicated that there will be a
shortage of 7 437 members in the 2000-2001 financial year. From the report
received from the Department of Justice, it appears that they have
succeeded in achieving a decrease of 10% in the number of awaiting-trial
prisoners.

In considering the reasons for the large number of awaiting-trial
prisoners, it is acknowledged by the department that basic things are
simply not being done correctly, and that this is mainly due to the lack of
training and experience of prosecutors. The costs associated with
unsentenced prisoners are estimated at R1,3 billion per year. The number of
prosecutors trained by the  Justice College unfortunately dropped
substantially from 1 610 in 1997-98 to only 450 in 1998-99, as a result of
budgetary constraints.

In some regions, persons with no prosecuting experience or training had to
be appointed. This situation is unacceptable. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Mr Chairman, I love this country, I am proud of our
democracy and I recognise that things are easier said than done. But my
heart goes out to the Ministers concerned, because we want them to succeed.
We understand very well - my colleague has mentioned it - the linkages
between crime and business confidence, crime and investment, and crime and
tourism.

I want to talk to members briefly today, not only about crime - the
understanding of which is vital - but the causes of crime, if we are going
to deal with the matter effectively. I was pleased to hear the Minister say
that he was talking to the Minister of Education and to the Minister of
Health about rape, and that he was liaising with his colleagues.

But I want to alert the Ministers to a potentially devastating link between
crime and Aids. Currently, there are 200 000 Aids orphans in our country;
and, by the year 2005, 1,5 million children will have lost their mothers to
Aids. Now I want to tell the Ministers that Aids, in my view, has been a
vital and important contributory cause to the dysfunctional state of
collapse, lawlessness and civil violence in the countries of central
Africa. There has been a loss of markets, an assault on the stabilising
structure of family life, a loss of skills to the economy, but, most
importantly, the psychological impact on society in general and the effect
upon lawlessness and crime,  and upon an individual's sense of self-worth.
A kind of desperate short-termism comes into the equation.

If one is unemployed, orphaned, or dying, one can become reckless and
desperate. I wish to request Ministers, seriously, to institute a
commission or urgent study to research these links, or to get a university
to research these links, between Aids, crime, and social disintegration,
and to see what can be done about it.

A study by Barings Bank shows us that by the year 2006, 26% of our
economically active population will be HIV positive. Life expectancy will
drop from 60 years to 40 years by the year 2008. Only 50% of people alive
in South Africa today are going to reach the age of 60.

I believe that these realities have already had, and are likely to have, a
major impact on our poor behaviour and crime, and increasingly so. An
urgent study on this aspect of things needs to be done so that possible
corrective action can be taken and behaviour understood. [Time expired.]

Mr M G E WILEY (Western Cape): Mr Chairman, I would like to quote.


  One of the central features of the brutish society we seek to bring an
  end to, is the impermissible level of crime and violence. Acting together
  with the people, we will heighten our efforts radically to improve the
  safety and security of all our citizens.

These words were uttered last year, on 25 June, just about a year ago, by
the President of this country, Mr Thabo Mbeki.

When I listen to the contribution made by the three very critical Ministers
- when I say critical, I mean that of the clusters that the Government has
created, their cluster is the single most important - I get the impression
from the Ministers that there is less of a sense of urgency with regard to
their cluster than what the President said last year already. And yet the
situation is considerably worse than it was last year, and all the
statistics are there to prove it.

National Commissioner Selebi said just yesterday that, as a result of
Operation Crackdown, he is going to force upon the Justice department
200 000 dockets in one year. Currently, the single biggest logjam in the
criminal justice system is the inability of the Justice department to
process dockets. The Minister has said that there was an improvement in the
processing of documents, but what he neglected to do was to back it up with
statistics.

Every single court in this country says otherwise. My visits to courts tell
me that, in fact, we are not processing more dockets; we are processing
fewer cases. What is happening is that more and more cases are being
withdrawn at police station level, because the police officers say: ``We
cannot investigate these crimes because we do not have the capacity to do
so,'' and they give one a case number so that one can make an insurance
claim. Even in the case of serious crimes, this happens. I had a case
yesterday in which a doctor phoned me. His wife is also a doctor, a
physician. She was robbed in her surgery, together with one of the
patients. Armed robbery in the surgery. He phoned to tell me six hours
later that the police had come to take a statement and they said that they
were not sending fingerprint people because it really was a useless case.
That particular case, may I say, is now subject to an investigation by my
department. But that is what is happening at the moment - fewer and fewer
cases are going through the process, because people have given up trying to
process them.

Then they go to the public prosecutor. The public prosecutor, still with
the greatest respect, is so overworked at the moment that, on the slightest
technicality, or maybe an inconsistency with regard to a statement, those
cases are being withdrawn.

In fact, if the Minister sees an improvement, I hope that the statistics
that he has quoted and the inference he is giving to this Parliament that
the situation is improving, do not include cases that are being withdrawn,
because with regard to the cases that are being withdrawn, where previously
they might have been the indication of efficiency, they are now an
indication of inefficiency. And this can be proven.

The President went on to speak about a whole series of actions that the
Government is going to take to try to improve safety and security - the
constitutional role of this country - to create a safe and secure
environment with regard to human resource development; and Minister Tshwete
has alluded to human resource development.

The most significant human resource development that is taking place at the
moment is with regard to a unit that Minister Tshwete reported on now. It
does not even reside in his portfolio, but under the Minister of Justice,
the so-called Scorpions Unit. Legally, it does not exist. It is still ad
hoc.  There is no legislation to allow it to exist. [Interjections.]

That is the truth, unfortunately. However, I have no problem ...
[Interjections] ... No, I am not going to take a question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I beg your pardon, Mr
Minister, but I must actually ask the member on what point he is rising. I
must ask him. I must give him a chance. We cannot just make a presumption.
Could you tell me on what point you are rising, hon member?

Mr M V MOOSA: Thank you for protecting me, Chairperson. I wanted to ask if
the hon member would ...

Mr C ACKERMANN: On a point of order, Sir: He is out of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I beg your pardon, hon member
I have not recognised you.

Mr C ACKERMANN: He is out of order. He is out of order, Sir.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Continue, Mr Moosa.
Mr M V MOOSA: Thank you, Chairperson. It looks like we have forgotten about
procedure in this House. I wanted to ask the hon member a question
regarding whether ...

Mr C ACKERMANN: He is out of order. He is not asking a question.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I have not yet recognised you.
[Interjections.] Mr Moosa, could you please ask your question?

Mr M V MOOSA: I wanted to ask the hon member how he ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Mr Wiley, are you prepared to
take a question?

Mr M G E WILEY: Mr Chairman, I hope that I will be dealt with impartially
in this House. When the hon member on the other side stood up, I
immediately said I was not prepared to take a question. [Interjections.]
Nothing has changed, and I hope that Mr Moosa's delaying tactic is going to
be taken into account with regard to my speaking time.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Wiley, are you prepared to
take a question or not?

Mr M G E WILEY: No, Sir, I am not.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Please continue with your
speech.

Mr M G E WILEY: The tragedy is that while small politics are being played
in this Chamber, this province ... [Interjections] ... the Western Cape
Province, had 47 murders last weekend, 45 attempted murders, 129 armed
robberies, 362 thefts of motor vehicles and over 70 or 80 women raped, and
that is about 10% of the truth. [Interjections.]

The question that has to be addressed to the Minister of Safety and
Security, because he said that the taxi violence is as a result of racism
and a lack of understanding of democracy in this province, and that this is
the number one crime province according to their own police statistics, is:
Can he tell us in what way, other than with urban terrorism and now during
this taxi violence, has this province been assisted with numeric supplies
and other resources, as it is required by law, in order to safeguard the
citizenry of this province? [Interjections.]

Since 1995 we have been given 112 new police recruits. I am currently
training - because the question was asked where I was, 150 police
reservists in an intensive training programme in Oudtshoorn, for which my
department pays and which I am not actually allowed to do. I trained over
250 police reservists last year. I found sponsors and we increased the
police numbers in this province by 257. [Interjections.] I will increase
the police numbers in this province by another 450 during the course of
this year, and this is being paid for by sponsors and the public sector at
the moment.

I would like to bring to the attention of this Parliament something which
is going to increase even more.

Nog misdaadslagoffers eis vergoeding van die Regering. Feit van die saak
is, meer en meer mense voel onveilig in hierdie land van ons. Meer en meer
mense voel so. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Still more victims of crime are demanding compensation from the
Government. In fact, more and more people are feeling unsafe in this land
of ours. More and more people are feeling this way.]

I would have hoped that the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development would have read some of the Hansards. Four years ago, I said to
Minister Omar, ``Please, investigate the lay magistrate system practised in
the United Kingdom.'' There are 28 lay magistrates. We have the tribal
system in this country. We have the lekgotla system just across the border.
There are other systems, such as the chiefs system, which we have in this
country. Having those legitimised - and it was on our agenda for discussion
previously - we can reduce the case-load in our courts almost overnight, as
long as those people do not demand a high payment, as the Minister said in
his statement only yesterday when he turned the turf for a court in Delft.

I sincerely hope that by turning that turf, the people that will be funded
in order to safeguard that court will not be police officers, because on
any one day in this province 400 police officers have to be deployed in
order to safeguard courts instead of being out on the street. I have to
train them in order to put them out on streets as visible police officers.
[Interjections.]

Currently in this province 37% of the prison population, which is now over
150% full, is awaiting-trial prisoners. Many of them are being incarcerated
under intolerable and inhuman conditions at the moment, because they cannot
get into the court system. Many of them are there because they quite simply
cannot afford bail for having stolen fruit or something of that nature.
Surely, what we need to do ... [Interjections] ... I cannot pay their bail
... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon MECs and hon members, a
perception is being created that the rate of violence against women and the
abuse of children have increased since the ANC took over Government. Those
who perpetuate this perception want us to believe that apartheid prevented
violence against women or that the end of apartheid has led to the increase
of violence against women. Nothing could be further from the truth.

Since 1994, there has been increased awareness of the seriousness of child
abuse and violence against women, not only as critical societal problems,
but also as crimes. In addition, there is increasing recognition of the
often long-lasting psychological effects on children who witness violence,
whether or not they are the actual victims. As a result, there has been an
increase in the use of criminal and civil processes to address violence and
the abuse of children and women in our country.

The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, in conjunction
with the other Ministers in the criminal justice system, was instrumental
in this process. Under the leadership of the current Minister for Justice
and Constitutional Development and his predecessor emerged a policy and
legislative environment which promote the safety of women and children and
which protect their rights to freedom from violence. This never happened
during the apartheid era. In fact, prior to the ANC taking over the
Government, few South African women had access to the judicial system in
the manner that they do today.

Under apartheid, victims of women and child abuse were expected to wait in
the same area as the accused. Prosecutors rarely consulted with victims
before the trial, and the reasons whether to prosecute a case or not were
not clearly explained to victims. On the whole, the apartheid courts and
their processes were inadequate and entirely unsupportive to victims. The
police themselves were not cognisant of the impact which their responses
had on victims of domestic and other types of violence. Their actions were
marred by a myriad of reasons for nonintervention, including lack of
resources, lack of transport, difficulties in securing convictions and a
belief that women themselves were responsible for being abused.

It was only after the ANC came to power that these problems began to be
addressed. Magistrates, prosecutors and members of the police were sent on
special training courses to sensitise them to the needs of women victims.
The judiciary has been transformed to ensure greater participation by women
on the Bench and special courts were established to deal with sexual
offences involving children. Police stations have become community centres
where female members of the police are specifically trained to deal with
child abuse victims and women who have been violently abused.

The ANC has made a commitment to eradicate violence against women and
children, and we have backed up this commitment with laws and institutions
which promote the rights of and protect women and children. However, we
also understand that neither the criminal justice system nor the social
service system alone can prevent violence against women and children. Based
on our increasing understanding of the experiences of victims of domestic
violence, we know that meaningful strategies of enhancing the safety of
women and children require a co-ordinated response in which entire
communities must be engaged. It is up to each one of us ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr J S MABONA (Mpumalanga): Chairperson, Minister of Safety and Security,
Minister of Correctional Services, Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I thank the House
for the opportunity to present my speech on this very important and useful
occasion.

Firstly, I just want to say something in relation to what the DP,
especially the hon Wiley, has said. It is very unfortunate that the people
who were privileged in the past simply kept quiet when black, coloured and
Indian people were murdered in this country. [Interjections.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, I do not believe Mr Wiley has joined the DP.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, on what point are
you rising?

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, on a point of information: I do not believe the
hon MEC has crossed the floor yet. [Interjections.]

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, on a point of order: There is nothing in the
Rules that indicates that a member can stand up on a point of information.
There is no such Rule. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Thank you, Mr Moosa. Please
continue, hon MEC.

Mr J S MABONA: Chairperson, I am in charge of safety and security in
Mpumalanga and I make sure that when people phone me to tell me that a
doctor and his wife have been raped by criminals, I stand up and give
instructions. I wonder why Mr Wiley does not do that. The public must ask
themselves why this is so. We are all aware that policing has been one of
the subjects for speculation during the whole period of the old
dispensation. This came from a background in which service delivery was not
an issue as long as specific ideological objectives were fulfilled.

The new dispensation brought about a turning point in these processes and
service delivery became a priority. The police service was expected to
conform to different norms in order to ensure that service delivery is a
success. In order for the police service to be able to conform to these
norms, various legacies of the past were supposed to be eradicated, and
this we have done. This process has, indeed, taken place, but old
tendencies and habits which still exist leave much to be desired. These
tendencies and habits are born of the old culture which can only be changed
through a process. It is the effectiveness and the practicability of this
process which put service delivery to the test.

The following subjects have a practical bearing on the whole question of
service delivery. The first subject is the budget. A unilateral approach
has characterised the culture of allocating the budget in the service.
Although there are certain factors which are taken into account when
allocating the budget, there is no fixed national formula. In addition to
this, a central bargaining structure where all provinces can bargain for
their share does not exist. The application of the factors against the
national allocation is also done without the participation of provinces,
something which gives national Government the power to make adjustments
unilaterally.

What has also become a disturbing factor in this process is the fact that
several components chop and change between the national and provincial
levels. This makes the historical data unreliable. Although the provincial
allocation for Mpumalanga has not yet been given, we are convinced that it
shall be far below our requirements, just as has been the case in the
previous financial years. But we must also bear in mind the national
considerations.

The second factor is human resource and related problems. Human resource-
related problems cover the greatest area in the SAPS. The following are a
few subjects covered in this area. The first subject is promotions. A
promotions policy was drawn up at the beginning of the new dispensation,
but has to date not yet been completed. An interim policy has been used
throughout the process, but its disadvantage is the fact that it is
characterised by various moratoriums and several conditions. The absence of
this policy has completely hampered human resource development and
continuity in leadership. The organisation is currently experiencing a
concentration of ranks at certain levels, especially at the level of
inspector.

An audit for promotion according to the different ranks is not really
available in the SAPS. The number of promotions to be effected is always
determined by the size of the budget and is only known when applications
for those who qualify are called. This is an area which has the greatest
impact on service delivery, because it has caused a high state of
demoralisation amongst the workforce. How can a person render effective
service if he or she is not promoted because of the lack of an effective
promotions policy? However, I must say that this is a question that the
national Department of Safety and Security is addressing.

The second subject is discipline and racial conflicts. It is also an
indisputable fact that discipline in general has deteriorated in the
service. One of the contributory factors to this is transformation. Many
individuals, especially leaders, earned automatic respect which was created
through subserviency to the system. The command language of the leadership
of the SAPS also changed and unions also came in to test the negotiation
skills of the SAPS managers, including their diplomacy and professional
leadership in general.

Leaders and members, in general, are now expected to conform to certain
norms, ethics and standards in order to earn dignity and respect.
[Interjections.] It has therefore become clear to every member in the
service that the Constitution has removed all barriers attached to the
system, and they have begun to exercise their rights. Leaders who still
relied on the advantages of the system and those who led through command
and control began to lose power.

Tension was created between general members and the leadership, which was
also fuelled by the advent of the unions. Many of the leaders resorted to
command and control for survival and supported their stand with negative
discipline.

Having stated the above, we wish to commend the decision by national
Commissioner Jackie Selebi to devolve disciplinary powers to the station
commanders on the ground. We are confident that if all rules are properly
applied we shall get discipline back to all our members. However, we need
to caution that one should guard against racially motivated disciplinary
action.

Regarding resources and restructuring, the distribution of resources is one
of the prominent priorities of the transformation and covert in the
dimension for restructuring. The complexity of this subject goes back to
the introduction of the new dispensation, when the different agencies were
amalgamated. This process was nothing but a flocking of blacks from black
areas to former white-dominated areas. This also amounted to a shift of
resources from these areas to white-dominated areas.

Mpumalanga is a good example of this, since both the provincial
headquarters and all three areas are in the former SAP's F region, all in
towns such as Middelburg. No establishment was put in the Kwa-Mhlanga and
Mbuzini areas, only small stations. I wish to report that, as the
administration is in the process of moving the Highveld headquarters from
Middelburg to Kwa-Mhlanga, certain unions, who are obviously still stuck in
the past, have declared a dispute against the SAPS. This is really
unacceptable. Other quarters have raised business concerns and suggested
that moving from Middelburg to Kwa-Mhlanga might prejudice the business
prospects of Middelburg. What type of people are we to put more weight on
business prospects than on the interests of our people, who were previously
disadvantaged and are now desperately in need of policing? [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms N MOKONYANE (Gauteng): Chairperson, I am Mokonyane, not Monkonyane, for
the record. I also wish to indicate, with the Chair's permission, that
sometimes it is very irresponsible of those who are given executive
authority to engage in debates of this nature without showing any serious
responsibility in terms of the responsibilities that they have been given.
[Interjections.]

I believe, not only as a member of the ANC but as a South African, that we
really have to appreciate that there is still much that has to be done.
Unfortunately for the people of the Western Cape, everyone in this country
has been talking about the serious issue of taxi-bus conflict, but it is
not seen as a priority. [Interjections.] Also, the investment in terms of
the training of reservists is seen as the domain of an individual rather
than a utilisation of public funds. [Interjections.]

On that basis, I believe cheap politics can never prevail, especially when
it amounts to a dog barking at a moving car. The car will continue to move
irrespective of whether the dog barks or not. [Laughter.] Even if the dog
continues to bark at other vehicles, that car will know its destiny, and
will never be distracted by a barking dog that does not have a vision.
[Laughter.]

I think we also need to appreciate that when millions of people of this
country went to the polls last year in order to cast their votes, they had
many choices in terms of who to vote for. But, many of them decided to give
the ANC a huge mandate to govern this country, because they believed in our
policies as well as our strategies. I believe that as this Government we
are on track in fulfilling that mandate, despite criticism from various
quarters, particularly from those who are sitting in the castles they have
created over the years.

The demographics of our province, as well as those of our country, are
likely to change within the next five years, and this will require a
different approach with regard to crime prevention, both on the side of the
SAPS and of various Government departments. This requires all of us to come
up with different interventions, based on our local priorities, that will
deal with breaking the cycle of violence.

In order to deal with crime effectively, we have identified key priority
areas which will be implemented during the current financial year: Violence
against women and children; youth crime prevention, which includes the use
of firearms and substance abuse; co-ordination of the criminal justice
system and liaison with various role-players; the building of good and
sound community-police relations, as well as the mobilisation of our
communities; ensuring the implementation as well as co-ordination of social
crime prevention initiatives, both at provincial and local level; and
monitoring police performance and assessing the effectiveness of visible
policing in the province. These are the priorities that we have identified
and the executive authority has actually taken responsibility.

I really find it quite disgusting that sitting here today are other members
of executive councils who want to abdicate the responsibility of
introducing social crime prevention strategies, and make that the
responsibility of the police while projecting that all is lost in this
country. I believe members also have to come to this House and account as
members of executive councils. [Interjections.]

Our plans are still based on policies as well as legislation that have been
passed by both national and provincial parliaments. During this financial
year Gauteng has already started implementing various interventions which
will lead to the co-ordination of crime prevention initiatives. We are
already complementing efforts developed by the SAPS by mobilising the
public at large to play an active part in crime prevention initiatives. We
are not just getting telephone calls, but we are with the people where they
actually encounter problems, and together with them we are trying to find
solutions.

I believe that at both the national and provincial levels we have developed
a comprehensive plan not only to deal with the containment of crime as a
short-term strategy, but also to enable us to prevent crime and to deal
with it in the long term.

I think that all members will agree with me that the active involvement of
our communities in working with different law enforcement agencies is of
critical importance. We have made and will continue to make appeals that
Government and the SAPS alone cannot and will not deal with crime on their
own. It is therefore imperative for various communities, irrespective of
political affiliation, as well as individuals to get involved. We will
continue to come up with new ways and methods of ensuring that the men and
women in uniform receive maximum support from the public.

Of course we also want to pose a challenge to the cluster that those men
and women in uniform also deserve to be given the rewards that they
deserve, because we appreciate the risks that they are faced with. We
believe that they cannot be treated like any typist or receptionist in the
Public Service. Their remuneration must be linked to the risks that they
are exposed to. [Applause.]
We have witnessed the disruption of schools in areas such as Alexandra and
KwaThema in Gauteng, and this is of great concern to us, because children
are the future leaders of this country. But we are not going to be
intimidated by a small group of unruly elements. Together with the
Department of Education, we are already implementing various projects aimed
at ensuring that we restore the culture of learning and teaching. Our
primary aim is to mobilise students, parents, teachers, the SAPS, as well
as the entire community to jointly find solutions.

Crimes against women and children are of great concern to each and every
member of the public. Our assessment of the impact of the Domestic Violence
Act has shown that there is a need to train members to further co-ordinate
and allocate new resources within the criminal justice system. Improved
service delivery by the SAPS to communities is of importance and should be
encouraged at all times so as to build public confidence. Quality service
delivery can be realised if business and other institutions can commit
themselves to assist with resources that are lacking.

The groundwork that we have done so far in Gauteng with regard to the
implementation of municipal policing will also greatly assist us in
speeding up the processes once the demarcation processes have been
finalised. Through this programme we will ensure that we reclaim our cities
and make them viable for business purposes.

The transformation of the SAPS is one of the major issues. The
transformation process that we want to see should be able to deal with
issues such as representivity, business practices and the new
organisational culture within the SAPS.

The process of co-ordinating activities within the various units of the
criminal justice system at provincial level will further ensure that we are
project-driven and able to talk to one another from time to time.

The challenge facing our national Government and the provinces is dealing
with public perceptions and, unfortunately, perceptions regarding those who
hold public office, particularly with regard to the inability of the police
to deal with crime. We are also faced with the problem of how to ensure
that developmental programmes take on board the social crime-prevention
issues. What matters most to us are the people from disadvantaged
communities, those who have been victims of the bus and taxi violence here
in the Western Cape. [Interjections.] Most of the people in these areas do
not have access to information and, therefore, our education programmes
must reach them. [Interjections.]

I want to reiterate that we have to address the conditions of employment of
members of the SAPS, as well as the wages or allowances granted to them, in
accordance with the sacrifices they make and the risks they take. I also
wish to urge this House to put politics aside if we really want to make
sure that we succeed. [Interjections.] All is not lost.

We will give support to the cluster and, more importantly, to those men and
women in uniform. [Applause.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, hon Ministers, members of executive councils and
members, this review debate is of great significance because it involves
three Ministries whose area of responsibility and performance affects every
person living in our country.

Although politicians and academics may abuse statistics to portray a
situation to suit their individual purposes, it is no secret that our
country is racked by crime, our judicial system is choked by backlogs, our
prisons are bursting at the seams, and that our police force is
underresourced and appears to be demoralised. Certainly, an honest
assessment of the underlying causes of these problems is necessary, but the
time for workshops or talk shops with no action has passed.

The hon the Minister of Justice made a vague statement today that
magistrates are now working upwards of four and a half hours. Perhaps he
will tell us what the actual average is. However, aside from wrangling over
what the hours are, we need to ask: How did the situation arise? What is
being done to correct it? How can we justify what is being spent on
magistrates' courts if they only work slightly more than half a working
day? Is the public getting value for money?

There were reports in the media yesterday that two alleged murderers walked
free from a court in Pretoria as a result of bureaucratic bungling. The SA
Press Association reports that the prosecutor could not find the docket and
withdrew the charges. [Interjections.] The police now have to launch a
manhunt to rearrest these people. In these circumstances it is not
difficult to understand why the police are demoralised. These incidents and
facts undermine the confidence of the public in the judicial system. The
mere fact that organisations such as Mapogo a Mathamaga exist at all shows
how far down this road we have already travelled. [Interjections.]

The standing of the courts was further undermined when an official of the
ANC, Mr Smuts Ngonyama, accused the Supreme Court of Appeal of racial bias
in the Boesak case. For the second time in a relatively short period the
Chief Justice and President of the Constitutional Court had to rush to the
defence of the judiciary.

Ironically, the Department of Justice has to grapple with fraud, corruption
and criminality within its own ranks. The latest Auditor-General's report
on the Department of Justice, for the year ending on 31 March 1999,
revealed that R2 545 170 worth of warrant vouchers were fraudulently
acquired and traded. This could not have been accomplished without the
collusion of members of the Department of Justice.
What needs to be done? Firstly, corrupt officials need to be rooted out.
The country cannot afford to play the ANC's own particular brand of musical
chairs, in which a corrupt official is merely transferred from one post to
another or, after a few months out of the public eye, shows up in his old
post as if nothing has happened.

Secondly, hands-on management is required. The department's problems will
not be solved by simply throwing money at them. The Minister has to ensure
that the money is being used for the purpose for which it is intended.
There is no room for squandering and waste. The short-term, medium-term and
long-term goals of the department must be attained. The Minister has to
ensure that discipline is restored to the department. Magistrates and
prosecutors must fulfil their duties diligently. Court backlogs must be
brought under control. The public's confidence in the judicial system must
be restored as quickly as possible.

In the briefing by the Department of Correctional Services we were informed
that most of the escapes from custody occurred ... [Time expired.]

Mr T S SETONA: Chairperson, hon Minister of Safety and Security Mr Steve
Tshwete, hon Minister of Justice Mr Maduna, hon Minister of Correctional
Services Mr Ben Skosana, MECs and special delegates from provinces and
fellow colleagues in the National Council of Provinces, I am, indeed,
honoured to be participating in this debate this afternoon.

After the Ministers had spoken, I tried from the point of view of being a
member of the ANC, to get words of wisdom from our fellow members on the
other side, that is, the opposition, but I really drew few lessons. I heard
some sense in what Mr Kent Durr said today, at least. All the others have
been teaching us about statistics. They have been telling us about the
failure of the Government, and have been singing the praises of criminals,
telling the public out there that criminals will continue to hold this
country to ransom because the Government is weak. I think we must not allow
ourselves to be intimidated by the attitude of those hon members.

Allow me to join others in echoing my support for the Ministries, the
departments and the Government at large for a job well done in re-
engineering the criminal justice system to meet the challenges of making
our beloved country, South Africa, a crime-free society.

Our support for the Ministers will never be complete if we do not equally
give accolades to men and women in the Police Service, the justice system
and Correctional Services who, under the most difficult circumstances, are
unwavering in their commitment to making our country a crime-free society.

Indeed, the successes of this Government against crime must be attributed
equally to the increasing support that the police continue to receive from
our communities, from ordinary men and women in the streets of our
townships. Accordingly, for millions of our people who were subjected to
social deprivation for many decades, a new season of hope has dawned
because, for the first time a child can report an indecent assault, for the
first time a mother can report all forms of abuse, even by her spouse, and
an ordinary citizen can report any form of corruption committed by any
officer in the Police Service or justice system.

I do not think it is my duty to remind some of the speakers, particularly
Mr Lever and company, that there never was a criminal justice system in
this country before April 27, 1994. [Interjections.] What we had in this
country before that particular period was a system of policing which was
based on racism, a system that was based on the oppression of the black
majority of this country. We are undoing this. In this process, the
selfsame creators of the same institution come back and tell us that we are
not doing enough. I do not think that we should be intimidated by this
chorus of hopelessness.

Quite clearly, a culture of silence against crime, engineered for many
decades of colonial rule, has been broken down in six years' time. It has
been built over more than 40 years, since 1948 when the NP took over. In
six years we have broken that culture of silence. People are able to report
criminal offences to the police and relevant authorities.

The renewed confidence in the criminal justice system has not been brought
about by speeches. I think we need to understand that and the MEC from
Gauteng has alluded to it. It has been brought about by the concerted
effort of our Government in partnership with our people. That is very
important and critical - it was achieved in partnership with our people. We
are engaging everyone, those who agree with us and those who do not agree
with us, to say this is the line we want to take in terms of creating a
South Africa which is free from crime. I am inviting the fellows from the
Western Cape, in particular Mr Wiley, to join us in that particular march.
[Interjections.] Whilst the prophets of doom continue with their chorus of
hopelessness about the inability of Government to bring the levels of crime
down in this country, our Government and our people are firm and
unflinching in their resolve to combat crime.

Allow me to highlight some critical initiatives that the provincial
government of the Free State is unleashing to maximise the capacity of the
South African Police Service in combating crime in the province, through a
provincial policing plan which is in line with the national plan. This plan
entails the following critical action areas. The first is combating
organised crime. The second is combating crime against women and children.
Thirdly, the aim is to combat serious violent crimes. In the fourth place,
the aim is to combat provincial priority crimes. In the fifth place, the
aim is to enhance budget and resource management. Other aims are enhancing
human resource management, enhancing basic service delivery to all
communities, and enhancing transformation.

Having enumerated these programme areas, allow me to join the MEC from
Gauteng to once again challenge the Western Cape delegate to tell us what
it is that he is doing to combat taxi violence that is rife in the Western
Cape. [Interjections.] What is it that he and his government are doing to
ensure that there is no crime in Gugulethu and Nyanga, and that there is no
crime in the entire Western Cape? [Interjections.] We want to benefit from
that.

Whilst energy and resources continue to be harnessed against crime, the
problem of the colour line remains an issue to be resolved by this country,
particularly in the police service. This relates to the mind-sets and
attitudes within the police service, the composition of the management
structure, and their common commitment and loyalty to the country's ideal
of a nonracial, transparent and efficient police service.

Whilst we appreciate the difficulties underpinning the transformation
process in the police service, it should, however, be noted that the
implementation of affirmative action is taking place at a very slow pace
and this matter must receive attention. I would like to refer the Minister
to a case at Bloemspruit Police Station next to Bloemfontein, where a
junior black official arrested a senior white official for corruption, and
this official was simply released on the directive of an area commissioner
who happened to be white. I am not playing cheap politics here, I am
relating a fact. [Interjections.] I am saying ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.] [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I see knobkerries
coming this way ... [Laughter] ... but I know it will be knobkerries of
education, and not physical ones. First, just to respond to one or two
points, and because I do not have much time to do that, there was a
question on the meeting between the Directors-General of Correctional
Services and Justice. Now I am informed ... The questioner is not here, so
I do not know whether I should continue with this. I will do it for the
sake of the House. I am informed that the meeting is ongoing and that it
will continue next week, but the essence of the meeting which the member
was asking about, was in fact to look at the possibilities of finding
alternative accommodation in order to house those children who are in
Pollsmoor and to transfer them to a place of safety, so as to alleviate the
overcrowding there.

I am also informed that today at 14:00 there was a meeting between the
Director of Public Prosecutions, the President of the Regional Court, the
regional head and representatives of SAPS and Correctional Services, who
also met with the MEC responsible for welfare in the Western Cape, just to
look at how to implement the above efforts in order to mobilise assistance
and resources. I must also add that it has become imperative that these
efforts are replicated in other provinces where the plight of children and
overcrowding are also in existence. It is not only in the Western Cape that
this happens, and therefore this ought to be used as a pilot project to do
so in other provinces.

Secondly, I want to respond to the question of understaffing or inadequate
staffing. Yes, I mentioned that, that when it comes to escapes, one of the
causes of those escapes is the inadequate staffing in some of our prisons.
So we do suffer that problem which the other member mentioned.
The question of overpopulation and overcrowding sometimes reminds me,
especially when the criticism is levelled at us, of when I was growing up.
Older boys would sit next to the road, and when one passed by, they would
just call one and ask why one was so ugly, and then start slapping one
around and hitting one for being ugly. Or sometimes one would stare in
their direction and they would say ``What are you looking at?'' I am sure a
lot of people have experienced that. Then they would slap one around just
for looking in their direction.

Now, I want to say to hon Mr Wiley that the police have arrested people,
and there is a figure of 37% of overcrowding in the prisons in the Western
Cape. The police are arresting people. They are doing their job, arresting
these people, and that member's police are doing that, which is a good job,
and the courts are also processing these people. They must go to prison. I
am responsible for prisons and therefore they are coming to prisons. I
cannot tell the police not to arrest people now because the prisons are
full. I cannot say to the courts not to do that to juveniles or children. I
can only ask where there are other places where we can keep these people,
but if they are supposed to go to prison, they go to prison, where we are
responsible. I feel that sometimes I am simply being slapped for being
ugly. The prisons are overcrowded and I am now responsible and slapped for
being ugly. [Laughter.] [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I want to start with hon
Mr Wiley. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] That hon member reports to this
Chamber that a friend of his and his wife, both doctors, experienced a
particular happening, a burglary in their surgery, and the police were not
keen to take up the matter for investigation and, ultimately, prosecution.

According to what that hon member said, if we heard him properly, the
matter is in his department. This is a typical example, of a man who has
been given responsibility by this coalition of theirs here, to look after
the safety and security of the people of this province.

There are constitutional structures that are in place, and that are
supposed to be dealing with cases of the nature he was reporting for
political gain in this House. There is the Independent Complaints
Directorate, which is the appropriate body - not that little office of his
- to deal with cases of insubordination and dereliction of duty on the part
of police officers. He does not do that. He did not go to the ICD to report
that this police officer had told his doctor friend that he was not going
to take the case forward. [Interjections.] He did not go to the ICD. That
is a constitutional structure that is supposed to be dealing with cases of
misbehaviour in the Police Service. He did not do that, because, at heart,
he is not interested in the proper policing in this province, and he has
never been, from 1948. His obsession, right up to when he lost power, as a
party and even himself as an individual, was to see massive deployment of
soldiers and police, true to type of the NP in the apartheid era. That is
what they believed in.

They never created any basis for proper policing in this country. They
never did, for many years. He talks here with passion and makes a lot of
noise about policing that he knows nothing about. He has never been
associated with any culture of policing. [Applause.] It is for the first
time ...

Mr M G E WILEY (Western Cape): Madam Chair, I wonder if the Minister will
take a simple question?
HON MEMBERS: No!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Minister, could you take your seat? You
are not the Minister, hon members. The Minister will answer whether or not
he will take a question. That is the Rule. Minister, are you prepared to
take a question?

The MINISTER: Madam Chair, I am answering the questions which have been
asked in their major interventions. I am not going to answer any question
right now, I am going to maul him, right now. That is my business.
[Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I do not know if I will allow mauling.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, he has never been, at any given point in time,
associated with any culture of policing - himself, as an individual, and
his party, as well. They do not have respect for the SA Police Service and
they do not pay allegiance to it. They are using the issue of crime as a
matter of salvaging the dying fortunes of their party. That is what they
are trying to do.

He went further to say that he was recruiting, and that they are going to
increase the police in his province here. Again this is pigeonholed and
circumscribed to this little province, and he is saying that he is going to
increase it to so many thousands. That is fine. At the end of the day, the
policing in this country - and even the recruitment of the police - is the
responsibility of the National Commissioner of the SA Police Service, the
custodian of the SA Police Service; not the wiry Wiley somewhere in Cape
Town. [Laughter.] That is his responsibility.

Even if the Constitution did allow him to do that and even if he had all
the will to do it - to finance, as he is saying, from his own pocket and
from the pocket of his party, that party is going to die before the end of
this year. [Laughter.] That party has become a very fertile poaching ground
for the DP.

What is going to happen to these thousands that he is financing? He is
creating a situation similar to the one created by one of his friends in
the Transkei, the UDM leader. He is misleading the police into believing
that he is the person. And when he is gone, before the end of the year,
what is going to happen to those thousands? They will be marauding around,
creating problems. [Interjections.]

He has been asked a specific question here: What is he doing to resolve the
bus-taxi problem here? He, again, wants to create criminals out of that
situation. He was quoted in the media as saying that the police have been
appealed to by the national commissioner's head office in Pretoria to go
``softly, softly, and softly'', because he is being used, and he has not
denied it. He should have denied it because it was in the media, but he has
not said a word to the effect that that was not what he said. In fact, he
should have said it when he was making his major intervention here. He is
interested in that massive deployment which was typical of the erstwhile
NP. That is what he wanted to do, and to criminalise all those bus drivers
and taxi drivers in that situation; and then he comes back to say that
crime levels are rising here. He must not dare raise dust and thereafter
complain that he cannot see. [Interjections.]

The problem around the bus-taxi issue is a political problem.
[Interjections.] He is refusing to attend to it politically, because it is
not in the nature of his party, and himself as an individual, to seek
political solutions. It is not at all in his nature to do so.
[Interjections.] And he is saying here that there is less urgency on the
part of the three Ministers in dealing with these issues. Again, that is an
indication of the mind of a person who is a total stranger to the truth.
[Laughter.] A total stranger to the truth.

In June last year, the President said that we must create an elite crack
force to deal with specified types of crime. Within no time, that force was
established, and a piece of legislation giving it legal backing will be
enacted before the end of this year. That is urgency. However, as a party
they have been in power for more than four decades, but it never crossed
their little minds that we needed, like other civilised countries have,
done, a specialist unit to deal with cases of a particular nature, because
all they were interested in was kitskonstabels [special constables], De
Kocks, and the rest of them, to fight against people who were fighting for
liberation.

Those kitskonstabels [special constables] are the very same people he was
complaining about in our Minmecs. [Interjections.] What is he doing about
these 30 000 people who are functionally illiterate? And he conveniently
forgets that that is his own creation. They, as a party, recruited those
people.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I beg your pardon, hon Minister. Yes,
Mr Wiley?

Mr M G E WILEY (Western Cape): Madam Chairperson, the hon the Minister is
misleading this House.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: On what basis are you making this statement?

Mr M G E WILEY (Western Cape): The Minister is accusing me of having
trained or deployed kitskonstabels [special constables]. I had nothing to
do with them. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Minister, will you continue.

The MINISTER: And the issue of numbers in modern policing is not the issue.
The issue, as Mr Wiley and his ilk should know, is technology. That is the
issue today. They are still trapped in the twilight of the past. They are
cheeky and they do not want to move out of that past. It is not numbers. In
any other field that we are talking about, we are talking about technology.


It is precisely on that score that this Minister, the Minister for Justice
and Constitutional Development, and I went to the United Kingdom to explore
ways and means of upgrading, technologically, the investigative capacity of
the members of the SA Police Service, because it was never in the NP's
scheme of things to introduce that when it was in power. All the NP gave
them were these sjamboks ... [Laughter.] All they gave them were guns to
skiet and donder [shoot and assault]. That is all they gave them.
[Laughter.]

We are in a new era all together. Six years down the democracy line, we are
talking about the transformation of the entire fortunes of the SA Police,
including the manner of investigation and docketing. That is why we have
the secretariat and the Independent Complaints Directorate today. It is
because of the demands of the objective scientific situation in which we
find ourselves today.

Numbers are not an issue. At any rate, even if we were to take the issue of
numbers into account and project it to the fore, which is the NP's main
obsession, South Africa is still fairing and comparing very well. We saw
the statistics at our Minmec meeting which indicate the ratio of one police
officer per the number of people in other countries and in South Africa. We
are doing pretty well in so far as those numbers are concerned. We are
going to strive to stabilise the SA Police Service at around 127 000
members, and there it shall remain. What we are going to do is step up the
scientific and technological advancement of the members of the SA Police
Service.

Unlike the Western Cape MEC, we rely on people, just like the MEC from
Gauteng and, of course, other MECs. Even if he had a million men and women
to police the Western Cape, he would still contend with the problem of
crime, as long as he is not mobilising the one major resource against
crime, and that is the people of this province. The MEC does not have the
capacity to mobilise them because he has antagonised them for a long time.
He cannot go to Langa, Khayelitsha, or Mitchells Plain and mobilise those
people, because his party is a skunk, it smells, and it is repugnant in the
nostrils of the people of the Western Cape. [Laughter.] That is why he
cannot place any reliance on mass mobilisation against crime. He cannot do
that which is an open sesame to a successful vanquishing of crime.

He should mobilise the people and the schoolchildren against drugs. He
should mobilise the communities against buying stolen goods and thereby
turning themselves into lucrative markets for thieves. He should mobilise
the people. However, it is not in the NP's nature as a political party to
mobilise the people. He should just forget about it.

Furthermore, even his friend is poaching their people. He is gone now.
[Laughter.] [Interjections.] Oh! there he is. He belongs to the DP which
has become the dumping pit for all elements that cannot accept change or
transformation in this country. [Laughter.] They find their way into the
DP, which is an abbreviation for dumping pit. [Laughter.] He is making a
statement ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon Minister, could you take your seat,
please.

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, on a point of order: when referring to all
animals, is the Minister talking about the people or citizens in this
country? Who is he referring to when he says ``all animals''?
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER: Animals like you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon Minister, it is not parliamentary
to refer to members as animals.

The MINISTER: Madam Chair, I said an animal like him, not that he himself
is an animal. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! It is not parliamentary. Please
withdraw the remark and do not use it again.

The MINISTER: I withdraw the remark.

An HON MEMBER: Are you withdrawing?

The MINISTER: I am not. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! The Minister withdrew his remark. You
should have been listening.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, his friend says that the SA Police Service is
demoralised. He is another stranger to the truth! He is living somewhere on
the moon, not on this planet. If the SA Police Service ever enjoyed a
moment of high morale, that time is now. We are with them day and night, in
the rain, in the heat, and they are there. That is why the numbers of
arrested criminals has risen to a point where that Minister has to contend
with the problem of overcrowding in prisons. It is precisely because of the
high morale among the members of the SA Police Service.

The NP and the DP want to demoralise them. They are shouting in this House
and in the other one that there is demoralisation in the ranks of the SAPS.
That is a blatant untruth. There is nothing of the kind. Their morale is
high, and those parties are not going to succeed in demoralising the
members of the SA Police Service. There they are in the gallery.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] They are not going to demoralise them. They want to
demoralise them, because they are waiting anxiously in the wings for a
moment when we will not be able to overcome crime in this country. Every
success that the police officers are achieving is driven right down to the
bottom of their hearts like an iron nail, causing their ventricles to bleed
profusely. Every time there is a major breakthrough, they become worried
because they have nothing to say - they have no politics. There is no
demoralisation in the SA Police Service. That is ... [Inaudible.]
[Interjections.]

The issue of the underresourcing of the police started with them. The state
of police stations in Mitchells Plain, Khayelitsha and Motherwell in PE -
that colonial setting - was created by this vociferous loud-mouthed NP we
hear today. [Laughter.] They created that over a period of 40 years,
consistently doing that kind of thing. They think that within six years -
only six years - we can magically turn around the situation. We cannot do
that. It is said that any mule - like the NP - can break any door anywhere,
but that it takes a good carpenter to repair one. We are the carpenters.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] We are repairing the doors that they broke. We have
in place a budget of approximately R995 million to attend specifically to
those colonial shacks that they left when they lost power in 1994. We are
rebuilding those police stations.

In the course of last year alone, over 30 new police stations were built in
this country. [Applause.] We are in the process of building those police
stations, and we are going to ... n[Interjections] ... How many did the NP
build in over 40 years in power? [Laughter.] They built nothing. They left
nothing. We are starting from scratch. In fact, we are not starting from
scratch, but from a total zero. Scratch is better because there is
something that one can call scratch. [Laughter.] There is absolutely
nothing. It is a void. We are starting from a void.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I am afraid your time has expired, hon
Minister.

The MINISTER: It is a pity. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Well, I am pleased to see that the
Minister was able to revive the members of the NCOP into some life.
[Laughter.] Mr Ackermann, the debate on this Vote has been concluded.

Mr C ACKERMAN: Chairperson, on a point of order: Corporal punishment is
unconstitutional. The Minister threatened my MEC with a cane.
[Interjections.] I want your ruling on that. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! That is not a point of order.
[Laughter.] Could I have some order in the House, please. Could hon members
leave in an orderly manner. You are disrupting the proceedings of the
House.

Debate concluded.

                      VOTING ON DECISION IN ORDER NO 2

                             (Draft Resolution)

The Council voted as follows on the decision postponed in Order No 2: Bill
agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                  SOUTH AFRICAN COUNCIL FOR EDUCATORS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Minister Asmal, welcome to the NCOP.
The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Chairperson, Assalaamu-alay-kum [Peace be
upon you].

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Wa-alay-kum-salaam. [Peace be upon you too].

The MINISTER: Chairperson, hon members, I am sorry to transfer from that
very lively and livening period that members have just witnessed to a much
more mundane but fairly important measure.

One of the five programmes of Tirisano aims to, I quote, ``enhance the
effectiveness of schools and to promote educator professionalism''. The
legislation which I am introducing today will do both of these by giving
effect to the need for a tangible expression of educator professionalism
and a certain belief that schools with professional staff are more
effective schools.

There are different ways and various means to promote educator
professionalism. These include developmental approaches, regulatory
frameworks and promotional work. In respect of developmental approaches,
these include the offering of in-service teacher education programmes,
which will be done in terms of the framework which is currently being
prepared. We will also look at the education sector training authority
under the Skills Development Levies Act as a mechanism to expand and
improve training in the sector.

Regulatory frameworks include the norms and standards for educators, which
were published earlier this year. These define the roles and competences of
an educator and provide a useful benchmark to ensure that our programmes
and teachers are of good quality. We will also be introducing legislation
this year which will amend disciplinary procedures in education so that
cases of misconduct can be speedily and effectively dealt with at an
appropriate level. But, these are the formal aspects of professional
development with training for future qualifications and ensuring
disciplined behaviour by educators.

The third leg, the promotional leg, as I call it, is just as important. The
purpose of this leg is to enable and assist the public to construct a new
image of teachers. The status of teachers appears to have declined over the
past two decades, and the very notion of educator professionalism has
become contested and discredited. This is a worldwide problem, I must say.
As long ago as 1966, Unesco and the International Labour Organisation
tabled a recommendation concerning the status of teachers. In the foreword
to the 1998 World Education Report, the former director-general of Unesco
stated that the 1966 report is especially relevant today, and he asserts, I
quote, that `` the teachers in particular need our encouragement and
support''.

In our country, the image of teachers has been battered by many factors.
These began with the deprofessionalisation of teachers, especially black
teachers under apartheid, who were expected to be uncritical and low-paid
functionaries. A professional was defined by the NP government as non-
political and subservient, as I myself experienced as a school teacher
under this regime 40 years ago. They were without any civil liberties and
civil rights whatsoever. Many teachers bought into this definition. Many
teachers of all races bought into this definition of nonprofessionalism to
secure their own places in the system, and particularly their promotion.
Others rightly rejected this understanding, but without creating a viable
liberatory model of professionalism.

These situations reflected in the divisions that arose out of the
repression of teachers in the 1980s and the resulting resistance. When
artificial distinction was raised between the so-called professionals and
workers, a new professionalism which embodied the material, political and
pedagogical or teaching arena emerged in South Africa and elsewhere when
teachers established unions to simultaneously pursue professional and
labour-related issues. As the current Minister of Labour put it in his
position as president of Sadtu a few years ago, I quote:


  The conditions under which teachers teach are the same as those under
  which learners learn. We cannot separate the learning process and the
  conditions which surround it.

More recently, the rationalisation and redeployment process has also
affected morale, and many teachers felt unwanted and surplus to
requirements. This redeployment, which we called equity redeployment, was a
necessary but painful process, and I am glad to be able to announce that we
are now in a position to terminate and end this special equity-driven
initiative at the end of this month. It is now time to right all these
wrongs and to rebuild the professionalism of our teachers.
We all recognise the need for a cadre of well-trained, reliable and
professional educators who are trusted by the public they must serve. One
way of doing this is by holding up as role models those very brave,
underfinanced and often undertrained teachers who meet this definition of
professionalism by praising and rewarding them. This is being done through
the National Teacher Awards scheme which I launched two weeks ago in
Johannesburg. The awards will be made on 5 October, World Teachers' Day.

The other means of enhancing the sense of teachers is through the
establishment of a really credible and accountable professional council
which will provide a guarantee of quality in respect of the services
obtained from registered teachers. This is the aim of the legislation that
is now before members. We have put before this House a Bill which will
provide for the revitalisation of the professional council for educators.
This council was originally established by collective agreement between
trade unions and the national Department of Education.

This council, thereafter, had a temporary legislative home as a chapter of
the Employment of Educators Act. We are past masters at passing a huge raft
of Bills in this country. Neither of these was a satisfactory location for
the council since they both related to an employer-employee relationship.
This relationship has undermined the collegial nature of the council with
discussions and decisions of the council often being partisan and
adversarial, which is not the function of a professional body.

This council now before members is set to make a fresh start under the new
legislation. The primary functions have not changed in this newly
constituted council, and the council will remain responsible for
registering, first of all, qualified educators; secondly, for promoting the
development of the profession and thirdly, for ensuring that educators
abide by a code of professional ethics. The scope of the council has been
extended by the inclusion of the early childhood development sector, adult
educators and teachers in independent schools. I must praise these sectors
for the willingness they have shown to be part of this council which bodes
well for the future, because we will now be inserting true professionalism
over the whole gamut of the teaching profession.

But there is now a dynamic which will ensure that the functions of the
council are pursued with greater vigour, greater unity of purpose and with
the interests of education and in particular of children held uppermost.
This new dynamic will come about as a result of a number of innovations and
changes in the Bill, including the fact that the council will in future be
made up of a much wider variety of participants, reflecting the extent and
scope of the council. These participants will include the organised
teaching profession, rightly comprising the majority in the council, as
well as representatives nominated by school governing body associations,
the early childhood education sector, the adult basic education training
sector, further and higher education sectors and also of course the
independent schools.

This will ensure that the council does not follow the pattern of too many
other professional councils, especially that of my own profession, the
legal profession, which have become self-serving, protectionist
instruments, defending the profession against the interests of the public.
This council will therefore repudiate Jeremy Bentham's famous dictum that
all professions are a conspiracy against the public. By contrast, this
council will serve the public by calling to account educators who do not
provide a quality education service. Such service is defined by the code of
professional ethics, which defines how an educator should relate to his or
her learners, to colleagues, parents and the broader community. Any breach
of this code will be investigated and, if necessary, pursued by the council
with the authority it will have to take appropriate disciplinary action.

This public accountability will be improved and enhanced by two other
factors. Firstly, all members of the council will be appointed by the
Minister. They will therefore, although they represent different sectors,
owe their allegiance to the council and the profession and not to any
constituency which has made the nomination for appointment.

Secondly, the chairperson of the council will be appointed by the Minister
on the recommendation of the council. This chairperson will be empowered to
act with confidence in leading the council with the full authority
conferred in the national interest. Where firm decisions need to be taken,
these will not be influenced by the interests of one or the other
constituency. I was therefore rather perturbed by a reaction from some
quarters which questioned this approach of appointing the chairperson of
the council.

These are the formal elements of this Bill, which alone should provide for
the revitalisation of this council. But there is more. I have attempted to
inject into this council a dose of commitment, a professional commitment to
serving the interests of the profession and of education, on a voluntary
basis - something new in South Africa.

I have reached an understanding with the chief executive officer of the
council, that the council will not under ordinary circumstances convene a
sitting of the council during school hours. Meetings will be held after
hours, at weekends and during school holidays, to ensure that this council
will not be accused of destabilising schools or interfering with the normal
teaching routines.

This House should also note that apart from the chairperson, who will have
a very heavy load, no member of the council will be paid for participation
in the council. This is also a new departure in our country. Service to the
council will be voluntary and not based on personal enrichment, but on the
will and ability of the 30 persons who will be appointed to this council.
These aspects are most important, since members of the council should be
role models in respect of the ethos of voluntary involvement and commitment
which we need so direly in our education system.

Now is the time also for ordinary people to make the contribution to
education. We cannot claim that all citizens of this country have fully
embraced the spirit of voluntary work upon which this country will be made
great. The principle embodied in this legislation is that of public
scrutiny of the teaching profession. Through this council the public will
recognise and appreciate the contribution of teachers to building this
nation. But there will also be an opportunity to weed out those who are not
up to scratch, who do not act in accordance with the values and ethics of
our new democracy.

The Bill also asserts the view that all of us, as citizens and whatever our
own levels of education, know what it is that we want from our public
servants, the teachers. It is also founded on the assumption that ordinary
people, representatives of the citizens, will also make themselves
available to serve and ensure that we receive the quality we expect. This
association therefore is no abstract matter. It gives us the means to
influence what happens to our children everyday at school.

We have promised, rightly, a better life for all. We are beginning to
deliver on that promise. But we never said that we could do it alone. All
of us must play our part, on the basis that we are beginning on a new route
to establish, not a culture because a culture is an evolving matter, a
habit of mind, but a commitment. We can commit ourselves to a new way of
doing things. I therefore have pleasure in commending this important
measure to the NCOP. [Applause.]

Mr D M KGWARE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon special delegates present
here, hon members, we have received the Bill which was referred to the
select committee. It is only proper to indicate that the Bill has gone
through all the stages, including the provinces, inputs, public hearings
and briefing by the department, and we are satisfied as a committee that
the Bill is suitable. With these few words, I would now like to wear the
other cap, because I am standing here representing the province.

The debate on the South African Council for Educators Bill provides us once
more with an opportunity to engage in a vigorous debate. Since our
democratic Government came to power, a lot of progressive legislation has
been put in place to enhance the transformation of our country. In
pursuance of this transformation it is necessary for us to review our
approach from time to time.

The SA Council for Educators was initially established in terms of a
collective agreement reached in the Education Labour Relations Council. The
resolution spelt out the objectives, composition, powers and functions of
the council. It was to replace the Teachers Federal Council, a creation of
the apartheid government accommodating only white educators. The SA Council
for Education was subsequently established in terms of the Educators'
Employment Act in October 1998. This was informed by an understanding
amongst stakeholders that a regulatory body like SACE has to be inclusive
of the stakeholders and does not fall within the domain of collective
bargaining. It was also understood that this was a temporary measure, as
SACE required its own Act.

The South African Council for Educators Bill provides for some effective
measures of control by educators and other stakeholders, accepting that the
state must continue to ensure the provision of an efficient system of
education. The scope of SACE must not be limited to educators employed in
terms of the legislation of 1998, but must include educators at independent
schools, educators employed by governing bodies, as well as adult basic
education and training and higher education practitioners.

The Bill does not deviate from the fundamental principle of the SA Council
for Education, which is founded on the promotion and development of the
teaching profession, the establishment of a registrar of educators, and the
establishment and maintenance of a code of professional ethics for
educators. SACE is not a disciplinary arm of Government, but should enhance
greater discipline amongst educators, not with the intention to witch-hunt
educators but rather to intervene in a professionally sound manner.

The composition of the council as proposed is inclusive of all
stakeholders, that is educators, representatives of education departments,
school governing bodies or SGBs, higher education institutions, further
education and training, and private and independent schools.

For greater accountability, the Minister must approve the statement of
income and expenditure of the council.

In conclusion, the SA Council for Educators should remain committed to high
standards in education to ensure that our educators are productive in a
pluralistic and interrelated global world. It is the responsibility of
every citizen to ensure that the image and dignity of the teaching
profession is ameliorated. [Applause.]

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, hon Minister Asmal, hon MECs from the provinces,
special delegates and dear colleagues, I mentioned once before in this
august House that the DP, though in opposition to the Government, will not
oppose every piece of legislation that is brought before the House. We see
this Bill, the South African Council for Educators Bill, as a piece of
legislation that should be supported, and I have pleasure in doing so on
behalf of the DP. At least on this occasion I will be spared the mandatory
ministerial chastisement for presenting opposition to Bills presented in
this House.
Let us quickly traverse the terrain before the South African Council for
Educators Bill came about in its present form. When the SA Council for
Educators was established in 1995 it was, understandably, perceived to be
an extension of the Education Labour Relations Council. The idea of a
professional body which would promote and control the teaching profession,
as intended, was thus diminished to some extent. This shortcoming was
redressed in 1998 when the Employment of Educators Bill was tabled in
Parliament. The Bill was amended to include Chapter 6, which converts the
SA Council for Educators from a labour-oriented body to a statutory body,
thereby ensuring that the SA Council for Educators would be regarded as an
independent professional body outside the influence of the Education Labour
Relations Council.

However, the SA Council for Educators, as a statutory body, was found
wanting in one important respect. The scope for application of this
professional body was restricted to educators in public schools and public
learning centres, and was not applicable to private or independent
institutions. Hence, the need for a comprehensive, all-inclusive
professional body to regulate the whole teaching profession wherever
educators may be employed. This new SA Council for Educators will thus have
a new face.

Furthermore, it will not only develop, maintain and promote the image of
the profession, but also place professional ethics for educators on a
distinct plane. The Minister, of course, will ensure that the SA Council
for Educators will function in a transparent manner and that it does not
function in such a manner that it would be inaccessible to educators at
large.

The DP cannot but support the good intentions of the hon the Minister in
proposing such a Bill, which would clearly elevate the status of educators
and their professional conduct and ethics to a higher plateau.

Finally, I want to compliment the Ministry for the manner in which the Bill
was presented to the select committee, and the accommodating manner in
which the amendments were received. The DP particularly welcomes the
amendments now contained in clause 6(5) under ``composition of council'',
as well as clause 7, regarding the appointment of the chairperson by the
Minister.

Finally, I reiterate that my party has pleasure in supporting this piece of
legislation. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I have noticed that the Minister of
Education has brought a traditional weapon into this House. I am not quite
sure why, but I hope it is not to be wielded against any of us.
[Interjections.]

Mr L SUKA: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I want to speak in
support of this Bill which is an important event in the transformation of
education. In other words, the Minister has walked his talk.

By creating a professional home for teachers, the Bill will serve to
enhance the status of professionalism and lead to a new climate of
accountability and delivery.

This council must play its role in upgrading the overall quality of the
profession. It must serve to ensure that those teachers who were poorly
trained by successive apartheid governments, now get the chance to become
fully qualified professionals. It must also assist in ensuring that even
our best qualified teachers are properly orientated towards a culture of
human rights within the school and classroom, promoting the values and
ethics which make up a democracy. The SA Council for Educators must be
prominent in the celebrations of World Teachers Day on 5 October so that
the nation can show its appreciation for the work which they do in the
country.

But, the Sace will also have to act decisively where there is evidence that
a teacher has contravened a code of professional ethics. The Sace must be
the quality guarantee in education. Parents and learners must be assured
that what they expect is what they get. In severe cases, the council will
have the power to remove the name of an educator from the roll in this
country. This is a harsh sanction and it must be used judiciously. But
where it finds that a teacher has sexually abused a child or perhaps sold
an examination paper, the council cannot afford to be soft. It must invoke
the powers it is given through this Bill. I am sure it will, since the
profession as a whole is discredited by the actions of a few elements such
as these.

The public will also have a role to play, not just in reporting possible
cases of misconduct to the council but also in the council itself. The
teaching profession will be the majority in the council. However, other
stakeholders will also be there to ensure that the council acts fairly in
its deliberations. In this way, the interest of the profession will be
balanced against the interest of the public. We cannot allow either of
these to become dominant. The fact that the scope of the new council will
be extended to include all sectors in general and further education bands
in particular is exciting and leads us towards a position where all
education and training is part of a seamless, integrated system.

Adult educators, for too long, have been a forgotten sector among teachers.
Now they can get their recognition and, so too, our early childhood
educators. They are regarded by many as baby-sitters, and yet they care for
the children who are at their most impressionable age - an age when their
attitudes and personalities are being formed. We must therefore expect a
high degree of professionalism from such educators if we are to have decent
citizens emerging from our schools.

The inclusion of private or independent schools is also significant. We are
all aware of the poor treatment of learners by a number of fly-by-night
cash colleges. Institutions which employ unqualified teachers provide very
little education and extract enormous fees from desperate parents. This
cannot be allowed. The Bill will at least ensure that any educator employed
in a private school is qualified, registered and acts in a professional
manner. The traditional private school sector, including the religious
schools, has welcomed their inclusion in the scope of the council. In fact,
many of their teachers have already registered with Sace of their own
accord. We applaud them for this move.

The council has a huge responsibility to ensure that the ongoing
transformation of education is not undermined by poor performance of a few
educators. There are still enormous challenges in respect of both equity
and quality, and we need a cohort of committed professionals to get us
there. Most of all, we need teachers whom we can trust. When our children
leave for school in the morning, we must know that they are safe, in good
hands and are involved in learning. That is what the SA Council for
Educators aims to deliver. I therefore call on members to support the Bill.
[Applause.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon special delegates and hon
members, the existing Council of South African Educators was established in
1995 through an agreement in the Labour Relations Council. This collective
effort by the state as employer of educators on the one hand, and the trade
unions on the other hand, sought to establish a professional council to
register educators and discipline them if they should be in breach of their
code of conduct. The council was therefore perceived to be more an
extension of the Education Labour Relations Council, rather than a
professional body which would inspire and strive for more noble ideals in
the promotion of the profession. The passing and the subsequent amendment
of the Employment of Educators Act of 1998 attempted to correct the
situation, but could not overcome the inherent impediments, such as
addressing the image of the council and the legal restrictions embodied in
the Act.

Currently the council consists of members representing public institutions.
In this Bill before us, the majority of members, that is 18, will be
institution-based educators, employed in various educational institutions
which were not accommodated before. One can then boldly say that the
composition of the council proposed in this Bill is inclusive of all facets
of the education spectrum and the community at large, through the National
Association of Governing Bodies. There are therefore no more doubts or
hassles as far as the composition of the council is concerned, since the
structure of the new council, including the all-important position of the
chairperson, were decided upon through elaborate deliberation processes
involving all stakeholders. The Bill itself also underwent several
amendments before presentation to this Chamber. In this regard, one can say
that the principle of participatory democracy was exercised extensively
when this Bill was negotiated.

Any law becomes obsolete when not practised or exercised. As public
representatives we have to publicise the contents of this Bill when it
becomes law, with the same vigour and consistency that was displayed during
the negotiation stage. The newly elected governing bodies should continue
to be our active and reliable partners in the transformation of the
educational sector. The functioning of the council, as well as of its
statutory committees, presents us with immense challenges which cannot be
overcome in a passive way. I am referring here in particular to the
challenge posed by the charting of the future of thousands of
underqualified and unqualified educators in Mpumalanga and elsewhere, not
to mention the so-called unemployed teachers. I believe that we should
never, ever think that they are not our responsibility, and the same goes
for the situation of illiteracy in our communities.

An average employee in any institution is usually preoccupied with working
conditions and other things concerning himself or herself, but in the
education field we find educators and other stakeholders being concerned
about the ethical standards of this noble profession. Yes, it happened in
other professions, but through interaction with the educators and other
stakeholders, I am inclined to believe that the educators and these
stakeholders unwittingly espouse a higher degree of patriotism. To these
dedicated men, including our hon Minister and his formidable team up there,
I would like to say ``keep up the good work''. [Applause.]

Mrs M BOPALAMO (North West): Madam Chairperson, national Minister, Prof
Asmal, special delegates from provinces and hon members, let me start right
away by supporting the essence and principles of this Bill. We believe that
it is going to maintain and protect the ethical and professional standards
of educators in our schools. The teaching profession will be treated the
same as other professions, like lawyers and doctors, because, when a lawyer
transgresses the ethics of his or her profession or a medical doctor
transgresses the ethics of his or her profession, he or she is struck off
the roll.

In that way, this Bill is going to make it possible for the image of this
profession to be raised. There has been a missing link between the
Department of Education and the teachers' unions. The Department of
Education plays the role of employer, and it is too administrative, while
the teachers' unions look after the interests of the educators.

The SA Council of Educators will fill this gap by protecting the
profession, by helping the members of this profession to look after the
souls and to build the characters of the children by making them better
members of the nation in the future. Those who belong to this profession
will be carefully monitored and catered for. They must be good models of
acceptable moral values which learners can emulate.

We support this Bill with the following issues of concern and comments.
Firstly, to whom is the SA Council of Educators accountable? Is it to the
educators or to the Minister? The unions argue that the origin of the
council is the Central Bargaining Chamber, therefore it is accountable to
them. The Minister says it is a body for professionals who are teachers. It
goes without saying therefore that the Minister is directly responsible,
since it deals with the issues of character, conduct and maintenance of
professionalism.

The second concern is the responsibility of the funding of the council?
Should it rely on the levy from the educators? What should be the role and
contribution of the state with regard to the funding of the council? It is
a question of: You put your money where your mouth is. Or is it not what we
are going to get from the educators?

The other concern is the issue of the chairpersonship of the council, which
is still debatable. The Minister maintains that he should be responsible
for the appointment of the chairperson of the council, and the unions are
opposed to that. What criteria will be used in the nomination of the three
names for the chairpersonship?

With regard to the composition of the council, it will be educators
collectively nominated by the organised profession. How is that going to be
done? Will it be that two educators will be nominated per province, or is
it going to be a random selection or nomination?

Regarding registration of all educators, this is, in fact, licensing of
teachers, meaning that an educator who is not registered with the council
cannot be allowed to teach in South Africa. The registration of educators
in the independent schools also needs to be considered. One wonders how
private or independent schools will come out with one person. Is it a
national body that co-ordinates these schools?

Another concern is the professional outlook versus chamber activities. A
clear line of distinction is important between the two. Otherwise, it may
create a serious problem. The institutions are separate with different
roles.

The next one is the relationship between the department and the council, in
respect of disciplinary measures against members of the council. Is the
department obliged to report disciplinary cases it handles and give a
verdict to the council and vice versa? What role is the council expected to
play when a particular educator is, for instance, suspended or discharged
by a provincial department? How are the two going to interact, co-ordinate,
or complement each other? [Applause.]

Mr P G QOKWENI: Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs and members, some of the
key principles raised in a myriad of documents that promoted the struggle
for democracy, were representivity, inclusivity and participatory
democracy.

We support the Bill for the effect it gives to these principles by
broadening participation in the council to make it representative and
regulating the whole profession in and outside public institutions, through
registration, professional development and a code of ethical standards.

We appreciate that some stakeholders have raised concerns around the
composition and funding, and what they perceive as an attempt to provide
for the ministerial control of the council. It is hoped that these concerns
will serve as a constant reminder to the department that the ideals of
democracy will be maintained.
However, it is in the nature of the profession of educators and its
functioning to call for participation from other interest groups in the
community; hence the need to create space for their involvement, so that
the council is not misconstrued as a mere extension of the bargaining
council, which operates on the basis of proportional representation, and so
that the council is not serving the interest of only one of the
stakeholders in the educative processes.

Furthermore, despite the plausible efforts to rescue education from the
legacy of crisis and to put it on a pedestal in terms of the expectations
of the new millennium, there still remains public perceptions that the
standards or the status of the profession has been sacrificed at the altar
of political expediency or partisanship and unionisation. There is a need,
therefore, to manage these perceptions by providing a balance between the
effectiveness of the council and rebuilding the confidence of the public in
the profession, and to profile the image of the profession in a renewed
fashion and in keeping with the dictates of the ethos of our new democracy.

It is considered, in the interests of the contributors to the funds of the
council, to open the funds to public scrutiny, in terms of enabling
legislation. UDM sees the provision around this development in the light of
its bent on promoting transparency and accountability, as well as fighting
fraud and uprooting corruption ferociously. [Applause.]

Mrs E E N KANKOSI-SHANDU (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, I want to say from
the beginning that we in KwaZulu-Natal support the Bill.

For the Bill to enjoy the full support of the whole profession, the Sace
must been seen as a council for educators. It is imperative that educators,
especially those who are in actual service, are able to participate and
contribute to the council's work.  Otherwise, it will become another
structure with very little impact on educators in general. There must be
ownership in terms of the role of the Sace. All efforts must be made to
ensure that all educators, irrespective of whether they are in private or
public schools, and across all bands of the National Qualifications
Framework are included.

In order for the Sace to be meaningful in the transformational process,
emphasis must be placed equally on its role as a developmental body for
educators, a body that keeps an up-to-date register for educators and is a
watchdog for the professional ethos of the educators. We also support the
separation of the South African Council for Educators Bill from the
Employment of Educators Act as the two cannot fall under one Act without
restricting the other and eventually destroying both of them. We thus
appreciate the efforts of the national Ministry in coming up with this Bill
that seeks to separate, officially, the Act that governs the creation and
the operation of the South African Council of Educators as an independent
Act.

As far as the composition of the Sace is concerned, it is desirable that it
must represent the profession, but it may have to be broadened to match the
envisaged scope of educators from both public and private domains. It is
also desirable that the Sace not be dominated by any one sector of the
organised profession. There is a need for an understanding to be arrived at
with all stakeholders as to how the 18 educators will be spread out in
order to avoid the situation whereby one union will dominate the council.

We also want to say that in terms of the language in which the certificate
is issued, we agreed among ourselves in KwaZulu-Natal that the certificate
must be issued in the language of the educators' preference, especially if
the language is one of the 11 official languages of this country.

We are also of the opinion that the council is best placed to decide, from
among its members, who the chairperson ought to be. The chairperson,
however, must be answerable to the Minister. We therefore recommend the
formation of the technical committee to work out these clauses, as they
impinge on the actual functioning of the council.

Finally, we believe that in the interests of education, the Sace needs to
commit itself to the establishment and maintenance of a code of
professional ethics for educators and also focus on the promotion and
development of the teaching profession. [Applause.]

Prince B Z ZULU: Madam Chair, hon Minister, hon members, the interim
arrangement to create the South African Council for Educators as a
statutory body by the inclusion of a chapter in the Employment of Educators
Act of 1998 was not the best or most effective manner to deal with the
matter. National and international models of professional councils of a
similar nature have shown that it can only be effective in its functioning
and have the right status and recognition if such council is contained in
its own substantial Act.

The placement of this professional council in an employment Act applicable
to state educators is very restrictive and undesirable as a model for the
profession of educators.

The scope and functions of this council were restricted to the employment
of educators at public schools and in public further education and training
institutions, and the intention is to get such a council to regulate the
whole profession. This means that this Bill extends the scope of this
professional council of all educators employed in private or independent
institutions in the general and further education and training sectors.

The Bill requires that educators employed in ordinary public further
education and training institutions, the early childhood development
sector, the adult basic education sector and the education for learners
with special needs sector be members of the council. This includes members
who represent national associations of school governing bodies and the
Council for Higher Education. It also includes members nominated by
national bodies representing independent or private institutions.

This Bill makes provision for the functions and powers of the council which
range from promoting, developing and maintaining a professional image of
the profession, advising the Minister on matters relating to registration
of educators, prescription of fees payable to the council by registered
educators, to taking disciplinary measures against educators who contravene
the code of conduct of the council. The Bill also provides for the
furnishing of information by a higher education institution and/or employer
of an educator to the council, whenever the council requires such
information for the performance of its functions.

The chairperson and the deputy chairperson of the council, and every member
and any person appointed as a member of a committee or a panel who is not
in the service of the state may, in respect of services rendered by them in
connection with the affairs of the council, a committee or panel, be paid
by the council all such travelling subsistence and all other allowances.
The ANC supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mev J WITBOOI: Mevrou die Voorsitter, agb Minister en agb lede, die Nuwe NP
steun die Wetsontwerp op die Suid-Afrikaanse Raad vir Opvoeders. Dit is
bemoedigend dat die samestelling van die raad grotendeels uit opvoeders
vanuit 'n wye spektrum van opvoedkundige instansies gevorm sal word.

Ook is dit verblydend dat die wetsontwerp dit ten doel het om die beeld van
die onderwysprofessie te bou en in stand te hou. Vir die Nuwe NP is die
professionalisme en toegewydheid van die onderwyskorps in ons land van die
uiterste belang, en hierdie raad sal dan ook oor die meganismes beskik om
die Minister te adviseer oor aangeleenthede in dié verband.

Ook verwelkom die Nuwe NP die feit dat die uitreiking van die
registrasiesertifikate nie slegs in een taal sal wees nie, maar dat elke
opvoeder die reg gegun sal word om sy of haar sertifikaat aan te vra in die
taal van sy of haar keuse. Die feit dat die wetsontwerp voorsiening maak
vir statutêre komitees, onder meer vir registrasie, professionele
ontwikkeling en tug ten einde die werksaamhede van die raad deursigtig en
toeganklik te maak vir alle opvoeders is 'n pluspunt. Die Nuwe NP steun die
wetsontwerp. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs J WITBOOI: Madam Chair, hon Minister and hon members, the New NP
supports the South African Council for Educators Bill. It is encouraging
that the council will be composed in the main of educators from a broad
spectrum of educational institutions.

It is also heartening that the Bill is aimed at building and maintaining
the image of the teaching profession. To the New NP the professionalism and
dedication of the teaching corps in our country is of paramount importance,
and this council will also have the mechanisms to advise the Minister on
matters in this regard.

The New NP also welcomes the fact that the registration certificates will
not be issued in one language only, but that every educator will be
entitled to request his or her certificate in the language of his or her
choice. The fact that the Bill provides for statutory committees, inter
alia for registration, professional development and disciplinary measures
in order to make the activities of the council transparent and accessible
to all educators is an advantage. The New NP supports the Bill.]

Mnr A B WILLIAMS: Mevrou die Voorsitter, agb Minister, as die Nuwe NP die
wetsontwerp steun, is dit vanselfsprekend dat die provinsie Wes-Kaap ook
die wetsontwerp steun. Die Wes-Kaapse regering glo dat opvoeders 'n baie
edel professie beklee en dat professionele ontwikkeling gereeld bevorder
moet word. Verder glo die Wes-Kaapse regering dat die etiese en
professionele standaarde vir opvoeders in stand gehou en beskerm moet word.

Hierdie wetsontwerp sal toesien dat hierdie raad die regte status en
erkenning geniet. Die feit dat die raad saamgestel word uit lede van die
onderwysgemeenskap van die land is 'n bewys dat daar erkenning gegee word
aan al die onderwysrolspelers.

Wat my egter 'n bietjie bekommer, is die feit dat die Minister die
voorsitter van die raad sal aanstel soos bepaal deur klousule 7(1)(a) van
die wetsontwerp. Wat my nog verder bekommer, is dat selfs iemand wat nie 'n
lid is van die raad nie, as voorsitter van die raad genomineer kan word
soos uitgespel word in klousule 7(1)(b).

Die ondervinding in die onderwys het geleer dat aanstellings deur Ministers
baie dikwels tot groot ongelukkigheid kan aanleiding gee; dat so 'n persoon
selfs met agterdog bejeën word; dat so 'n persoon se geloofwaardigheid baie
dikwels onder verdenking kom, en dat so 'n persoon heel dikwels nie die
volle samewerking van die res van 'n raad of vereniging kry nie. Ek wil
aanbeveel dat die raad nie net die nominasie sal doen van 'n voorsitter
nie, maar dat die onderwysgemeenskap waaruit die raad saamgestel sal word,
ook die verkiesing van die voorsitter uit eie geledere sal waarneem.

Dit is goed dat die professionaliteit van die onderwysprofessie gereël word
deur 'n raad wat uit lede van die onderwysgemeenskap kom. Hierdie raad moet
uiteraard 'n liggaam wees waarin lede van die onderwysgemeenskap die
professie se sake sal reël.

Daardie lede van die raad wat in die tugkomitee moet dien, sal uit die aard
van hulle werksaamhede nie baie gewild wees nie. Die breë
onderwysgemeenskap daar buite sal die raad en veral sy komitees met
arendsoë dophou om te kyk of hulle hul taak met die nodige professionalisme
en deeglikheid gaan uitvoer. Omdat goeie orde en dissipline noodsaaklik is
vir suksesvolle onderwys, sal die tugkomitee hom uiteraard die gramskap van
diegene op die hals haal wat goeie orde en dissipline met chaos wil
vervang. Daar moet sonder aansiens des persoons opgetree word teen
individue wat chaos wil veroorsaak in die onderwys.

Daar was in die verlede die geneigdheid by sommige onderwysorganisasies om
vir lede wat hulle skuldig gemaak het aan erge voorvalle van
ongedissiplineerdheid in die bres te tree. Ek wil 'n vriendelike versoek
tot ons onderwysorganisasies rig om hulle te distansieer van diegene wat 'n
struikelblok wil wees in die weg van doeltreffende en effektiewe onderrig
aan ons leerders.

Omdat die speelveld in die onderwys nog baie ongelyk is, is dit noodsaaklik
dat ons as onderwysgemeenskap kollektief sal saamwerk om die speelveld in
die onderwys gelyk te maak sodat opvoeders dit nie as 'n verskoning kan
gebruik wanneer hulle oorgaan tot gedrag wat nie van professionalisme
getuig nie. Ten slotte wil ek net herhaal dat die Wes-Kaap hierdie
wetsontwerp steun. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr A B WILLIAMS: Madam Chair, hon Minister, if the New NP supports the
Bill, it is obvious that the Western Cape Province also supports the Bill.
The Western Cape government believes that educators have a very noble
profession and that professional development should be promoted regularly.
Furthermore, the Western Cape government believes that the ethical and
professional standards for educators should be maintained and protected.

This Bill will ensure that this council enjoys the appropriate status and
recognition. The fact that the council is composed of members of the
teaching community of the country proves that recognition is being given to
all the education role-players.

Something I feel a little concerned about, however, is the fact that the
Minister will appoint the chairperson, as prescribed by clause 7(1)(a) of
the Bill. What causes me even more concern is that even a person who is not
a member of the council may be nominated as chairperson of the council, as
stipulated in clause 7(1)(b).
Experience in education has shown that appointments by Ministers can very
often lead to a lot of unhappiness; that such a person might even be
regarded with suspicion; that the credibility of such a person is very
often in doubt, and that such a person very often does not enjoy the full
co-operation of the rest of the council or association. I want to recommend
that the council not only nominates a chairperson, but that the teaching
community, whose members will constitute the council, will also observe the
election of the chairperson from its own ranks.

It is a good thing for the professionalism of the teaching profession to be
regulated by a council consisting of members of the teaching community.
This council must obviously be a body in which members of the teaching
community will be regulating the affairs of the profession.

Those members of the council who have to serve on the disciplinary
committee will, by virtue of their functions, not be very popular. The
broader teaching community will have to keep a watchful eye on the council
and especially on its committees to see whether they perform their task
with the necessary professionalism and thoroughness. Because good order and
discipline are essential for successful education, the disciplinary
committee will obviously incur the wrath of those who want to replace good
order and discipline with chaos. Steps will have to be taken without fear
or favour against individuals who want to cause chaos in education.

In the past there was a tendency in some education organisations to defend
members who were guilty of severely undisciplined behaviour. I want to
address a friendly request to our education organisations to distance
themselves from those who want to hamper efficient and effective education
for our learners.

Because the playing field in education is still very uneven, it is
essential that we, as the teaching community, work together to level the
playing field in education so that educators cannot use that as an excuse
when they indulge in behaviour that is unprofessional.

In conclusion I just want to repeat that the Western Cape supports this
Bill.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson, hon Minister, the hon House, the South
African Council for Educators was established in 1995 after an agreement
between the state as employer of educators and the trade unions on behalf
of the employees. This professional council is intended to register
educators and be able to discipline them if they are in breach of their
code of conduct. This means that the South African Council of Educators,
Sace, would therefore be not more of an extension of the education labour
relations council, but rather a professional body which promotes and
controls the profession.

The Bill provides that in the appointment of the members due consideration
should be given to representation in respect of race, gender, disability
and geographic distribution, and this is most welcome. It is also of
interest to note that the members to be appointed by the Minister would
first be nominated by various specified organisations, and this process
also is democratic and welcome.

The Bill further clearly sets out the functions of the Sace: It shall
develop, maintain and promote the image of the profession, it shall
register educators who comply with determined minimum criteria and it
shall, from time to time, review a code of professional ethics for
educators. The Bill was published for public comment by the various
roleplayers and the final product, now before this hon House, was a joint
venture. The UCDP is in full support of the Bill. [Applause.]

Mrs C NKUNA: Chairperson, hon Minister, I would like to thank hon members
in this House for this opportunity to express myself on behalf of the
committee. In the first instance, allow me to address the DP. I hope that
it has not arrived at a cul-de-sac and that it is reconsidering its views.
We appreciate their position. [Laughter.]

During the deliberations at the public hearings on the Bill, two key issues
were given special attention. The first issue was the involvement of the
Minister in the appointment of the council and its chairperson. Education
within the general and further education and training band is a fundamental
right of all learners. South African Council for Educators is a
professional body responsible for ensuring that education is provided by
professionals who adhere to a professional code of ethics. There can be no
doubt that the professional conduct of educators raises public interest.

As education is clearly in the public domain, gone are the days when the
own-interests of a profession prevailed over or negated the interests of
the public affected by the conduct of professionals. The profession can no
longer protect and justify itself in spite of evidence that individuals act
unprofessionally. It also empowers the Minister to appoint a chairperson.

The Minister chooses the chairperson out of five members. These five
members are appointed by the the South African Council of Educators, Sace,
itself, he does not appoint the chairperson from outside. It is not three
members as one member has alluded. The Minister appoints a chairperson out
of five members and the five members come from within the Sace itself. The
approach makes it possible to appoint a chairperson with a public stature
who can ensure that both the professional and public interests are served,
and by so doing avoids a situation whereby we have a player and a referee
being the same person.

The Bill determines that the Sace is subject to public scrutiny by
requiring reports to be tabled in Parliament. It stipulates that the budget
of the Sace must be approved by the Minister and that money may only be
spent within that approved budget.

There can be no doubt that the definition of a national public entity in
terms of the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of 1999, is wide enough
to include statutory bodies such as the Sace. The Sace is therefore
subjected to the provisions of that Act. In terms of the definition, the
Sace is an entity established in terms of national legislation. It is fully
or substantially funded by way of compulsory levy and is accountable to
Parliament. The approach requiring that the Minister should approve the
budget of the Sace is in accordance with section 3 of the Public Finance
Management Act.

A question arose during the debate on what the Government is doing in terms
of funding the Sace. The Government does not fund the Sace nor does it
subsidise it in any way. So it is explained in the Bill that it is fully or
substantially funded by way of compulsory levy and is accountable to
Parliament.

The intention of the Bill is to ensure that public contributions by way of
compulsory levy are scrutinised by those in public office and is subject to
public debate in Parliament if the money is not used in terms of the
approved budget within the scope and functions set out in the Bill. This is
an open and democratic approach to ensure that the professional interests
of all educators are looked after and developed. It will also prevent abuse
and corruption by any official member or staff member. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Chairperson, I know it is very late. There
are rumbles in certain parts of our anatomies. I have always enjoyed coming
to this House and therefore I will be using my 10 minutes to review
matters, although the chairperson of the committee has answered some of the
questions. I will be using my 10 minutes because I get a sense of enjoyment
by being here in this House.

I begin with an apology. I am not going to lay into Mr Rajoo. I apologise
to him. The last time I was here, I said I would have expected something
more from a former student of mine. I apologised to him. We were
contemporaries. I do not know which is worse. Should I expect much more
from a contemporary or from a former student? So, I apologise.

Firstly, I am grateful for the little mercy that the DP has condescended
from on high to support this measure and, that in that great outpouring of
altruism, will give support for education development. I hope he will have
a word with the spokesperson of the Other Place, Mr Ellis. Mr Ellis shoots
from the hip almost all the time and, invariably, when one shoots from the
hip one shoots oneself in the foot. I hope he will have a word with Mr
Ellis not only on outcomes-based education, but also because we need to
remove partisanship, in light of the extraordinary terrible period we went
through in 1995-1996 to remove that. I think that the DP has a special role
to play in that, because it adopts this highly partisan position.

The second point I would like to make is that some of the contributions
have really been overtaken by events. I would like to ask special and
permanent delegates to liaise much more with the MECs. This Bill was
discussed at Cabinet level. This was discussed at length by the council of
educational ministers and the MECs. They unanimously supported the
provisions of the Bill. In fact, in clause 7 which deals with the
appointment of the Chair, both the Cabinet, under Minister Buthelezi, and
MEC Helen Zille insisted that there should not be nominations from the
council, but that I should appoint, absolutely, the chairperson of the
council.

But because of the representations made, we adopted this other formula. In
other words, I think there should be closer co-ordination with the MECs. Of
course the New NP may have genuine difficulties with the spokesperson of
the Western Cape. They have a somewhat detached relationship with her. I
sympathise with them very strongly because they have a semi-detached
relationship with her, but for others there is really no excuse. Therefore
many of the issues raised, for example by Mrs Bopalamo, were in fact dealt
with in the committee. They were dealt with by the study groups, and they
are reflected in the Bill.

This council is totally independent of the Minister. It is absolutely
independent. The only issue that arises is in terms of the Public Finance
Management Act, because so many of these councils have not been carrying
out the proper financial controls over them. This council will be funded as
all other professional councils are funded - and I would like to point this
out to Mrs Bopalamo - by the members. And there is no reason why 360 000
members paying a small levy could not conduct a modest outfit and
arrangement among themselves. No other council is, but why is it necessary
for an independent council to have the chairperson appointed under clause
7(1)?

Other professional councils do not enjoy great public esteem. For example,
as an advocate I speak particularly about the bar council. They investigate
complaints among themselves in private, and hardly publish their report. As
for the law society, it takes the versatility and the persistence of
journalists, particularly journalists with a nose for information, to come
out with a scandal about the abuse, for example, of the Motor Vehicle
Accident Fund. It was a little journalist who did that in the first place.
We have to get away from this comfortable conspiracy of professional
bodies, and that is why we have clause 7(1) to improve the status of the
teaching profession and the council. This is particularly important for the
New NP, because this is an attempt by this Bill to ensure that there is
greater participation.

I think we are one the first countries in the world to insert a role for
the governing bodies in the council, and also for other school bodies
rather than the state schools bodies. Particularly important are the five
people who will be appointed by the department after full consultation with
the MECs, people of international status and standing, so that there will
not be a closed network of broeders, as we used to call them - sisters
never got a look-in before. Now we want people who are not only broadly
representative, but also strong people who will really look after the
public interest.

The point that therefore arises is that I hope - and I would like to say
this to Mrs Bopalamo - that this will not be like the medical and lawyers'
outfits. I hope this will be very different. If one tries to get a doctor,
for example here or in England or anywhere else, to give evidence against
another doctor, one cannot get him or her to do so. That is the kind of
masonic closed world we must get away from.

So the next point is that there is an enormous difference between
professional ethics being broken and discipline. The disciplinary matter is
between employer and employee. That is a disciplinary matter - breach of
the contract of employment, nonattendance, nonservice. Breach of the law of
the country, for example, is a serious matter. That is why I brought my
traditional weapons here, which were confiscated the other day. [Laughter.]
It is a breach of the law of the country to beat children. That is a
contractual matter.

If a finding is made by the employer, then the finding, in principle,
should be referred to the council for educators.  There should be rules
that will be worked out. The Council of Educators must look at that, but
independently of the breach of the contract of employment, on the basis of
public complaints. That is how it will work. I am not going to raise
complaints with them. They are an independent body. The public now must
assert their right if the ethics and the rules of ethical behaviour have
been broken by individual teachers. They call them ``educators'' in the
legislation, but the old-fashioned word ``teachers'', I think, is much
better.

We must encourage the public to be sensitive about the needs of the parents
and their own rights, so that they can make representations and complaints.
There will not be a flood of complaints. We know that. But we must help and
encourage people in an open democracy in that there is a professional body
out there that seeks to assert and maintain the status of the teaching
profession.
So, I say that many of these points have been made, but member Suka has
raised a very important point on these cash colleges. They are the reason
why we must lift the status of the public educational system.

I have said to this House that we must all have a conviction about the
value of the public educational system, for poor Afrikaners, for poor
blacks, for Indians and coloureds, for all of us, and for the middle-class
people in particular. Because, if the middle-class people do not send their
children to public schools, then, immediately, standards deteriorate.
Middle-class people are very articulate. They write to newspapers, they
write to the Minister, they write to the clergy and all that. They write to
everybody who has a public life.

That is why it is very important that we should lift the status of the
public school system. These cash colleges are of two kinds. One is the cash
college for higher education, which we are now seriously dealing with,
because overseas cash colleges in particular, are coming here.

We are dealing with this very seriously, and we will prosecute the one so-
called television training company, which has its headquarters inside the
SABC, ``nogal''! They are illegally operating the training college inside
the SABC. We will prosecute them. So, we are looking after higher
education.

However, the proliferation of so-called secretarial colleges, intermediate
colleges, computer colleges, high school level, and all kinds of colleges,
are a menace and a scandal. We are now working with the provinces. We will
have to work out, over the next six months, registration processes for
them. If they do not register, we will throw the book at them, and
prosecution and public vigilance are the way we are going to maintain
standards of any kind here. I say, therefore, that Mr Suka's point is very
important, but the answer to that is that our parents must have confidence
in the public education system.

I think this Bill will help in a little way. In the end, it is the
assertiveness and the democracy of ordinary people who want the highest
standards, from doctors and lawyers, and we are concerned here with
educators. With the support of members and their continued involvement, in
a nonpartisan way, I think we can feel, as I always felt 42 years ago when
I became a teacher, that this is the noblest profession of them all.

We can bring back that public appreciation of this extraordinary group of
people who have done so much good in the past. We will now bring them back
to centre stage in our educational system. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Thank you, Minister Asmal. You have a
standing ovation over there. The members are particularly energetic today,
with standing ovations.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF ROAD TRAFFIC OFFENCES AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution (Western
Cape dissenting).

             ROAD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT CORPORATION AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution (Western
Cape dissenting).

The Council adjourned at 19:03.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           WEDNESDAY, 7 JUNE 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:
     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 7 June 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (a)    National Youth Commission Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Education:


     Explanatory Memorandum of Vote 8 "Education", Supplementary Estimate
     for 2000-2001.

2.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Supplementary Estimate of Expenditure to be defrayed from the
         National Revenue Fund during the Financial Year ending 31 March
         2001 [RP 4-2000].


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Supplementary Estimate for 2000-
         2001.

3.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Explanatory Memorandum of Vote 4 "Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology", Supplementary Estimate for 2000-2001.

4.    The Minister of Housing:


     Government Notice Number R.437 published in the Government Gazette
     Number 21136 dated 5 May 2000, Dissolution of the Pretoria Region Rent
     Board and extension of the area of jurisdiction of the Southern and
     Western Region Rent Board to include the Pretoria area, made in terms
     of sections 2(1) and 2(2) of the Rent Control Act, 1976 (Act No 80 of
     1976).

5.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:
     Explanatory Memorandum of Vote 3 "Agriculture", Supplementary Estimate
     for 2000-2001.

6.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Explanatory Memorandum on Vote 34 "Water Affairs and Forestry",
     Supplementary Estimate for 2000-2001.

7.    The Minister of Health:


     Explanatory Memorandum of Vote 13 "Health", Supplementary Estimate for
     2000-2001.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
     Sorghum Industry Levy, dated 7 June 2000:


         The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
         considered the application by the National Agricultural Marketing
         Council for the continuation of the statutory levy in the sorghum
         industry, reports, in terms of section 15 of the Marketing of
         Agricultural Products Act, 1996, that it has approved the
         recommendation of the Council, namely that the statutory levy of
         R3,10 (VAT excluded) be continued until 28 February 2001.


                            THURSDAY, 8 JUNE 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 8
         June 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Local Government: Cross-boundary Municipalities Bill [B 37
              - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 21252 of 2
              June 2000.]


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 7 June 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Local Government: Cross-boundary Municipalities Bill [B 37
              - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government - National Assembly).


     (3)    The Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 8 June 2000
         took a decision, in accordance with Joint Rule 216, that the Local
         Government: Cross-boundary Municipalities Bill [B 37 - 2000], be
         fast-tracked by, where necessary, shortening any period within
         which any step in the legislative process relating to the Bill
         must be completed, in order to make it possible for the Bill to be
         passed by both Houses of Parliament by Friday, 23 June 2000.


         In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in both
         Houses for ratification.


     (4)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (a)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 8B - 2000] - Act No 16 of 2000
              (assented to and signed by President on 7 June 2000); and


         (b)     Nonprofit Organisations Amendment Bill [B 9 - 2000] - Act
              No 17 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 7 June
              2000).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     (1)    Explanatory Memorandum on Vote 22 - "Provincial and Local
         Government", Supplementary Estimate for 2000-2001.


     (2)    Report of the Department of Provincial and Local Government for
         1999.


2.    The Minister for Welfare and Population Development:


     Explanatory Memorandum on Vote 35 - "Welfare", Supplementary Estimate
     for 2000-2001.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Report of the National Prosecuting Authority for 1998-99 [RP 99-2000].

4.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Explanatory Memorandum on Vote 9 - "Environmental Affairs and Tourism",
     Supplementary Estimate for 2000-2001.

5.    The Minister of Labour:


     Explanatory Memorandum on Vote 19 - "Labour", Supplementary Estimate
     for 2000-2001.

