---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 May 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-05-09
---

TUESDAY, 9 MAY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

The Deputy Speaker announced that the vacancies caused by the death of Mr M
I Vilakazi and the resignations of Ms L A Abrahams and Mr G Rockman, had
been filled, in accordance with item 6(3) of Schedule 6 to the
Constitution, 1996, by the nomination of Mr R M Moropa and Mr S L Dithebe
with effect from 1 May 2000, and Mr M H Fazzie with effect from 3 May 2000,
respectively.

                                    OATHS

Mr R M Moropa, accompanied by Miss P S Sekgobela and Mrs M P Coetzee-
Kasper, made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.

Mr S L Dithebe, accompanied by Miss P S Sekgobela and Mrs M P Coetzee-
Kasper, made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.

                             SOLEMN AFFIRMATION

Mr M H Fazzie, accompanied by Miss P S Sekgobela and Mrs M P Coetzee-
Kasper, made and subscribed the solemn affirmation and took his seat.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M B NTULI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the contention of the Leader of the Opposition that ``the most
       important issue in Zimbabwe is not land, but democracy itself'';

  (2) believes that democracy is not merely the right to vote, but includes
       equal access to economic opportunity and the redress of inequity
       brought about through historical injustice;

  (3) further believes that if inequity is not addressed through a
       systematic programme of restitution and redistribution of land,
       capital and opportunity, democracy cannot be fostered in postcolonial
       societies; and

  (4) commends the South African Government for its focused approach in
       addressing the very problems that are leading to a breakdown of the
       rule of law in Zimbabwe, through its policies on land, economic
       development, workers' rights ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr D K MALULEKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that former President Nelson Mandela has asserted great
       leadership in stating that we must not tolerate tyrants; and

  (2) resolves to support President Mandela's view and his call that we
       must be ruthless in denouncing such leaders.

[Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with satisfaction the substantial decrease in fatal road
       accidents over the Easter period;

  (2) commends the provincial and national Government departments for their
       campaign to curb the carnage on our roads; and

  (3) pleads with authorities and the driving public to continue in their
       efforts to make South African roads safe for all responsible road
       users.

[Applause.]

Mr E I EBRAHIM: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the continuing violence in Zimbabwe, resulting in loss of life
       and destruction of property;

  (2) emphasises that violence will not solve the political, social and
       economic problems of Zimbabwe;

  (3) believes that violence will erode the hard-won freedom of the people
       of Zimbabwe; and

  (4) calls on the people of Zimbabwe to work towards the rule of law and
       peace, including the implementation of the Good Friday agreement of
       leaders President Chissano of Mozambique, President Sam Nujoma of
       Namibia, Thabo Mbeki, our President, and President Robert Mugabe of
       Zimbabwe.

[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the policy of quiet diplomacy pursued by our President in his
       dealings with President Robert Mugabe during the past weeks of
       mayhem, murder and disruption of the democratic process and economy
       of Zimbabwe;

  (2) notes with disgust and dismay that President Mugabe nevertheless
       continues to associate himself with flagrant and violent violations
       of human rights, including political and land rights constitutionally
       guaranteed to Zimbabwean citizens in that country's declaration of
       rights; and

  (3) urges President Mbeki to follow the example of former President
       Mandela and reassure South Africa and the world on the issue of his
       respect for human rights and democracy and his abhorrence of tyranny.

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with dismay and grave concern the continuous job losses as a
           result of retrenchments and severance packages;

       (b)  that the Government has failed to honour and implement the
           resolutions on job creation agreed upon at the Presidential Jobs
           Summit; and

       (c)  that failure by the Government to implement these resolutions
           has resulted in a nationwide strike, which will start tomorrow;
           and


  (2) calls on the Government and the labour movement to sort out their
       differences and give urgent attention to the plight of workers in the
       best interests of the economy of this country.

Mr J D ARENDSE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Government plans to resettle about 70 000 black
       commercial farmers on 2 million hectares of land;

  (2) further notes that the Land Claims Commission has a programme in
       place to settle all land claims within five years;

  (3) recognises that the land restitution process started immediately
       after the ANC came to power; and

  (4) commends the initiatives taken by the ANC-led Government in
       addressing the injustices created by the apartheid regime.

[Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the incident some weeks ago when a woman employed as a domestic
           worker was savaged by pitbull terriers in KwaZulu-Natal; and

       (b)  that the woman, whose arms were severed from her body, suffered
           various gruesome injuries and has since died in hospital; and


  (2) in light of other savage attacks by pitbull terriers on unsuspecting
       people, calls on the Government to ban these savage dogs from this
       country urgently, as has been done in the United Kingdom.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die AEB sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) die aankondiging van die Adjunkminister vir Landbou en Grondsake dat
       2 miljoen hektaar staatsgrond vir swart kommersiële boere beskikbaar
       gestel gaan word, verwelkom;

  (2) erken dat die uiteindelike mikpunt om 15% staatsgrond vir kommersiële
       landbou beskikbaar te stel te klein is, aangesien 'n groot deel van
       die grond in staatsbesit reeds deur die vorige regering vir dié doel
       aangekoop maar nog nie aangewend is nie;

  (3) ernstig daaroor moet besin of 70 000 boere op 2 miljoen hektaar nie
       te veel is nie, aangesien die gemiddelde grootte van 28 hektaar nie
       vir kommersiële boerdery voldoende is nie maar bloot vir
       bestaansboerdery en dat die wagwoord eerder kwaliteit as kwantiteit
       moet wees;

  (4) die feit betreur dat die Regering nie van dié geleentheid gebruik
       gemaak het om daarmee saam 'n duidelike verbintenis te gee dat die
       basiese konstitusionele reg op private besit te alle tye gewaarborg
       word, en nie volgens die Mugabe-model aangetas sal word nie; en

  (5) die Regering versoek om ferm standpunt in te neem teen die
       dreigemente van plaasbesetting wat reeds in die Noordelike Provinsie
       en Mpumalanga voorgekom het.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day, I shall move on behalf of the AEB:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the announcement by the Deputy Minister for Agriculture and
       Land Affairs that 2 million hectares of state land are going to be
       made available to black commercial farmers;

  (2) admits that the eventual aim of making available 15% of state land
       for commercial agriculture is too low, as a large portion of the land
       owned by the state was already purchased by the previous government
       for this purpose, but has not yet been utilised;

  (3) must seriously consider whether 70 000 farmers on 2 million hectares
       is not too many, as the average size of 28 hectares is not sufficient
       for commercial farming but only for subsistence farming, and that the
       watchword should be quality rather than quantity;

  (4) regrets the fact that the Government did not use this opportunity to
       give a clear commitment that the basic constitutional right to
       private ownership is guaranteed at all times, and will not be
       violated according to the Mugabe model; and

  (5) requests the Government to take a firm position against threats of
       farm occupation which have already occurred in the Northern Province
       and Mpumalanga.]

Mr J H MOMBERG: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the continued abuse of farmworkers by farmers all over South
           Africa; and

       (b)  that farmworkers continue to be evicted without notice;


  (2) recognises that the Government introduced laws protecting farm
       labourers and farmers; and

  (3) calls on the farmers to condemn violence against farmworkers and to
       recognise their rights.

[Applause.]

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the President continues to justify the need for an international
           panel to discuss the link between HIV and Aids; and

       (b)  the debate instigated by the President on this matter, which was
           settled definitively many years ago, is distracting the
           Department of Health and the South African Aids community from
           the real issues around Aids prevention and treatment, thereby
           further delaying the implementation of effective plans and
           strategies; and


  (2) distances itself from this initiative and calls on the President to
       concentrate his efforts on initiatives which will have a direct
       impact on the course of the epidemic.

Dr K RAJOO: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) requests the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism urgently
       to look at operating legislation that controls air and water
       pollution by large industries;

  (2) notes that a large multinational industry south of Durban has been
       responsible for releasing noxious chemical fumes, resulting in a
       number of schoolchildren in the area being rushed to hospital with
       breathing problems;

  (3) urges the Minister urgently to set up a stringent watchdog body
       comprising national, provincial and local experts to monitor
       pollution emanating from industries in that area;

  (4) notes that AECI, Shell, Engen, Mondi, Sasol and Saprep are giant
       industries in southern Durban that are prone to so-called accidents
       where effluents are released into the waterways and the atmosphere,
       to the consternation of local residents as this is an assault on
       their health and quality of life; and
  (5) further notes that these industries tend to monitor themselves ...

[Time expired.]

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the decision by the national executive committee of the ANC to
       dissolve the provincial executive committees of Gauteng and Free
       State;

  (2) believes that this bold step will go a long way towards inculcating
       and entrenching the organisational culture and values of our
       movement, which put the interests of our people at the centre of the
       process of transforming our country; and

  (3) commends the national executive committee for this decisive
       intervention to further reposition our movement in order to continue
       to lead the process of social change, effective governance and
       building a better life for our people.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Adv D M BAKKER: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met besorgdheid kennis neem -


       (a)  van Cosatu se voorgenome algemene staking wat môre gaan
           plaasvind en die land na raming meer as R3,2 miljard gaan kos;
           en

       (b)  dat die voorgenome staking geensins sal bydra tot die skepping
           van nuwe werkgeleenthede en die verligting van armoede in ons
           land nie;


  (2) die voorgenome staking veroordeel as teenproduktief, aangesien dit
       geensins sal bydra tot stabiele arbeidsverhoudings, hoër ekonomiese
       groei en die lok van buitelandse beleggings nie;

  (3) 'n beroep doen op die ANC-regering se alliansievennoot Cosatu om hom
       eerder op 'n ordelike wyse toe te spits op die verhoging van
       produktiwiteit, wat in 'n groter mate sal lei tot die skep van nuwe
       werkgeleenthede; en

  (4) hom opnuut verbind tot die spoedige implementering van die Regering
       se makro-ekonomiese beleid, Gear.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Adv D M BAKKER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern -


       (a)  Cosatu's intended strike, which will take place tomorrow and
           will cost the country an estimated R3,2 billion; and

       (b)  that the intended strike will not contribute in any way to the
           creation of new job opportunities and the alleviation of poverty
           in our country;


  (2) condemns the proposed strike as counter-productive, since it will not
       contribute in any way to stable labour relations, higher economic
       growth, and attracting foreign investments;

  (3) appeals to the ANC Government's alliance partner, Cosatu, rather to
       devote itself in an orderly fashion to increasing productivity, which
       will lead to a greater extent to the creation of new job
       opportunities; and

  (4) commits itself anew to the speedy implementation of the Government's
       macro-economic policy, Gear.]

Mr S J DE BEER: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the proposal that an African language be included in the
       curriculum of all South African learners and would like to go further
       and propose that such language teaching also include a study of the
       culture associated with the language, since that will allow learners
       to truly communicate in the given language;

  (2) believes that South Africans can mobilise, for the greater good, the
       creative spirit inherent in our rich diversity and that this language
       proposal, if implemented with due regard for the cultural
       sensitivities of minorities, will be a great step in nation-building;
       and

  (3) is convinced that the proper implementation of this proposal can be
       of great value to minorities in their quest to play a meaningful role
       in a multicultural and multilingual democratic South Africa.

[Time expired.]

Dr J BENJAMIN: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Minister of Education, Kader Asmal, has called on
       teachers to be exempted from the Cosatu strike of tomorrow, as it
       will disadvantage students;

  (2) further notes that the Government sees education as a priority to
       creating a better life for all and ensuring its vision of a caring
       society;

  (3) acknowledges the constitutionally protected right of teachers to
       embark on strike action; and

  (4) calls on teachers throughout the country to be sensitive towards the
       needs of their students and to work with the department in
       establishing an education system of which we can all be proud.

[Applause.]

        CONGRATULATIONS TO MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs has brought
           to this world a healthy baby girl, who has been named
           Thandolwethu; and

       (b)  that this is the first time in the history of our country that a
           Minister gave birth whilst continuing with ministerial
           responsibilities;


  (2) commends the Minister for serving our nation in this diligent manner;
       and

  (3) wishes the newly born baby, Thandolwethu, a happy and prosperous
       future.

[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I assume there are no objections to that motion
without notice.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, the DP certainly does not wish to oppose
it. We want to say that we are glad that at least one of our Ministers is
productive. [Laughter.]

Agreed to.

                  CONDEMNATION OF KIDNAPPING OF 21 HOSTAGES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) condemns the kidnapping of 21 hostages including two South Africans
       by a Phillippine rebel group;

  (2) demonstrates its solidarity with the families of the South African
       hostages;

  (3) expresses its appreciation for the tireless efforts of the South
       African Government in trying to release the hostages and to ease
       their plight; and

  (4) trusts that all the hostages will be released as soon as possible.

Agreed to.

                         COMPETITION AMENDMENT BILL

  (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Portfolio Committee on Trade and
                  Industry on amendments proposed by NCOP)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 5 - Communications:

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Speaker, hon members, distinguished
guests, I have the privilege and pleasure to rise, for the first time in
this House, to support and Appropriation Bill, introduced by the Minister
of Finance, for the purpose of appropriating funds for the 2000-01
financial year for the Department of Communications.

As we present budgets for the second term of our democracy, I have, by
happy coincidence, been placed in the sector in which I had a baptism of
fire in 1993, as the Chairperson of the SABC board. But members are all
witness to the fact that we have survived. Transformation and freeing the
airwaves was tackled head on. It was tough. No one had promised us that it
was going to be easy.

Today, I can only echo the words of the hon the President when he proudly
said that we are on course and steadily the dark clouds of despair are
lifting, giving way to our season of hope. Building on the foundations
which have been laid, and despite the setbacks that may have caused delays
or problems in meeting services outlined in our mandates and targets, we
have achieved much, with very little, in record time.

The communications portfolio, which covers broadcasting and postal and
telecommunications services, is building on the foundation that has been
laid and will, in time, make possible access to and the participation of
every South African in reshaping our nation through information and
communication technology and the knowledge economy. Our intention is to
improve the life of all our people and make South Africa's future
generations a knowledge-based society. This will be achieved by
establishing a networked information community, empowering people to
participate in the new economy, to change the way people work, the way they
live, play and make South Africa globally competitive.

There is a great challenge before us. This sector is the driver of economic
growth today, contributing significantly to the GDP. Within the context of
a policy framework that demands increasing competition, shifting
expenditure to infrastructure, mobilising investment and reducing state
debt, we have had to explore a wide range of options in corporatisation and
privatisation as we restructure state assets. We had to be cautious not to
substitute public monopoly for private monopoly. The imperatives imposed by
these contradictory challenges require that we make hard choices and act
responsibly. We have to balance delivery of services to ordinary people and
to business.

In addition, the department had to rise to the challenges set out in the
national priorities outlined by the President in his speech on 25 June
1999. These priorities include integrated, sustainable rural development,
the campaign against HIV/Aids, the African renaissance project and bringing
development and access to Government to the majority of the people. I am
happy to say that Government's policy of reducing state assets and belt
tightening and of a better and a quality performance of portfolio
organisations, together with restructuring and privatisation in others, has
significantly reduced the budget of this department by 40% to R466 948
million from the previous financial year.

The Post Office is an institution familiar to most of our people, though
its accessibility was governed by apartheid planning. Access to its
services, however, is a basic right. Much has been done over the past five
years to improve access to a reliable and affordable postal service for the
majority of our people, especially those in the disadvantaged and rural
communities. To ensure this, we are implementing the Postal Services Act of
1998. We appointed the Postal Regulator. One of the key functions of this
regulator will be to issue licences to postal service providers.

The licence to the SA Post Office Ltd has, amongst others, the following
obligations: Increasing the number of postal outlets from the current 2 400
to 3 206 by 2003 in both rural and urban areas; rolling out 4 million
addresses by 2003 - which will increase address points from 8 million to 12
million; setting clear and better customer care targets; improving the
delivery standards of on-time delivery of basic post from 92% to 96% by the
year 2003; and providing universal access to Internet and e-mail addresses
through public information terminals, or what we call PITs. Members will
see many of these PITs demonstrated in the Old Assembly lobby.

In order to meet these national obligations and the challenges of
globalisation, a strategic management partner has been engaged and 31
projects have been attached to its contract. This partner is a joint
venture between the New Zealand Post Office and Royal Mail of the United
Kingdom. Additional projects include the building of an international hub
in Johannesburg and the establishment of e-commerce-related business by the
Post Office. The development of the Post Office into a world-class company
will enable us to deliver efficient and effective service to customers and
the people of South Africa. This has started and is well on course.

Financial performance over the past three financial years has seen a
reduction in the subsidy to the Post Office, from a high of R700 million in
the year 1996-97 to R283 million in the year 1999-2000, and the total
elimination of that subsidy in this financial year, 2000-01. Preparing the
necessary human resources for a new task is urgent. Exploratory talks with
a Canadian institution are under way. We are not only looking at so-called
international best practice, but also examining whether the best practice
is, indeed, relevant to us.

The restructuring of the Postbank is also on course. In the restructuring
project of Government, the Postbank is being transformed into an entity
that will provide financial services to the non-banking masses of our
country, especially those in rural areas. The Postbank, whose major funds
are from the poorer majority of our country, has not been able to use these
resources to improve the life and conditions of the rural poor and of
small, medium and micro enterprises. Restructuring the Postbank will be
done in such a way that the benefits which emanate from that include new
products and credit offerings. It must also improve relations and co-
ordination with other Government institutions in order to achieve
Government objectives. These objectives are integrated sustainable rural
development, urban renewal and the development of the small and medium
sector.

The second phase of the restructuring will involve the acquisition of a
strategic equity partner and further capitalisation of the bank. We have
also had to pay attention to diversification. The Post Office is
investigating the viability of acquiring the productive assets of Fast
Forward in order to add further value to the courier business of the
company. It will also explore offering consulting services in the SADC
region and on the continent. These restructuring efforts will attract
foreign direct investment which will stimulate economic growth.

The Post Office has also begun the application of procurement policies in
order to accommodate small and medium enterprises. A number of awards are
in the adjudication stage for the maintenance of corporate and regional
contracts and subcontracting at the international mail centre, and
expansion to other areas remains an imperative.
Technological changes and advances in types of communication such as e-mail
are placing an increasing pressure on traditional forms of communication.
In order to continue to survive in the information age, the SA Post Office
is looking at innovative ways of protecting its core business and enhancing
the types of services it provides to its customers.

The development of new products is being investigated by the Post Office in
order for it to secure its place in the global information society. Direct
mail opportunities in South Africa remain underexplored, as do the
additional services of correspondence in the hybrid mail areas. The SA Post
Office is developing electronic commerce and has plans to give all citizens
of South Africa access to a free e-mail service.

With regard to broadcasting services, the ANC-led Government has since 1994
consistently sought, among other things, to build a single nonracial and
integrated country, and to consolidate our democracy and extend
participation by its people. No other sector is poised to contribute to
this better than the broadcasting sector. The sector reaches the
marginalised and those who are not empowered - women, the youth, the
disabled, the illiterate, rural and landless people, as well as traditional
leaders who play an important role in shaping the development ideology and
knowledge base of these areas.

In pursuance of these goals, broadcasting can and does make a major
contribution to creating a better life for so many of our underserviced
communities. Consequently, based on the broadcasting policy and the
Broadcasting Act of 1999, the focus has been placed on universal service
access; the roll-out of community radio station infrastructure; the
promotion of local content; making Parliament accessible to the people;
making education accessible to the majority; and meeting the challenges of
technological change and of globalisation. Therefore, the expanding and
upgrading of the infrastructure of the SABC in order for radio and
television under the national broadcaster to reach more people and to
achieve our goal of freeing the airwaves so as to allow access to a
diversity of views devoid of state propaganda is still an imperative we
pursue.

Die uitbouing van gemeenskapsradiostasies word bepaal deur 'n
lisensiëringsproses van die Onafhanklike Uitsaaiowerheid oor 'n tydperk van
vier jaar. Meer as 80 gemeenskapsradiostasies is sedert 1995 gelisensieer.
Die eerste van hierdie stasies is reeds in Januarie vanjaar gesamentlik in
Botshabelo, Ficksburg, Senekal en Qwaqwa - almal in die Vrystaat - deur
satelliet geloods. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The development of community radio stations is determined by a licensing
process of the Independent Broadcasting Authority over a period of four
years. The first of these stations was launched by satellite jointly in
Botshabelo, Ficksburg, Senekal and Qwaqwa - all in the Free State - in
January this year.]

Mafelong a selemo sena sa ditjhelete sa 2000-01, ditshebeletso tsa kgaso
tsa setjhaba [community radio stations] tse mashome a mararo le metso e
tsheletseng di tla emiswa diprofensing tse robong. Lefapha le tla thusa
haholo dibakeng tse futsanehileng. Tjhelete e kana ka R6,5 million e se e
beheletswe ka thoko selemong sena sa ditjhelete bakeng sa hona. Diprofensi
tse tharo tse tlang ho thuswa pele ke Profensi ya Lebowa, profensi ya
KwaZulu-Natal le Kapa Botjhabela. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph
follows.)

[At the end of this 2000-01 financial year, 36 community radio stations
will be opened in nine provinces. The department will give assistance
particularly to disadvantaged areas. An amount of R6,5 million has already
been set aside in this financial year for this project. The first three
provinces to be assisted will be the Northern Province, KwaZulu-Natal and
the Eastern Cape.]

Not only is this sector important in providing communities with mechanisms
to discuss developmental and educational issues relevant to them, but it
also offers them an opportunity to reflect themselves to others and connect
with the broader South Africa. To sustain community radio stations, the
department is establishing production hubs in provinces for programmes that
cater for the disadvantaged and the marginalised, especially children and
people with disabilities. An amount of R19,4 million has been budgeted for
this programme.

A vibrant broadcasting industry can stimulate economic growth. The
regulatory environment that must exist in order to allow this growth should
give certainty, consistency and confidence to the industry. The recent
experience with the telecommunications regulator has dented confidence.
However, the convergence of the broadcasting, information and
telecommunications technologies has forced Government to focus on an
appropriate regulatory regime and structure.

The merger of the IBA and Satra is a step in the right direction. The
policy and the regulatory and operational aspects need fine-tuning, hence
the integration of legislation in order to remove contradictions and
facilitate rigorous application of laws is an urgent matter. The merging of
the authorities will ensure rationalisation and reduce costs.

The parliamentary process that establishes the new regulator needs to
ensure a quality of leadership that can give confidence to a rather shaken
industry. The processes of the establishment of two bodies have started.
The first one is that the Digital Advisory Council will advise the Minister
on the technical and economic applications of digitisation. The other is
that the SA Broadcast Production Advisory Body will advise the Minister on
how the development, production and display of local radio and television
content can be supported. The budget for this at the moment is R1 million.

Two feasibility studies are under way. One is into the establishment of a
parliamentary television channel, the other into the establishment of a
dedicated education channel. The budget for both studies has also been set
at R1 million. There is a great need for integrated training in
broadcasting skills which also caters for transformation. Government has
been a catalyst in establishing the National Electronic Media Institute of
South Africa, or Nemisa, in order to undertake training in the broadcasting
and media fields. An amount of R12 million has been budgeted for this
purpose.

Sentech, our signal distributor, was converted into a public company with
the state as the sole shareholder. This restructuring was taken a step
further through a strategic and resource review which is aimed at
introducing a strategic equity partner in the near future. Sentech is
aggressively pursuing an extension of its work and services to other parts
of the continent through the maintenance and running of infrastructure in
Swaziland, Ghana and Kenya.

We cannot but recognise the importance of the telecommunications sector to
economic growth, and the sector is well established today. South Africa
ranks 23rd in telecommunications development and 17th in Internet in the
world. The sector is the fastest growing sector here and in the world. It
has already transformed financial services and fuelled globalisation.
However, there are inherent contradictions in the so-called digital divide
of the haves and the have-nots. The challenge for us is how we can
effectively bridge this divide, which is, firstly, the divide in access to
services; secondly, the divide in ownership; and, thirdly, the divide in
knowledge.

To transform this key sector of the economy, we need to ensure benefits to
large numbers of our people and change the racial ownership patterns in
both the publicly listed and privately held companies. To effect this, we
accept that it is the state's role to create equality. Today, for the first
time, 200 villages have access to telephones within a reasonable distance.
This point was driven home one night when I got stuck in a village without
cellular coverage because of two punctures between Viedgesville and
Mqanduli in the Eastern Cape in January. Less than 50 metres away was a
public phone which allowed me access to family, hospital and the police.

Telkom has met and exceeded its roll-out targets, over 1,6 million lines,
an impressive 175 000 lines more than the cumulative target. Approximately
14 000 lines have been installed since 1998 to priority customers such as
schools, clinics and hospitals, but much more needs to be done. The
telecentre infrastructure roll-out is under way, but we are reviewing the
concept and role of the Universal Service Agency.

Now that the Internet is part of our daily lives, the centres take on a
community focus and become the development and business node of rural and
urban communities. The recently launched telecentres in Villiers in the
Free State and Schweizer-Reneke in the North West, the latter for disabled
women, speak of the ability of this Government to empower and of
communities to rise to the challenges of our times.

To effect the second bridge, we are transforming the way business is done.
Telkom is promoting black economic empowerment through the purchasing of
services and equipment. More than 371 black suppliers, 351 small and medium
enterprises and 20 large black suppliers have done business with Telkom to
the value of more than R4 billion in just under three years. I hope members
note that.
In divesting 10% of Telkom equity, the Government has allowed 3% to go to
black empowerment consortia across all nine provinces. From the lessons we
learned in restructuring the broadcast sector, we shall ensure careful
shareholder agreements to avoid fronting, or the ``rent-a-black'' syndrome.
The challenge is immediate in the evaluation of the third cellular licence.
However, to effect the third, investment in our people is imperative. The
role of education from an early age to adulthood, including innovative
training practices in the hi-tech environment, research and development, is
a priority. This is reflected in the budgets of all the portfolio
organisations.
 
Humble beginnings at Houwteq have paid dividends in that young people from
disadvantaged communities, 60% of them female, are now being trained as
software engineers and in remote sensing and satellite technology. Over 100
have already been absorbed into the economy. The first cohort of students
studying remote sensing at the Arianne Space Institute at Toulouse in
France will soon return to teach at Houwteq. Telkom alone has set a target
of R1,3 billion for knowledge development over a five-year period. We will,
for our part, accelerate the development of Web Internet laboratories in
schools, and I hope Minister Kader Asmal has taken note of that.

In the area of public emergency, the increase in the budget over the medium
term is mainly for the expenditure of emergency communication. The aim is
to create emergency services with a three-digit phone number that can be
used anywhere, anytime in the country. The study has been completed and
will be presented to Cabinet. An initial R7 million has been budgeted for
the establishment of the Emergency Services Fund.

Other key activities for the future, namely the listing of Telkom in 2001,
the feasibility study on a domestic satellite, the development of
electronic commerce, and the regulatory regime to govern Internet economy,
demand well-thought-out policies and legislation. A Green Paper will be
ready soon. To further liberalise the sector, the department is preparing
to license a second national operator as a means of introducing
competition. Other inputs for the year 2000-01 are the development of a
spectrum pricing policy, a numbering plan, Government call centres and a
new regulatory framework.

A year ago the Department of Communications' gender desk commissioned an
audit to determine the level of gender transformation in portfolio
organisations, namely Telkom, Sentech, SABC, the Post Office and Satra,
following the conference held by the Department of Trade and Industry on
Technology for Women in Business in 1998. This audit could be used to play
a central role in the implementation of the national gender programme and
determine priorities for organisations, as well as examine their practices
against which changes can be measured over time.

Across all organisations racial equality is progressing much more rapidly
than gender equality. There is a lack of support systems for women in
management and a severe shortage of women trained in this area. There is
also a belief that no women are skilled in technical jobs. Therefore the
challenge is to find ways to change this culture or this mindset.

The promotion of the African renaissance and the African century and the
development of South-South relations are Government priorities. This sector
is key to the realisation of these goals. Each of the portfolio
organisations - the SABC, the SA Post Office, Telkom and Sentech - have
pursued these goals, cognisant of the fact that their own growth and
success are inextricably linked to those of the continent.

Regarding cultural and media services, the television channel SABC Africa
is breaking new ground in the development of African perspectives in
information and entertainment, in particular in the news and current
affairs section and in the campaign against HIV/Aids. A process of
commercialising Channel Africa radio and extending its services and
programming has started. The station will be restructured and turned into a
viable commercial enterprise, and R28 million has been budgeted for this
purpose.

We confirm that our commitment to the African connection is beginning to
bear fruit. A secretariat has been set up at the DBSA, and the World Bank
and other institutions, under the leadership of South Africa as chair of
the ministerial oversight committee, have begun the process of funding the
project. My Ministry has assembled 10 African experts and intellectuals in
the communications sector, to work with us in driving the African
connection project. Six key African telecommunications projects have been
prioritised. These are telehealth, telemedicine, tele-education, tele-
agriculture, infrastructure development and telecentres or Internet access,
and centres of excellence.

The development of a co-ordinated policy and regulatory framework in the
broadcasting, postal and telecommunications sectors at continental level
would make possible economies of scale in order to transform the continent
into an active and vibrant market. These are pursued through the
continental Pan African Postal Union, the African Telecommunications Union
and the Telecommunications Regulatory Authorities of Southern Africa,
Trasa.

I ask hon members to help us move forward along our road by voting to
approve this budget, as we emerge from an intellectual-based economy to an
information-based economy, from traditional ways of doing business to the
world of electronic commerce. Again, as we move from traditional literacy
to digital literacy, we need, as South Africans, in this age of the
Internet economy, to be .com and .za, or else we are likely to be .dead.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the director-general and all
the staff members of my department, for the enormous support that they have
given me and for the work that they have done in order for this department
to deliver services to the people of South Africa. I would like to thank
the portfolio organisations for taking the projects of this Government -
the national priorities - and making them theirs in pursuit of these
projects, especially the African renaissance project.

Given that this is my first year in Cabinet, I would also like to thank my
family, in particular my two sisters Eunice and Felicia, who have always
been by my side, and my nephews and nieces who have, indeed, made my life a
little easier. I thank them very much. [Applause.]

Mr N N KEKANA: Madam Speaker, let me start on a lighter note, by
congratulating the Minister, the director-general and his department on an
award that was confirmed by the World Information Technology Seminar
Association, which recognised that the public information terminal that we
see in the passage here is, indeed, a new invention and will enable our
people to access the Internet. I believe that this award will be given to
South Africa at the World IT congress in June. [Applause.]
Acquisitions and mergers have taken place in the information, media and
technology sectors at global level. The growth of the Nasdaq suggests that
the notion of an information revolution is a reality. Despite the recent
hiccups on the stock exchanges, more and more information communication
technology companies are demonstrating, through their share prices, that,
indeed, the future of trade lies in e-economy. A country's competitiveness
will soon be measured by its e-commerce readiness and infrastructure
capacity. Today, wireless technology has enabled new services to be availed
anywhere and at any time.

The increase in the capacity of networks to carry more information at
greater speed, the increase in bandwidth, will result in changes to our
lifestyles. Many of the new innovations worldwide make the old science
fiction movies seem so ordinary. While the high speed data and the new
wireless telecom technologies cause even academic control freaks to
acknowledge that there is, indeed, an information revolution, what matters
are the needs and concerns of the consumer and the demand for basic
telephone services by our communities.

South Africa is a middle-income, developing country. It has two worlds in
one - the information rich and the poor who do not have telephones, access
to the Internet or any access to computers. It is, therefore, necessary to
continue to find a fair regulatory and policy balance between the necessity
to modernise our communications network, bringing in new upgraded services,
and attending to the cry for universal service, for access to basic
telephony and for clinics and schools to be connected to the Internet.

Telkom is restructuring its operations and focusing its attention on it
core business of being a first-class telecommunications operator. This
initiative we must all welcome as essential for our national operator to
prepare for competition. Telkom should pay more attention to satisfying its
current customers and becoming the operator of choice for new subscribers.
Evidence suggests that companies that pay more attention to customer care
have the competitive edge and also increase their revenue base.

Telkom must know its customers better. It must be a company where everyone
knows one's name. Data warehousing is becoming an essential ingredient of a
successful and competitive telecom operator. Global telecom operators are
spending more on research and analysing the special needs of their
customers. Telkom must prioritise this approach to survive competition. We
agree, and evidence in many countries suggests, that competition brings
benefits to the telecom users. There is no doubt that with the introduction
of competition and more players, prices will certainly be lower, and with
more choices, there is a better quality of service offered to the consumer.

However, given our experience with the conduct of the two South African
cellular incumbents, MTN and Vodacom, who have about 3,5 million active
subscribers between them, it is important that we should conduct a thorough
study before we decide on whether to introduce one or two players in the
fixed wireline market. An assessment of the size of the fixed
telecommunications market should also factor in new, third-generation
technologies.

We must also bear in mind that the growth of cellular networks, especially
with new features such as the wireless application protocol, simply known
as Wap, which will undermine the business market of traditional fixed
networks such as Telkom and Transtel. People will, more and more, demand
services that enable them to access data and the Web while on the move and
at their convenience.

Given the problems we are currently experiencing regarding Satra's third
cellular ``beauty contest'', it must be tempting to introduce auction
rather than cumbersome licensing processes that have even enticed a judge
to cross the separation-of-powers boundaries set out by our Constitution.
Auction will certainly generate funds for the fiscus, but experience
worldwide has shown that companies pay more and retrieve later from the
consumer. The day after an auction, I will argue that the duopoly might
disadvantage the consumer and sacrifice our universal service needs. Three
players could prevent colluding by operators and benefit the end users.

The high cost of developing infrastructure might, of course, discourage big
global players from investing in our country. However, the possibility of
cross-border telecommunication expansion into Southern Africa will
certainly enlarge the size of the market share. Eskom and Transnet already
have a presence in Southern African countries. Their infrastructure might
be the backbone of the new entrants. Whether through an auction or a beauty
contest, there has to be a balance between generating more money for the
public purse, and fierce competition between the incumbent and the possible
new entrants.

The SABC has received negative publicity in the past weeks. For instance,
Jacob Dlamini has described the SABC in the Leadership magazine - while
profiling the new chairperson of the SABC board, Mr Vincent Maphai - as ``a
snakepit driven by petty ego and territorial squabbles, and is riddled with
incompetence and corruption''. While journalists and other commentators are
entitled to their own opinions - whether credible, ill-advised or even
misinformed - no amount of analysis or whingeing about the problem will
bring about change at the SABC.

The SABC has a legal framework reference to conduct its affairs, the new
Broadcasting Act of 1999. It is currently going through a restructuring
process that will turn the corporation around to generate revenue, while
meeting the requirements of the Broadcasting Act to serve public
broadcasting interests such as language, education and current affairs
programme.

We have full confidence in the new board of the SABC to give leadership and
steer the SABC into a new era in broadcasting. There is a need for urgency
to implement the Broadcasting Act, consider the commissioned Gemini
restructuring report and appoint a new executive leadership team to run the
operation of the SABC according to the Act. The new board should introduce
corporate governance principles and rules and avoid the temptation to run
the day-to-day operations of the SABC. We as a Portfolio Committee on
Communications have committed ourselves to interacting with the board of
the SABC on a regular basis to measure progress in the restructuring and
operations of the corporation.

One other matter that I want to attend to is a conference that was hosted
by the Competition Commission to discuss boundary issues between itself and
various industry-specific regulators such as the IBA and Satra. The ruling
by the Appeal Court on the Stanbic and Nedcor merger has thrown the cat
among the pigeons. The interpretation of section 3(1)(d) of the Competition
Act has created an impasse on jurisdiction with regard to competition
matters, and in our case the judgment has questioned the role of the IBA
and Satra on regulating broadcasting and telecommunications competition.
This, of course, has created uncertainty about who is in charge of
competition matters.

We believe that the merged independent regulatory body should continue to
exercise its authority on these matters, but more focus should be on policy
objectives and less on turf battles with the Competition Commission.
Therefore, the possible amendment to the Competition Act, section 3(1)(d),
should enable the new industry-specific regulator in the communications
sector to exercise jurisdiction discretion on competition matters. We
should encourage co-ordination and co-operation between the Competition
Commission and the new Independent Communications Authority of South
Africa.

Our policy-makers should consider multisectoral regulation, especially for
industries that are fast merging and converging in our economy and
globally. Today companies that operate in the transport industry are
sometimes overlapping with telecommunications, and vice versa. I think it
is important that we consider multisectoral regulation.

The Portfolio Committee on Communications is going to invite the public to
nominate eligible South Africans to be interviewed and serve as new
councillors of Icasa. We will advertise in major newspapers next week and
the National Assembly will make recommendations to the President before 23
June 2000. We are confident that the new council of Icasa will stabilise
the regulatory environment and attend to the backlog of the IBA and Satra.
With strong, deeply motivated administration, the regulator will certainly
attend to all outstanding concerns in the industry.

The ANC supports this Vote. My colleagues will address issues of our
portfolio, but again I think we need to congratulate the Minister and the
department for ensuring that, in their operation, they exercise belt
tightening. I think this is one of the few Votes that has had a reduction
in its budget. This was not done to punish the department, but because they
managed to achieve what I believe is a victory for this country, the
reduction of the subsidies to the Post Office. If we remember, in the last
years of Nat rule, the Post Office was subsidised. A lot of money has been
wasted in subsidising the operations of the Post Office. I therefore think
we should congratulate the Minister and the department for achieving this
goal.

As I said, my colleagues will address other issues of our portfolio, and I
think hon members should expect that the DP will be negative, and will
whinge about problems. As the ANC, we expect the co-operation of the
opposition in order to find solutions to the apartheid mess that we
inherited from the Nats, not complaints. We expect the opposition,
including the DP, to be constructive and not destructive. [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Speaker, I will not dignify those comments with a
response.

South Africa should be poised, at this moment, to establish itself on the
right side of the digital divide, and to take our continent along with us.
We should be debating, in Parliament, the finer detail of legislation
liberalising the sector, and in due course liberating it altogether from
all but strictly technical regulation. Instead, all energy and attention is
focused on a licensing process that is starting to resemble a soap opera,
one regrets to say, and which is ruining South Africa's reputation.

The impression exists in some quarters that a new set of Icasa councillors
will clean up the mess and sort out the problems. In fact, the Minister
referred today to a need for a better quality of leadership there. We
simply do not believe that rogue councillors are the sole source of the
trouble in telecommunications. The real trouble, in our view, lies in the
executive - in the administration to be precise - that treats the
regulators as if they were toy telephones.

The revocation of Satra's guidelines on interconnection is only the latest
example of executive interference, or administrative interference - who
knows - with independent regulation. We intend to ask the director-general
to come and defend his arguments on the revocation of the gazetted
regulations before the portfolio committee. How is the new regulator
supposed to ``bring the guidelines in line with the new regulatory
framework''? What new ``regulatory framework''? The Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa Act only creates the new body.
Icasa will regulate in terms of the law as it stands. The Minister today
referred to the need for the integration of the three underlying statutes,
and the fact that this was urgent. She also referred to the urgent need for
a new regulatory framework. Therefore, what price the arguments of the
director-general?
The director-general furthermore publicly protests that it is the Minister
who makes policy. However, the Minister's telecommunications policy-
directive powers are specific, they are procedurally prescribed, and they
have no bearing on this case. Besides, the more one merges broadcasting and
telecommunications, the less the Minister can issue any directives. The
Constitution enshrines the broadcast regulator's autonomy - a battle we won
long ago.

Here are some questions that I would like the hon the Minister to answer.
Do sections 43(3) and 44(5) of the Telecommunications Act require Satra to
make regulations on interconnection and facility provision? Secondly, did
the ministerial power to determine guidelines for Telkom fall away on the
third anniversary of the issuing of Telkom's licence a few days ago?
Thirdly, is Satra required by law to regulate in the public interest,
including the encouragement of investment, innovation and fair competition?

Fourthly, does section 96 stipulate that Satra makes, amends and withdraws
regulations which become valid when approved and gazetted by the Minister?
Did she, after some discussion with Satra, gazette the guidelines on 15
March? The answers are ``yes'', of course. Where does the law allow her to
revoke gazetted regulations? While I am about it, could she kindly tell us
in terms of which provision of the Telecommunications Act the Cabinet made
the pre-emptive decision that the 1 800 megahertz frequency be shared
between the two existing cellphone licensees and the successful bidder? Is
she asking us to believe that Cell C's dual strategy had no bearing on that
decision?

I have proposed that in future South Africa should auction licences. In a
mature democracy we should be debating the pros and cons of such a policy
choice and, indeed, the chairperson of the committee made a valid point.
However, quite frankly, such a debate is a waste of time where a department
acts arbitrarily and ignores the law. The fact is that auctioning is one
way of making sure that we cut through all possible corruption, maintain
maximum transparency and make a great deal of money to boot.

This department is a law unto itself. We insist that the Minister and the
director-general should follow the law. They do not, and it follows that
we, therefore, cannot support the Vote. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, Mrs Newhoudt-Druchen will be making
her maiden speech. She will be assisted by an interpreter to make her
speech. I have granted permission for the interpreter to be on the floor of
the Chamber for this purpose.

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Madam Speaker, hon members of this House and
members of the disabled community, today we want to congratulate our
Government for bringing the disabled community into this House. Never
before in history has a deaf person stood in this House and addressed it.
[Applause.] Few countries have achieved what this country has achieved. The
disability issues were in the Office of the Deputy President, but have now
been moved to the President's Office. Through this visibility, the attitude
to disability has changed slowly and more awareness has been made possible.
Under the past government this would not have been done. However, more work
still needs to be done.

We live in a global age, yes, and fast-moving changes in technology are
happening. We find that there are still people in South Africa who are
lacking these things. Many of our people cannot read or write.
Unfortunately, some of our disabled people fall into this category. They
have no access, in particular to TV.

The Constitution says that all of us are equal, including disabled people.
It goes on to say that all of us have rights. We can use our own language,
and participate in cultural activities. It also goes on to say that a
person belonging to a cultural, religious or linguistic community must not
be denied their rights. They should enjoy these cultural, religious and
linguistic rights just as other people do.

How can language and culture be transmitted? Today one way is via the TV.
But it can only become accessible to all people once all our rights are
entrenched. However, many of our deaf people are left out. The SABC's
mandate - which was drafted in October 1994 and approved in February 1995 -
states that it will cater for all languages or all cultural groups and
provide entertainment, education and information, and that it is responsive
for the needs of the public. Yes, the SABC is placed in a unique situation
to break down barriers and serve as a channel for communication for all
people in society. We can share and exchange ideas and information via the
TV.
The SABC acknowledges full recognition and the importance of language as a
means of communication between people, as it is a carrier of values,
attitudes and cultural expression. At least, where feasible, the SABC has
recognised the South African sign language and is providing this service on
TV.

Let us just look at what the SABC has provided for us as deaf people. They
have a television programme for deaf adults called Signature, Dtv for deaf
children and the youth, and different programmes that cater for other
languages such as isiXhosa and Sesotho, with subtitles in English. They
also have programmes showing the disabled people's lives and sign-
interpreted news bulletins on SABC 3, which, in the past, was broadcast
before the six o'clock news bulletin, and was 12 minutes long. However, it
has now been reduced to five minutes, and shifted to the 5:30 time slot.
This time slot does not benefit us as disabled and deaf people. Therefore
we would like to ask and challenge the SABC why this time slot was changed,
and its airtime reduced. Did they consult with the disabled people? At the
same time, members of the blind community would also like to have more
access to television. They have asked for audio-descriptive devices.
The SABC's focus is mainly on the 11 official languages. We, as deaf
people, are fighting for our sign language to be recognised as the 12th
official language. If this does not become an official language, then the
deaf community will not have access to communication. That means that deaf
people cannot become full members of an integrated South Africa. They need
information about their consumer rights, and they need to know about the
danger of HIV/Aids. This is very important in South Africa today.

However, we have no access to information. Even worse, when our President
is addressing the nation or talking in Parliament, the deaf people are,
again, disadvantaged. Why should we not, as deaf people, understand our own
President? Therefore, I would like to encourage the SABC, when our
President is addressing the nation, to please provide subtitles, or have a
sign language interpreter on the television screen. [Applause.]

At the moment research is being done at the University of Potchefstroom.
This is funded by the Pan South African Language Board. The available
research shows that captioning can improve the literacy level in children.
Children learn to read through this captioning, and it also helps with the
acquisition of a second language. It also makes programming more accessible
to deaf and hard-of-hearing people. Furthermore, captioning can be
effective and economically viable in looking at language issues, language
policies and language rights, especially when it comes to a multilingual
country like South Africa. Research is still being done, and we can all
benefit from it, especially the Minister of Education, who is trying to
combat the illiteracy rate in our country.

With regard to telecommunications, Telkom has recently launched a project
in the Western Cape, working very closely with the deaf community. They
have handed out 100 teldems to be used for free for three months. Hon
members may be wondering what teldems are. Well, a teldem is a
telecommunication device for deaf people which allows them to communicate,
via the phone, with another deaf person or with a hearing person. Out of
the 100 teldems, 50 were given to deaf people and 50 to hearing people to
facilitate communication. They can communicate via the teldems. This is all
part of the ANC-led Government's policy to make phones more accessible to
people who have never had them before and to those who could never use the
phone before.

I would like to conclude by emphasising what our President has said before.
All these things that I have mentioned are being done to assist, and I want
to quote [Hansard, Joint Sittings, 1999, col 13] -


  ... to speed up the improvement of the quality of life of various
  sections of our population. These will include the accelerated delivery
  of assistive devices for the disabled ...

We still today have a lot of work to do. We are still on course and we are
still making a better life for all. [Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Madam Speaker, it is patently impossible to intelligently
analyse the budget of the Department of Communications and to review its
performance in the diverse sectors of its operations in just three minutes.
I have therefore had to resort to a press release in an attempt to more
cogently express my party's views on this matter.

Postal services, telecommunications and broadcasting are in themselves
hugely complex and strategically important entities, vital to the
development of our nation and its citizens. The IFP, if it had time, would
properly analyse its mixed bag of praise and criticism of the department.
We would explain why we believe that this budget can only be supported with
reservations in certain areas, while giving recognition and indeed lavish
praise to the Minister, the director-general and their team for the
enormous efforts being made, for instance in the restructuring of the Post
Office and in developing, at Houwteq and elsewhere, the huge potential of
the best and the brightest of our youth for the engineering requirements of
the telecommunications sector.

But the bottom line is that while there is a so-called ``roll-out'' of
telecommunication services to previously underserviced areas throughout our
country, consumers are paying too high a price for fixed-line and cellular
services. The cost of communications is crippling to consumers, in
particular individuals and emerging businesses. The majority of South
Africans cannot afford to use the Internet, and, given the implications of
globalisation and the divide between those who are information rich and
those who are information poor, that is disgraceful. Our President may well
be able to surf the Net, but it is a fact that top students in our township
schools most certainly cannot. Their parents simply cannot afford the phone
bills.

There is also the fact that our broadcasters are not reflecting South
African realities. They are not meeting their local content quotas, they
are not supporting local content and they are not helping the development
of indigenous producers, directors, writers and artists. In a nutshell, our
so-called independent regulators, the IBA and Satra, now one body, have not
functioned as they should have and they say they have been and are being
deprived of funds by the department so that they cannot operate efficiently
or effectively or in terms of their statutory obligations. Government
interference is not being hinted at; it is being shouted from the rooftops.

The fiasco and allegations surrounding the third cellular licence deserve a
debate of their own. We have a concern that the department blurs the lines
between regulation and policy-making, and it was for this reason that the
IFP objected to sections of the Broadcasting Bill. If we are going to drive
down prices, attract investment and promote local talent in this country,
we must have competition and the IFP would like to see the rapid
liberalisation of the telecommunications and broadcasting sectors. When it
sorts itself out, no doubt the postal sector can also be opened up. This is
why our so-called independent regulators, combined in the Independent
Communications Authority of SA, must be supported and strengthened. This
budget slashes their budgets to the bone and the chairperson of the IBA, Mr
Mandla Langa, informed the communications committee that the IBA's three-
year plan was now looking more like a 10-year plan. The IBA will receive R6
million less than its 1999-2000 budget. What can we say about Satra? [Time
expired.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The hon Mr Maserumule is going to give his
maiden speech. [Applause.]

Mr F T MASERUMULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon members. Let me, with a
sense of responsibility, indicate, without hesitation, that it is incumbent
upon all of us to contribute towards making human life human. When I grew
up in the far regions of the Northern Province, a very interesting thing
would happen every morning. One would be sent to the surrounding villages,
either to one's uncle or one's sister, or any other relative, just to ask
them how their morning was. Those of us who have experienced this type of
life will understand how important it is for people to communicate
continuously.

For us communication is not just about one person talking to another,
picking up the telephone, writing a letter or sending a Christmas card. For
us communication is about understanding one another's culture, feelings,
hopes, wishes, likes and dislikes. For us communication is about comforting
those who are in distress. It is about appreciating one another's
weaknesses, about educating one another, about empowering one another.
Above all, it is about the unification of our communities and society in
general. We are therefore not demanding too much when we say more resources
should be made available for infrastructure in the rural areas. We are not
being unreasonable when we say it does not make sense to have four post
offices in Pietersburg while there is only one post office in Seshego which
is supposed to service more than 50 000 people.
 
Ordinary people who are in the majority and who are located in the rural
areas do not have access to financial institutions. They rely solely on the
Postbank. It would be very encouraging indeed to see the Postbank
developing facilities that make it easy for ordinary people to have access
to loans. We need to see more post offices in the rural areas, in
particular in rural provinces such as KwaZulu-Natal, the Eastern Cape and
the Northern Province. Only then will ordinary people be able, within
walking distance, to receive letters and bank money. Only then shall we say
there is a better life for all of us.

As the process of liberalisation and globalisation takes shape, we should
create conditions conducive for post offices to benefit from the global
market. In that way empowerment will be a reality. We therefore hope and
trust that we were sensible enough when we demanded an acceleration of
speed with regard to building more infrastructure in the Post Office and
Postbank, in particular in the rural areas.

It has come to the attention of many opinion-makers countrywide that a lot
of ordinary people are putting their lives at risk because they expose
themselves to loan sharks who charge them huge interest rates and, when
they are not able to pay, their  properties are seized. Hence the need for
Government to fast-track the delivery of Postbank branches in the areas
that are very vulnerable to loan sharks. These facilities can be created as
an urgent need. Our people will be enabled to save a lot and begin to live
in accordance with what their pockets allow.

We are well aware of the fact that in the past these facilities were made
available in particular areas, not because there was a need, but because
they were supposed to be treated differently from the rest of us. It is
very encouraging to take note of the fact that the Post Office has gone a
long way in transforming itself as well as the Postbank. We will still
expect more, however, in terms of roll-out in the rural areas. [Applause.]

Mnr J J DOWRY: Mevrou die Speaker, een van die positiewe aspekte van
telekommunikasie die afgelope tyd is dat meer as 800 000 nuwe telefoonlyne
aangelê is en dat 70% van dié lyne na plattelandse gebiede en dorpe aangelê
is. Mense wat baie jare lank sonder dié noodsaaklike diens moes klaar kom,
beskik nou oor 'n telefoon, en dit is 'n lewenslyn na die buitewêreld. Die
Nuwe NP wil die hoop uitspreek dat die mikpunt om vanjaar meer as 3 000
lyne na sowat 800 dorpe aan te lê, bereik sal word en dat Telkom, soos in
die afgelope drie jaar, selfs sal verbeter op dié mikpunt, veral omdat
Telkom steeds 'n monopolie geniet op die gebied van telekommunikasie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr J J DOWRY: Madam Speaker, one of the positive aspects of
telecommunications in recent times is that more than 800 000 new telephone
lines have been laid on and that 70% of these lines were laid on to rural
areas and towns. People who had to manage without this essential service
for many years now have a telephone, and it is a lifeline to the outside
world. The New NP wants to express the hope that the aim of laying on more
than 3 000 lines to approximately 800 towns this year will be reached and
that Telkom, as in the past three years, will even improve on this target,
particularly because Telkom still enjoys a monopoly in the area of
telecommunications.]

Although the director-general, Mr Ngcaba, said the competitor to Telkom
could start operating in two years' time at the end of Telkom's five-year
exclusivity period, one must remember that if Telkom reaches its delivery
target of 2,8 million telephone connections the Act will allow it to
continue exclusively for  one more year. Yes, the New NP will welcome the
competitor, but we are also hopeful that the target for new telephones can
be reached, because that would mean that still more disadvantaged people
would get access to this vitally important commodity.

Daar is egter 'n paar dinge in die telekommunikasiewese wat kommer wek.
Eerstens is daar die hele kwessie oor die ontevredenheid van personeel by
die openbare uitsaaier. Aangesien die SAUK die afgelope paar jaar ook deur
die belastingbetalers gefinansier is, het hulle die reg om te weet wat daar
aan die gang is. Die Nuwe NP hoop die Minister sal die verslag oor die
strukture en werksaamhede van die SAUK openbaar maak sodat almal kan weet
wat werklik daar aan die gang is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[However, there are a few things in the sphere of telecommunications which
are a cause for concern. Firstly, there is the entire issue regarding the
dissatisfaction of staff at the public broadcaster. As the SABC has also
been financed by the taxpayers for the past few years, they have the right
to know what is going on there. The New NP hopes the Minister will release
the report on the structures and proceedings of the SABC so that everyone
can know what is really going on there.]
Another worrying factor is the budgetary shortfall of the SA
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority. Of the R127 million Satra
required, only R65 million has been granted. Because of this shortfall in
the past years, Satra was unable to collect the R100 million owed to it by
the industry. Yet Satra's revenue to the fiscus in the 1997-98 financial
year was R263,7 million. They have surely found innovative ways to increase
the flow of revenue to the fiscus without benefiting from it themselves.

The effect of the budgetary shortfall is that qualified people leave the
employ of the authority. The people who have been retained are all in
acting positions and the chairperson of the authority has rightfully
pointed out that outsiders refer to them as ``actors''.

Die een aspek wat die afgelope jaar die meeste vrae laat ontstaan het, is
die hantering deur Satro van die derde selfoonlisensie. Hoe 'n mens ook al
daarna kyk, feit bly staan dat Suid-Afrika in die proses skade gely het.
Omstredenheid en binnegevegte het die proses gekenmerk, wat
multimiljardrandtenders behels het, en vrae word steeds gevra.

Hoe verklaar Satro byvoorbeeld dat hy op die ou end teenstrydig opgetree
het met twee deskundige verslae wat merkwaardig ooreenstem oor die
relatiewe stewigheid van die konsortiums? Hoe verklaar Satro dat sy
voorsitter, mnr Maepa, gedwing is om hom te onttrek aan die proses, terwyl
twee ander raadslede met nouer bande met konsortiums eties skoon verklaar
is? Dit is dié soort werkwyse wat die onafhanklikheid en geloofwaardigheid
van statutêre liggame wat groot tenders moet toeken onder verdenking bring.

Dit is dus geen wonder nie dat een van die rolspelers, NextCom, die
owerheid hof toe gevat het. Tot die Minister se krediet moet gesê word dat
daar wel 'n ondersoek was toe die Ouditeur-generaal aangestel is om die
toekenningsprosesse van die derde selfoonlisensie te ondersoek. Ongelukkig
het hier ook vrae onbeantwoord gebly. Selfs toe die Minister die komitee
kom toespreek het oor die aangeleentheid, is vrae gevra soos waarom die
Ouditeur-generaal nie genoeg fondse en tyd gekry het om 'n behoorlike
ondersoek te doen nie, 'n saak wat die Ouditeur-generaal duidelik in sy
verslag gemeld het.

Al dié onbeantwoorde vrae oor die proses hang steeds soos 'n donker
onheilspellende wolk oor die toekenning van die derde selfoonlisensie. Dit
maak nie saak wie die lisensie gaan kry nie, die twyfel oor die proses gaan
moontlik nie uitgewis word nie. Intussen word die toekenning van die
lisensie vertraag en is dit die Suid-Afrikaanse verbruiker en die land se
ekonomie wat daaronder ly. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The aspect which has caused the most questions to arise during the past
year is the handling by Satra of the third cellphone licence. However one
looks at it, the fact remains that South Africa has suffered in the
process. Controversy and in-fighting have characterised the process, which
involves multibillion rand tenders, and questions are still being asked.

How does Satra, for example, explain that it eventually acted contrary to
two expert reports which agreed to a remarkable extent on the relative
stability of the consortiums? How does Satra explain why its chairperson,
Mr Maepa, was compelled to withdraw from the process, while two other
council members with closer ties to consortiums were cleared ethically? It
is this sort of procedure which brings the independence and credibility of
statutory bodies which have to award large tenders under suspicion.
It is therefore no wonder that one of the role-players, NextCom, took the
authority to court. To the Minister's credit it must be said that an
investigation indeed took place when the Auditor-General was appointed to
investigate the process of the awarding of the third cellphone licence.
Unfortunately, in this regard questions have also remained unanswered. Even
when the Minister addressed the committee on the matter, questions were
asked such as why the Auditor-General did not receive enough time and money
to undertake a thorough investigation, a fact which the Auditor-General
stated clearly in his report.

All these unanswered questions regarding the process still hang like a
dark, ominous cloud over the awarding of the third cellphone licence. It
does not matter who is going to receive the licence; the uncertainty about
the process is possibly not going to be removed. In the meantime the
awarding of the licence is being delayed and it is the South African
consumer and the country's economy which suffer as a result.]

A very positive development is the opening of the 1800 mHz frequency
spectrum and the fact that not only the third cellular network, but also
Vodacom and MTN will benefit from this. It will enable both Vodacom and MTN
to exceed their universal service obligations. This will also mean that
more than R6 billion will be invested in the coming months, and this will
undoubtedly be a huge injection for job creation and the South African
economy.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, you are conversing
rather too loudly. Let us give the speakers at the podium a chance to be
heard.

Mr V C GORE: Chairperson, the DP would like to congratulate the Minister on
saying it should be looking at the universal fund, particularly the
universal service. I would like to remind her that this cannot be achieved
through a monopoly, or a duopoly for that matter.

In the past, some have held the view that a state monopoly was needed to
force cross-subsidisation in order to achieve universal service. The
assumption was that there was a conflict between liberalisation and
universal service. In February 1998, the EU report on competition and the
telecommunications industry concluded that penetration levels for telephony
service are continuing to rise and that there have been notable
improvements in the quality of service.

As in most countries, Brazil, after decades of state monopoly in
telecommunications, did not get near to achieving universal service or
universal access. In many cases, the promise of universal service has been
used as an excuse to retain a monopoly. In the Brazilian case, before last
year's privatisation of Telebras, there were reportedly over 10 million
Brazilians waiting for wireless telephone services. The government projects
now, after liberalisation, that the number of fixed-line telephone lines
will increase over 76% from 1998 to 40 million by the end of 2003. Even
Telkom, as recently as last week, has announced that they will not meet
some of their service targets as laid down by the monopoly agreement.

We must keep reminding ourselves that this whole discussion surrounding
universal access and whether it can be achieved through a monopoly or
duopoly does not merely deal with telephony but with the economy as a
whole. We are dealing with all potential transactions in the economy and
making them more efficient. We are dealing with interaction of
communication and knowledge in education, health, social interaction,
research and development, democracy and Government social delivery. It goes
far beyond telephony. It goes to the fact that a legally enforced monopoly
or duopoly, private or public, will become a dictator over the whole
economy and society. If all communication and business transactions, most
education, health services and political dialogue is dependent on a
monopoly or duopoly controlling all communication and transactions, surely
it is unacceptable.

The move, internationally, from state monopolies to free, fair and open
competition has been driven by a number of well-documented phenomena, in
particular the globalisation of markets and rapid advances in technology.
Other events such as the rapid rise in mobile penetration rates, the spread
of the Internet and the convergence of the telecommunications, broadcasting
and IT sectors, were largely unforeseen when Telkom was granted a monopoly.

The combined effect of innovation brought about by competition, and lower
prices as a result of that competition, the small enterprise effects and
contributions to the universal service fund will bring about universal
access and service sooner than a state-enforced monopoly or duopoly. The
small enterprise effect of open-market entry refers to the fact that an
individual or a small company or co-operative can exploit dozens of small
niche markets which a large company will ignore. New Zealand, for example,
has over 400 rural telecommunications operators, each with a tiny market,
but sufficient to support a small business.

I would like to say to Madam Minister that it is time that we realise that
universal access, together with considerations such as secure growth,
employment and competitiveness, protection of the interest of consumers,
ensuring a wide choice to providers and services, innovation and quality of
service, cannot and will not be achieved through a monopoly or duopoly for
that matter. The only way in which we can achieve this is through a rapid
process to free, fair and open competition in the telecommunications
industry. If we do not do this, we face a very real risk of condemning our
nation to the wrong side of the digital divide. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R D PIETERSE: Chairperson and hon members, when the overall Budget for
the country was presented by the Minister of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel, I
was one of those who thought that he was getting there. He was making the
right noises and moving in the right direction, taking away here and adding
to where it was needed most, but particularly addressing the needs of the
poor and the disadvantaged. That was a general response. It was positive
one, but, again, general in nature.

Having looked at the proposed budget for communications, I had to ask
myself certain specific questions. Does this budget address the need of the
public broadcaster to inform, entertain and educate the broader public?
Does it ensure that the roll-out of services takes place and at what rate?
Does it form partnership with other departments to ensure that we improve
the lives of all? This better life for all must reach all of those who were
discriminated against under apartheid. These people include rural women and
the disabled. It is also important to address the needs, particularly, of
the deaf community, which speaks a 12th language, sign language. It can and
must be done.

Dit is seker makliker gesê as gedoen. My kiesafdeling is in die Klein
Karoo, en daar bly van die armste van die armes. Ek moet ook byvoeg dat
hulle trotse mense is wat nog altyd hul lisensiegeld betaal. Die pleidooi
wat die begroting betref, is dat die inwoners van die Klein Karoo, en so
ook inwoners in ander plattelandse dele van ons land, glo dat die
verspreiding van seine absoluut beperk is en dat dringend daarna gekyk moet
word. Die begroting moet begin antwoorde gee oor hoe en wanneer hierdie
diens uitgebrei gaan word na plekke soos Ladismith, Dysselsdorp, Uniondale,
Haarlem, Bongolethu, Bridgton, Toekomsrus en so meer.

Die SAUK is besig met die herstrukturering van die organisasie, en word
gehelp deur Gemini Consulting. Ek wil graag daarop aandring dat die verslag
so gou moontlik aan die Kabinet sowel as aan die Parlement voorgelê word.

As ons waarde wil hê vir ons belegging in die SAUK is dit belangrik dat die
kwessie van tale aangepak word. 'n Taal behoort aan almal wat dit praat en
nie aan een spesifieke groep of politieke party nie. Van die krapperigheid
wat ek graag wil ophaal, gaan oor die taal op televisie asook die
gebrekkige gebruik daarvan deur die aanbieders.

Die SAUK moet sy joernaliste aanmoedig om soveel moontlik inheemse tale aan
te leer. [Tussenwerpsels.] Veeltaligheid moet dus die wagwoord word in die
SAUK. Wanneer 'n joernalis byvoorbeeld gestuur word om 'n storie te doen,
moet hy of sy in meer as een taal terugvoering kan gee, vernaamlik ons
inheemse tale. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This is probably easier said than done. My constituency is in the Little
Karoo and among the poorest of the poor live there. I must add that they
are proud people who have always paid their licence fees. The appeal as far
as the budget is concerned is that the inhabitants of the Little Karoo, as
well as the inhabitants of other rural areas of our country, believe that
the distribution of signals is extremely limited and that this should
receive urgent attention. The budget must start giving answers about how
and when this service is going to be extended to places such as Ladismith,
Dysselsdorp, Uniondale, Haarlem, Bongolethu, Bridgton, Toekomsrus etc.

The SABC is in the process of restructuring the organisation, and is being
assisted by Gemini Consulting. I would like to insist that the report be
submitted to Cabinet and to Parliament as soon as possible.

If we want value for our investment in the SABC, it is important to address
the question of languages. A language belongs to everyone who speaks it,
and not to one specific group or political party. One of the aspects that
causes dissatisfaction, which I would like to mention, concerns the
language on television as well as the inadequate use thereof by the
presenters.

The SABC should encourage its journalists to learn as many indigenous
languages as possible. [Interjections.] Multilingualism should therefore
become the watchword in the SABC. When a journalist, for example, is sent
to cover a story, he or she should be able to give feedback in more than
one language, especially in our indigenous languages.]

We expect the new regulator, called Icasa, to continue licensing community
radio stations not for five days or a month or six weeks, but for four
years. We would like to call on all community radio stations to make direct
contact with the Portfolio Committee on Communications if they have
concerns, to avoid being used by political parties. The portfolio committee
calls on Icasa, as soon as it has been established, to give an assessment
report on developments.

Sentech, our common carrier, is also being restructured this year and will
face competition. We therefore want to urge Sentech to form business
partnerships with communities to ensure that the roll-out of services in
terms of signal distribution takes place at a much faster rate. We have a
situation in communities that although they pay licence fees, they do not
receive the signals that the communities in urban and in particular the
metropolitan areas are receiving. This is true both for television and for
radio. These discrepancies should be addressed as a matter of urgency.

The people of Uniondale, for instance, are frustrated because they cannot
receive the necessary signal to watch and hear the programmes of their
choice, and have decided to do something about it. They enlisted the help
of a consultant. They started fundraising and bought their own signal
distribution equipment. Land was offered to them by the their local
municipality to set up this structure. Then they were told by the SABC that
they needed a licence. They were sent from pillar to post, from the SABC to
the IBA, to Sentech, to me and back to the Department of Communications.
This has been going on for more than seven months and there is no end in
sight.

Places like Uniondale are ready, but are frustrated by the bureaucracy. I
want to appeal to Sentech to fast-track such applications by which
communities want to work to help themselves in collaboration with Sentech
and the rest of the department.

I want to take this opportunity to welcome the Aids panel initiated by the
President. It was a bold, courageous and correct initiative by him. Yes,
the Mickey Mouse parties in this Parliament will always criticise the
President about certain alleged shortcomings, but it is because he, as the
President of the ANC, the leader of the people of South Africa and the
President of the country, is doing something about this epidemic that can
destroy nations.

Terwyl die President besig is om die probleem aan te pak, sal die
opposisie, eerder as om verantwoordelik betrokke te raak, strooi kwytraak.
Die volgende vraag wat natuurlik by 'n mens opkom, handel oor die rol van
die openbare uitsaaier in die geveg teen vigs. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[While the President is tackling the problem the opposition, rather than
getting involved in a responsible way, will be talking nonsense. The next
question which, naturally, arises concerns the role of the public
broadcaster in the fight against Aids.]

How does a public broadcaster ensure mass Aids education? Amongst others,
it could educate the youth, the most vulnerable of society, by working in
collaboration with the Departments of Health and of Education and the Youth
Commission to promote positive messages on Aids prevention.

Now, how does a public broadcaster use existing popular programmes, for
example Generations - one of the most popular soap operas on TV, and
watched by millions, to send out a positive message to prevent Aids? Soul
City, as a health soap opera, has also been successful in highlighting
health-related issues in communities. This budget is creating the space for
these programmes or projects that I have just mentioned to be launched or,
where they do exist, to be strengthened.

The people in the Karoo and the rest of the rural areas have full
confidence in this Government to meet their needs. The rural people want
the Minister to speed up her delivery to the rural masses, the poor, the
hungry, the dispossessed, the women and the disabled. The people are
waiting.
Hon members might have noticed that I have not touched much on the question
of entertainment as part of the terms of reference of the public
broadcaster. I do not need to look much further. There is a healthy
competition between the New NP and the DP to be the idiot of the year.
[Interjections.] Members saw them not too long ago when they went for a
walk. The public broadcaster and the rest of the media called it a march.
There are only two parties in this House that can organise a march, that is
the ANC and the IFP. The rest of the parties would go for a walk.
[Laughter.] They went for a walk. They knew that there was nobody down at
the consulate. They read the letter out to themselves and pushed it under
the door. The SABC kept the camera focused on them. One does not have to
look any further for other entertainment.

Obviously I refer to the New NP as well. Not long ago everybody was crying
about sanctions. Who runs across to foreign countries calling for sanctions
against a democratically elected government? The two most senior coons in
the circus are Mr Van Schalkwyk and, I think, Mr Leon. [Interjections.] As
I said, there is a healthy competition. I am sure, looking from the
outside, that Mr Leon got to be crowned idiot of the year. So there is
enough entertainment. We do not need to do anything else. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the African
century, if it is to be counted as a significant factor in world
development, must show the capability to engender the knowledge and growth
of information technology systems. Africa has its own set of problems, and
information systems must be harnessed to address these problems.

The African renaissance should be methodically driven by strategic
information to infuse development and growth on the continent. South Africa
is fortunate that it has an information technology sector that has shown
growth over the past number of years. A report published by the SA
Information Technology Industry Strategy states that the IT sector in South
Africa was worth R27,2 billion in 1992. In 1999 it had grown to R32,2
billion, and it is expected to reach R47,5 billion by the year 2001.

What these figures indicate is that, at an annual growth rate of 12%, the
South African IT sector proves that the information industry is already
determining the way business and communication relations will operate in
the future. Although there is this increase in the growth of the IT sector
in our society, there is insufficient increase in the individual competency
levels to exploit these systems. In fact, South Africa is experiencing a
brain drain of people with expert technical knowledge.

Crises abound in Africa due, inter alia, to a lack of information access,
expertise and intellectual independence. We do, however, welcome the
initiative of the public information terminal which will bring electronic
communication to the average citizen. We need, however, to invest more in
research. Our research must lead us to obtain achievable goals to deal with
Africa's problems. If we invest in our information and communication
systems, the research capacity of our nation and other regions further
afield will greatly improve. Subsequent benefits of this investment will
ensure ... [Time expired.]

Mr J J KGARIMETSA: Mr Chairperson, hon members of Parliament and Ministers,
on 18 March 1998 hon Deputy Minister Essop Pahad made a commendable speech
during the launch of GCIS. I quote:


  The road we hope to travel is ripe with promise. It is so full of hope
  because we are convinced that our country has a team of communicators who
  share a common passion for the profession and individual citizens in the
  public, private and community sectors who wish to see our country
  succeed.

Indeed, our country is on track. The ANC-led Government and the party of
the people, including the rural poor, is continuously engaged in fulfilling
its mandate to build a prosperous and democratic South Africa. The
Government, through the Department of Communications, has played an
important role in ensuring that Telkom fulfils its mandate to provide a
better service to all South Africans.

Telkom is on course to deliver on its mandate. There are massive social and
economic disparities as a result of the legacy of apartheid. Our democratic
Government was quick to recognise that telecommunication is both a basic
need and a precondition for economic development. The five-year mandate was
entrenched in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and in the licence granted
to Telkom in May 1997. The licence set stringent obligations on Telkom.
Apart from almost doubling the new lines to 2,8 million - including 120 000
payphones - in only five years, Telkom must replace over 1 million old
lines and raise service levels to international standards.

Gompieno re kokoane fano mo Palamenteng ya batho e e kgethegileng.
Ponelopele le dikgatlegelo tsa batho tse di tshotsweng ke ANC, ke tsona
fela tse di re fitlhisitseng fa. Re gatela pele mo logatong la bobedi la
Aforika Borwa wa demokerasi. Re kampame le go tlisa ditirelo gaufi le moagi
mongwe le mongwe, bogolo jang ba ba nnang kwa metseselegaeng.

Batho ba metseselegae ba gogile sebaka se se fetang dingwaga di ka nna 46
ba sa itse metsi a a phepha le motlakase. Megala yona ga ke bolele. Yona
tota ba ne ba setse ba antse letsele la tshotlego e bile go le mo mading
gore ga se se se ka ba tshwannang. Puso ya NP le dipuso tse di motlele tse
di tsetsweng ke apartheid, di kile tsa baya batho mo lefifing le go ba
sotla.

Re le ANC, re amogela moa wa poelano, tirisanommogo le kago ya setšhaba, le
go tsweletsa tokafatso ya matshelo a batho. Kwa porofenseng ya Bokone
Bophirima, Telkom e tsentse mafaratlhatlha a megala e ka nna 469 mo motseng
mongwe le mongwe wa e le e 13, go akaretsa dikolo, dikliniki, maokelo le
dikantoro tsa kgotlasemorafe mo nakong ya dingwaga tse pedi. Palo ya megala
ya tuelo ya gola ya fitlhela 6 206. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[Today we are gathered here in this Parliament of the people. The wishes
and aspirations of the people who voted for the ANC are what has brought us
here. We are continuing on the second phase of democracy in South Africa.
We are tasked with bringing services closer to people, especially those in
rural areas.

Rural people have struggled for close to 46 years without clean water and
electricity, not to mention telephones. They had become accustomed to
poverty and they were used to the idea that they did not deserve better.
The NP government and other parties which supported its policies humiliated
people and abused them.

We as the ANC accept the spirit of reconciliation, co-operation, rebuilding
our nation and improving people's lives. Telkom has put 469 telephone
cables in homes, including schools, clinics, hospitals and traditional
offices, in the past two years in the North West Province. The number of
pre-paid phones has increased and now stands at 6 206.]

Over a two-year period 56 441 new lines, excluding payphones, were
installed.

Mo palong e, 41 843 e tsentswe mo mafelong ao go neng go sena le nko e e
tswang lemina. Metse e tshwana le bo Ramosibitswana, Mantsho le Kameelboom
mo Mankwe, go setse go simolotswe go tsenya megala le metlakase. Metsi,
megala le motlakase e bontsha tswelopele. [Tsenoganong.] Mafelo a mo
malobeng a neng a tsewa jaaka maemo a moraka, kwa go phelang leruo fela,
gompieno a lebega jaaka metse-setoropo. Bana ba magae a, ba ne ba ile
makgwela, mme e le fa ba latile metsi, megala le metlakase e e neng e seo
mo pusong ya NP le Mangope. Gompieno bana ba boela gae, le metse e a gola.
Ke fetsa go buwa ka maemo a porofense ya Bokone Bophirima. (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Of this number 41 843 lines have been put in areas where there was
absolute poverty. Telephones and electricity have already been installed in
areas such as Ramosibitswana, Mantsho and Kameelboom at Mankwe. Water,
electricity and telephones show progress. [Interjections.]
Today areas which in the past looked like pastures where only animals
lived, resemble urban areas. The children of these areas had left on the
pretext of fetching water and never returned. Providing telephones and
electricity was not in the minds of the governments of the NP and Mangope.
Today these children have come back and the villages are no longer
deserted.]

Telkom has provided a first-time service to 3 204 villages nationally.
Telkom has already serviced 1 381 villages. These include villages in the
Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and the Northern Province. Telkom has installed
7 955 lines to special customers, including clinics, schools, hospitals and
local authorities. This is, indeed, work in progress. Telkom is delivering
on its mandate. People have access to basic telephone services. We appeal
to Telkom to continue to provide a universal service to many other villages
throughout the country. We are a nation at work. Let us make it happen
where we live. [Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, I would like to ask the Minister of
Communications one thing. Knowing the SABC better than most of us, does the
Minister believe that the state-owned and state-controlled broadcaster
would have aired the exposé, as M-Net did on Sunday night? I think we all
know the answer to that. There is no way in which the state broadcaster
would have exposed a story which alleges that senior members of the ANC
Government, who are part of a consortium, have secured a lucrative contract
to run the Lindela repatriation centre for illegal immigrants.

High-ranking members of Government named by Carte Blanche include the
Deputy Speaker of this House, the adviser to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, the MEC for Public Safety in Gauteng, and the Deputy Speaker of
the Gauteng Legislature. According to Carte Blanche, they could not find
any evidence of a declaration of interest by any of the above members. This
story may be true, or may prove to be groundless. I have requested the
Public Protector to investigate this matter, and my questions about the
awarding of contracts for repatriation centres appear on the Question Paper
of 20 April. I await the answers to those questions.

This particular case highlights why we in South Africa need an independent,
probing and highly critical media. It is an essential ingredient in any
democracy. The impartiality of the press is of even more importance when it
is a national broadcaster and has the ability to influence millions of our
citizens on a daily basis through its reporting, or lack thereof.

During the apartheid era, we all witnessed how the NP used the SABC for its
own ends. Sadly, though, today we witness the mounting attack and gradual
erosion of the independence of SABC news by the new regime. So much so, the
DP is once again at the brunt of biased reporting. This was blatant
throughout the general election campaign, where the majority of the items
covering the DP were accompanied by editorial comment that was mostly
negative and disparaging. Unfortunately, this bias has carried on right
into the Mbeki administration.

Some of the many issues since the election in which the SABC has been
blatantly prejudiced against the DP are: the launch of the DP's Aids
policy, which was flighted two days after the event; the DP participation
in the International Women's Day debate, which was ignored; the DP's
support for the soccer World Cup 2006 Bid, which was not aired, while that
of nearly every other party was broadcast; and an SABC team's filming of
the meeting between the President of Botswana and the Leader of the
Opposition, the footage of which was never shown on national television.
[Interjections.]

One should keep in mind that the DP, as the official opposition, is being
deliberately sidelined in favour of much smaller parties, especially those
which express pro-Government views. There seems to be a certain thinking
within the SABC newsroom that if there is a credible opposition it must be
undermined, that if there is truth it must be ignored, that if there is a
viable alternative it must be destroyed.

Unfortunately, the ANC's obsession with controlling the media does not stop
with the national broadcaster. We have seen desperate attacks by the ANC on
the media over alleged racism in the media and, more recently, when the
views of the President on Zimbabwe were not reported in the media as the
ANC would have liked, the President called for a state of the nation
address.

Let me give some advice to the ANC. [Interjections.] If they or their
leader do not say that the rule of law must be returned unconditionally to
Zimbabwe, the press cannot report it. If they or their leader do not
condemn the political attacks on opposition supporters, the press cannot
report it. If they or their leader fail to condemn the abuse of state power
to rig the forthcoming elections in Zimbabwe, the press cannot report it.
The ANC's silence in this regard is killing. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairperson, we live in a new information and
communication century. This department's task is to make sure that
Government and we, as policy-makers, keep up with international
communication technology and developments. One wrong policy decision or
mistake may put South Africa back many years and would cost millions, and
there are quite a few examples of this.

Ek sou graag met die Minister wou praat oor Satro en die toekenning van die
derde selfoonlisensie, maar ek het bitter min tyd, so ek gaan my by die
SABC bepaal. Televisiekykers daar buite word deur 'n wet van hierdie
Parlement verplig om lisensiegeld aan die SABC te betaal. Hierdie kykers
het nie beheer oor wat met hulle geld gedoen word nie. Baie van hulle
ontvang nie eens die volle diens, naamlik SABC1, 2 en 3 nie. Ek praat nie
eens oor die vermindering van Afrikaans nie.

As M-Net, e-tv, satelliet-TV en video's bykom, is daar baie mense wat nooit
na die SABC kyk nie. Tog moet hulle hul televisielisensies betaal. Doen
hulle dit nie, word hulle met die hof gedreig en kry hulle allerhande
lelike briewe. Dit is 'n onregverdige stelsel wat steeds meer reaksie en
weerstand sal uitlok en wat verander moet word.

Dit is lankal nie meer 'n televisielisensie wat mense koop nie. Dit is 'n
belasting wat hulle verplig word om te betaal. Dit is te hope dat die
verdeling van die SABC in twee dele, met 'n kommersiële diens aan die een
kant en 'n openbare uitsaaier aan die ander kant, in dié verband sal help.
Daar is maniere waarop 'n mens die kommunikasie en die finansiering kan
behartig.

Die naaste wat die kykers aan beheer oor hulle lisensiegeld kom, is wanneer
hierdie Parlement se portefeuljekomitee deur die President gevra word om
die lede van die SABC-raad aan te wys. Op 'n manier kan seker geargumenteer
word dat ons as demokraties verkose lede van daardie komitee ook indirek
die kykers verteenwoordig.

Nadat ons komitee verlede jaar weke daaraan bestee het om onderhoude te
voer en met redelike ooreenstemming die nuwe raadslede aangewys het,
besluit die President hy hou nie van ons keuses nie, en word die ou SABC-
raad se termyn met drie maande verleng. Dit is onaanvaarbaar. Die VF laat
hom nie misbruik om geloofwaardigheid aan die aanwysproses te gee en dan
maak die President op die ou end in elk geval net soos hy wil nie. Gelukkig
is daardie proses toe reggestel.

Laat ek egter ook positief wees en nie net negatief nie. Wat die
televisieprogramme betref, is uitsaaiblokke in dieselfde taal beslis 'n
verbetering. Die Afrikaanse nuus is daarom byvoorbeeld nou elke aand om
sewe-uur, en dit is 'n verbetering. Monitor, Spektrum en Rekenskap op RSG
moet genoem word. Die SABC se verslaggewers moet ook gekomplimenteer word
met hulle dekking van die gebeure in Zimbabwe. Kom ons hoop die dag as die
ANC se posisie so in gevaar is soos dié van Zanu-PF in Zimbabwe, sal hulle
steeds op dieselfde manier daaroor verslag doen. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die skuif van gewilde programme soos Pasella en 50/50 is egter baie swak
gehanteer. Ek is oortuig dit kos die SABC miljoene rande. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[I would have liked to talk to the Minister about Satra and the allocation
of the third cellphone licence, but I have very little time, so I am going
to confine myself to the SABC. Television viewers out there are compelled
by an Act of this Parliament to pay licence fees to the SABC. These viewers
do not have control over what is done with their money. Many of them do not
even receive the full service, namely SABC1, 2 and 3. I am not even talking
about the reduction of Afrikaans.

If M-Net, e-tv, satellite TV and videos come into play there are many
people who never watch the SABC. They must nevertheless pay their
television licences. If they do not do so, they are threatened with the
court and receive all manner of nasty letters. This is an unfair system,
which will elicit ever increasing reaction and resistance, and will have to
be changed.

For a long time this has not been a television licence that people are
buying. It is a tax that they are compelled to pay. It is to be hoped that
the division of the SABC into two parts, with a commercial service on the
one hand and a public broadcaster on the other will help in this regard.
There are ways in which one can handle the communication and the financing.

The closest that the viewers get to control over their licence fees is when
this Parliament's portfolio committee is asked by the President to appoint
members of the SABC Board. In a way one could probably argue that we as
democratically elected members of that committee also indirectly represent
the viewers.

After our committee had devoted weeks to conducting interviews last year,
and had with reasonable consensus appointed the new board members, the
President decided that he did not like our choices, and the term of office
of the old SABC Board was extended by three months. This is unacceptable.
The FF does not allow itself to be misused to lend credibility to the
appointment process, for the President in the end to do what he likes in
any event. Fortunately that process was rectified.

However, let me be positive too, and not just negative. As far as the
television programmes are concerned, broadcasting blocks in the same
language are definitely an improvement. The Afrikaans news is at seven o'
clock every evening, for instance, and this is an improvement. Monitor,
Spektrum and Rekenskap on RSG should be mentioned. The SABC's reporters
must also be complimented on their coverage of events in Zimbabwe. Let us
hope that the day the ANC's position is as threatened as that of Zanu-PF in
Zimbabwe they will still be reporting in that fashion. [Interjections.]

The moving of popular programmes such as Pasella and 50/50 were handled
very badly, however. I am convinced that this is costing the SABC millions
of rands.]

In the news department, the bimedia option is presented as being about cost-
effectiveness and adapting to the convergence of technology. I am not
convinced by this argument. As far as I can see, the process is being
exploited to centralise control. [Time expired.]

Mr A C NEL: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, every day we hear the
buzzwords e-commerce, e-economy, knowledge economy, .com this, .com that
and dot, dot, dot, being bandied about on television, radio, newspapers,
magazines and on the Internet.

Every day we read about a group of three computer science students, young
men and women, coming together, putting up a computer in a garage, forming
themselves into a .com company, running off to the stock exchange and
listing at a couple of billion dollars. We read with envy about a Cape Town
computer security company being sold to an American competitor for about
R3,5 billion. However, what does not reach our ears as often are stories
such as the one about an artist from Stanger in KwaZulu-Natal who for many
years sat next to the roadside close to a national park, carving chess sets
out of stone and selling them for minor amounts of money. This artist
advertised his chess sets recently on the Internet and he is now trying to
meet an order for 5 000 sets from an overseas collector.

Clearly, the world economy has undergone fundamental change as we leave the
20th century and enter a new millennium. Increasingly, the world economy is
moving from an economy based primarily on the physical production of
physical commodities to one based more and more on the production of
services and ideas and the exchange of those intellectual property products
by electronic means over the vast international network of computers that
we call the Internet.

The question for South Africa, and also this Parliament and its committees,
is: To what extent are we as South Africans prepared to meet the challenges
which stand in the way of our entering this new economy to the advantage of
the nation and all its people? In short, we need to answer the question
posed by the Minister earlier, namely: ``Are we going to go .com or are we
going to go .dead?''

I would like to congratulate the Minister and the Department of
Communications on taking the lead in encouraging the nation to debate these
issues. In July 1999 the department released a discussion document titled
The e-commerce debate. This document has been in circulation for some time
now. It is also on the department's web page. I have checked the debate
that has been going on on that web page. The document is expected to result
in a Green Paper by the third quarter of this year and in a White Paper by
the end of the year. Legislation is expected to follow soon thereafter.

The discussion document poses the following issues: firstly, the need for
confidence in the security and privacy of transactions performed
electronically; secondly, the need to establish rules that would govern
electronic commerce, such as what tax laws would apply, how we would deal
with the trade in prohibited articles, aspects of international trade and
intellectual property law; thirdly, the need to ensure that information
technology and infrastructure become more accessible, especially in rural
areas and historically disadvantaged areas; and fourthly, the need to bring
the opportunities of e-commerce to as many South Africans as possible. I
think it is important that Parliament be seized with these issues, because
e-commerce will affect all aspects of society. All sectors of Government
and the private sector need to work together to ensure that South Africa
succeeds in e-commerce.

For example, the Department of Education must ensure that our children are
brought up computer literate from as early an age as possible. The
Department of Labour needs to implement programmes on skills training and
technology job placement, and policies on industry evolution. The
Department of Trade and Industry needs to ensure that we negotiate as
favourable a position as possible for South Africa and other developing
nations in bodies such as the World Trade Organisation, especially when it
comes to the intellectual property aspects of international trade. This
department also needs to ensure that small, medium and micro enterprises
are as empowered as possible to participate in e-commerce. The Department
of Finance needs to formulate policies on tax treatment, revenue collection
for electronic transactions, import and customs issues. Lastly, the
Department of Justice, the Department of Safety and Security and the
National Intelligence Agency must look at issues such as cyber fraud, trade
in pornography, illegal transmission of data and other security threats.

For me the most important question is how we ensure that as many South
Africans as possible are able to participate in e-commerce and enjoy the
economic and social benefits thereof. In this regard the first, and maybe
the most important, immediate challenge is to address the low level of
basic telephone penetration in rural areas and access to computer and data
services. Without this basic infrastructure, most South Africans will
certainly be left .dead. Fortunately the department is trying to address
these challenges through multipurpose community centres, public information
terminals and the mass roll-out of telephone connections by Telkom.

The second important challenge is to ensure that the benefits of e-commerce
are maximised and spread as equitably as possible. We need to ensure that e-
commerce narrows the gap between the haves and the have-nots, and does not
further widen that gap. If we can succeed in meeting these challenges, and
become a major e-commerce player, our future will certainly be sunny.

I would like to end off by posing a question to the hon member Waters. In
his speech he mentioned that he saw this, that and the following on TV. I
have heard that in some portfolio committee or another he very proudly
announced that he did not own a TV because he refused to pay the TV
licence. [Interjections.] I want to urge the hon member to please pay; it
is the right thing to do. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, I would like to thank all the
hon members who have made constructive contributions to this debate today,
and particularly those who have shared with us some of their personal
experiences that point to the challenges that are before us.

I would like to say to the hon Mr Kekana that we are indeed looking at the
multisectoral legislation that he suggested, because the challenges before
us demand that we bring integration and much more intersectoral legislation
to this House. However, I am quite amazed at some of the suggestions made
by the hon Dene Smuts. While some of the questions that she asked were very
technical, I wondered whether the hon member wanted to become the new
regulator herself. She is quite free to apply. [Interjections.] The hon
Dene Smuts has a democratic right to be a Minister, but I think we also
have a democratic right to stop her from being a Minister. [Laughter.]

What we see from the comments that were made in that section is that we
will, indeed, meet with the portfolio committee to address the questions
that were asked, but this is a good example of how certain parties within
this House want to see a Government that is castrated, that must not set
policy, unless this policy is favourable only to those who have and
unfavourable to those who do not have. [Interjections.]

I am quite surprised today because, in fact, it was the DP that contributed
to the licensing of the so-called soap opera. They asked for investigations
of things that have never been brought to the fore, and part of that soap
opera has been created within Satra too, and we have seen how some of the
members of that committee have responded to some of the ideas that have
been put into their heads, I think, by the said party.

They have a democratic right to ask for auctioning and, for example,
licensing, but we also have a democratic right to consider who, in fact,
will win the auction, if one looks at the House sitting here. We know where
that auction will go. However, auctioning is an option that, indeed, we
will look at, like any other suggestion that is made on how to handle the
future cellular and second national operator.

However, I think the answers that have been contributed by Mr Nel indicate
that the electronic commerce debate is a debate that did not go through the
normal channels in order to make sure that South Africans make a
contribution. There is a debate out there and that debate has been a very
healthy debate. Today, we hear that we are just apparatchiks that want to
kill the industry, when, in fact, we have made it possible for
contributions to be made so that Government can set policies that, indeed,
benefit this country and the industry in this country.

On the issue of the 1800 mHz spectrum, I think the DP, in particular,
should really educate itself on how to look at what the executive
pronounces, and not to follow what somebody else says the executive has
said. The 1800 mHz spectrum is an important and valuable resource. It is
not a resource that we can just give to the few who know what its value is,
and rob the majority who do not know what its value is. It is like asking
us to take the gold mines, the diamond mines and the platinum mines of this
country and give them to the few who have. That shall never happen. It is a
policy issue that this Government, together with the people of South
Africa, will determine what happens with the 1800 mHz spectrum.
[Interjections.]

To the hon Wilma Newhoudt-Druchen I want to say that I knew that I did not
have to speak here on behalf of the disabled. Today, we actually saw a very
concrete example of a group of people who can speak for themselves, and we
simply have to hold their hands and work with them. [Applause.] We say we
have listened and we will take their concerns up with the SABC, which has
already been told that we need to deal with the matters that are raised by
the disabled people with sensitivity. I would like to thank her for that.

With regard to the issues that have been raised by Ms Vos, the issue of
universal service is a very important one. We would like to create the
confidence that one needs to have with regard to where this country is
going. I will also deal with what she calls an ``interference or a blurring
of the lines''. I think, when we look at the document that I read today
before the House, it is quite clear that it is the ANC that has constantly
been harping on the fact that we must separate policy from regulation and
from operators.

We believe that that is important, but it is also important to understand
what the policy issues are. We cannot have something being a policy issue
today because it benefits some people, and not a policy issue tomorrow
because it does not benefit other people. We have to have consistency on
this matter, and we will be prepared to engage on and discuss these issues,
especially in the context of the regulatory environment that, as I have
said, has been dented.

In terms of rural telephony, I am very happy to say and to hear - I think
we have noticed that Mr Dowry has also answered some of the questions that
were asked earlier on - that rural areas are very important to us. The hon
Dr Mulder spoke about the SABC and the access to people, especially
Afrikaans-speaking people.

Ek wil net vir hom sê ons is ook baie bekommerd as ons sien die SAUK doen
soms nie die werk wat hy moet doen nie, maar een van die dinge wat ek moet
sê, is dat baie mense in die verlede ook gevoel het hulle het belasting
betaal en nóóit die dienste ontvang nie.

Ons het 'n radiostasie by die SAUK vir mense wat Khoisan praat, wat nou 'n
lisensie van die OUO ontvang het. Ons wil seker maak dat al die mense se
stemme gehoor kan word, nie net een taal se mense nie. Dit wys net hoe ons
as die ANC besorg is daaroor dat al die mense - ál die mense, of 'n mens in
die dorp bly of in die platteland, of jy Khoisan of Xhosa praat - dieselfde
behandel moet word. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ons sal daarvoor werk. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I just want to say to him that we are also very concerned when we see that
the SABC sometimes does not do the work it should be doing, but one of the
things I have to say, is that in the past many people also felt that they
paid tax and never received the services.
We have a radio station at the SABC for people who speak Khoisan, which has
now received a licence from the IBA. We want to ensure that the voices of
all the people can be heard, and not only the voices of people who speak
one language. This shows how we, as the ANC, are concerned that all the
people - all the people, whether one lives in town or in the rural area,
whether one speaks Khoisan or Xhosa - are treated the same.
[Interjections.] We shall work for that.]

This goes just as much, I think, for the points that were raised by the hon
Randy Pieterse. The reason for this is that when one goes out and meets
with the ordinary citizens - the hon member from the Northern Province
spoke very well about the pain that ordinary people in North West and the
Northern Province have suffered - one realises that it is this Government
that has said: ``We have listened.'' We want to make sure that we can, in a
small way, on a yearly basis, improve access to services; not just to be
able to speak to one another, not only to be able to do this to one
another, but to be able to say that we are also empowering them so that
they can participate in this Government and be able to do the kinds of
things that they have never been able to do.
Yesterday I talked to someone who was telling a story about his grandmother
who had been given a cellular phone and for the first time was able to use
a phone. She said: ``Why, I never knew that this thing could speak
isiXhosa!'' [Laughter.] That is the kind of thing that we say we are doing
to change the minds, the knowledge and the access of ordinary people. It
brings a new light to their eyes.

Coming to the hon Mr Mike Waters of the DP, I would like to find out if he
expects me to go to the SABC and tell them what they must cover about the
DP and its leader. One cannot have one's cake and eat it. [Interjections.]
I shall not interfere in the editorial work of the DP. When it suits them
they say they should do this, and when it does not suit them, they say they
should not do that.

We all suffer. People from the ANC, the IFP and other parties all have
their complaints about the SABC. There are lots of things, I think, which
they can change. It is for us to work with them in a manner that is open
and transparent, and allows for a debate that says: ``What is the quality
of our newsgathering and our information-giving structures throughout the
country, including Carte Blanche itself?'' That, I think, is our
responsibility, particularly for us as members who are sitting in this
House.

I shall not be able to do what he says and I will not be able to pass
judgment on this particular matter because, in fact, I did not see the
programme that he saw, because I worked until midnight that night and did
not have the leisure to watch television. [Laughter.] To Mr Gore I would
like to say that this sector will open competition. Competition is not an
end in itself, but a means to an end. I have just returned from Brazil, and
when I looked at the universal services challenge in that country, I knew
that we were doing quite well, and that we were on course.

The commitment of my Ministry to liberalisation is in line with the WTO. We
cannot just have freedom to cherry pick, to take all the cherries and the
cream off the cake, and allow Government to bear the rest, while nobody
wants to pay for the services that also need to go to those who do not have
the means. We will do all in our might to be able to make sure that all of
us, business and ordinary people, get services, and that these services are
quality services. We cannot say, in this day and age with the kind of
technology that we have, that those people who have been carrying messages
on horseback must continue to carry messages on horseback when they could
send messages via e-mail. Why not? We should teach them to send those
messages and give their horses a break. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

We concur with Mr Swart of the ACDP that this sector is growing, and that
it is a catalyst for the entire economy. Indeed, the public information
terminals will be deployed to many post offices. We hope that in this way,
through this and the Wap Internet laboratories which are now being put in
schools, that we really can do something about us being .za.

Debate concluded.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, by agreement with all
political parties, I move without notice:


  That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rules 29, 110 and 115, a
  statement by the President of the Republic on the Democratic Republic of
  Congo takes precedence tomorrow.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 16:29.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 20 APRIL 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Office of the Auditor-General on the Budget of Income and
     Expenditure for the financial year ending 31 March 2001 [RP 76 - 2000].

                             TUESDAY, 2 MAY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:


     Private Members' Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions:

     Appointed: Heine, R J.
     Discharged: Bruce, N S.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -

     (1)    JLB Smith Institute of Ichthyology for 1997-98 [RP 49-2000];

     (2)    Departments of Posts and Telecommunications of the former TBVC
         Countries for 1995-96 [RP 73-2000].

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises:


     Report and Financial Statements of Eskom for 1999.

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Tourism
         Board for 1997-98.

     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Botanical
         Institute for 1998-99.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism on the Tourism Amendment Bill [B 50 - 99] (National Assembly -
     sec 76), dated 12 April 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
         having considered the subject of the Tourism Amendment Bill [B 50
         - 99] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified
         by the JTM as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments
         [B 50A - 99].

2.    Report of the Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative
     Proposals and Special Petitions on the proposed Constitution of the
     Republic of South Africa Amendment Bill, dated 19 April 2000:


         The Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative Proposals
         and Special Petitions, having considered the proposed Constitution
         of the Republic of South Africa Amendment Bill, submitted by Mr V
         B Ndlovu and referred to the Committee, and having consulted the
         Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, recommends in terms of
         Rule 235(4) that permission to proceed with the proposed
         legislation be refused.


     Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     Competition Amendment Bill [B 10B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 19 April 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the Competition Amendment Bill [B 10B - 2000] (National Assembly -
         sec 75) and proposed amendments of the National Council of
         Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 344),
         referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B 10C
         - 2000].

                             FRIDAY, 5 MAY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     (1)    The Minister of Transport on 5 May 2000 submitted drafts of the
         Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Amendment
         Bill, 2000, and the Road Traffic Management Corporation Amendment
         Bill, 2000, and the memorandums explaining the objects of the
         proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms
         of Joint Rule 159. The drafts have been referred by the Speaker
         and the Chairperson to the Portfolio Committee on Transport and
         the Select Committee on Public Services, respectively, in
         accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 28 April 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Administration of Estates Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Justice
              and Constitutional Development - National Assembly).


     (3)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 5
         May 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill [B 27 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 21071 of 13
              April 2000.]


     (4)    On 3 May 2000 the following Bill, at the request of the Minister
         of Education, was introduced in the National Council of Provinces
         by the Select Committee on Education and Recreation. It has been
         referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     South African Council for Educators Bill [B 26 - 2000]
              (National Council of Provinces - sec 76) - (Select Committee
              on Education and Recreation - National Council of Provinces)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 20956 of 3
              March 2000.]


     (5)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant committees as mentioned below:


         (1)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Public Service and Administration and to the Select
              Committee on Local Government and Administration:


              Report of the Department of Public Service and Administration
              for 1999-2000.


         (2)     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee
              on Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and to the
              Select Committee on Public Services for information:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 17 - Home Affairs for 1998-99 [RP 141-99].
         (3)     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee
              on Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and to the
              Select Committee on Public Services for information:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 28 - Public Works for 1998-99 [RP 152-99].


         (4)     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee
              on Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science
              and Technology and to the Select Committee on Education and
              Recreation for information:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              the Zoological Gardens of South Africa for 1998-99 [RP 65-
              2000].


         (5)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Welfare and Population Development and to the Select
              Committee on Social Services:


              Report of the Department of Welfare and Population Development
              for 1999-2000 [RP 86-2000].


         (6)     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee
              on Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and
              to the Select Committee on Economic Affairs for information:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              the Independent Development Trust (Main Fund) for 1997-98 [RP
              182-99].


         (7)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology and to the
              Select Committee on Education and Recreation:


              (a) Report of the Board of Control of the Woordeboek van die
                  Afrikaanse Taal for 1998-99.

              (b) Government Notice No 1034 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20410 dated 3 September 1999, Withdrawal of
                  Government Notice No 644 of 19 April 1999 made in terms
                  of section 5(1)(c) of the National Monuments Act, 1969
                  (Act No 28 of 1969).

              (c) Government Notice No 1044 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20410 dated 3 September 1999, Entries in the
                  register of immovable conservation-worthy property in
                  terms of section 5(1)(cC) of the National Monuments Act,
                  1969 (Act No 28 of 1969).

              (d) Government Notice No 2063 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20436 dated 10 September 1999, European
                  Programme: Support for small, medium and micro
                  enterprises in South Africa.

              (e) Government Notice No 90 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20458 dated 10 September 1999, Designation of
                  Provincial Language Committee in the North West, made in
                  terms of section 8(8)(a) of the Pan South African
                  Language Board Act, 1995 (Act No 59 of 1995).

              (f) Government Notice No 92 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20458 dated 10 September 1999, Designation of
                  Provincial Language Committee in the Western Cape, made
                  in terms of section 8(8)(a) of the Pan South African
                  Language Board Act, 1995 (Act No 59 of 1995).

              (g) Government Notice No 91 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20458 dated 10 September 1999, Publication of
                  a decision in terms of section 11(7) of the Pan South
                  African Language Board Act, 1995 (Act No 59 of 1995).

              (h) Government Notice No 1125 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20476 dated 23 September 1999, Registration of
                  heraldic representations made in terms of section 10 of
                  the Heraldry Act, 1962 (Act No 18 of 1962).

              (i) Government Notice No 97 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20499 dated 01 October 1999, Designation of
                  Khoi and San National Language Body, made in terms of
                  section 8(8)(b) of the Pan South African Language Board
                  Act, 1995 (Act No 59 of 1995).

              (j) Government Notice No 98 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20499 dated 1 October 1999, Normative
                  Framework for the recognition of Provincial Language
                  Committees made in terms of the Pan South Language Board
                  Act, 1995.

              (k) Convention on the Means of Prohibition and Preventing the
                  Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of
                  Cultural Property, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
                  the Constitution, 1996.

              (l) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.

              (m) Convention to the International Centre for the Study of
                  the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property
                  (ICCROM), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
                  Constitution, 1996.

              (n) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.


         (8)     The following paper is referred to the Subcommittee on
              Internal Arrangements:


              Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
              Community concerning Parliamentary Support Programme, tabled
              in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (9)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Safety and Security and to the Select Committee on Security
              and Constitutional Affairs:


              Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
              Community concerning Policing in the Eastern Cape, tabled in
              terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (10)The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Education and to the Select Committee on Education and
              Recreation:


              (a) Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning Technical Support to the
                  South African Department of Education, tabled in terms of
                  section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

              (b) Amendment Agreement between the Government of United
                  States of America and the Government of the Republic of
                  South Africa on Primary Education Results Package
                  Programme: Department of Education, tabled in terms of
                  section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (11)The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
              Public Service and Administration and to the Select Committee
              on Local Government and Administration:


              Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
              Community concerning Public Service Management Development,
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (12)The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
              Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Select
              Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs:
               
              Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
              Community concerning the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (13)The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government and to the Select Committee on
              Local Government and Administration:
               
              Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
              Community concerning the Cato Manor Development Programme,
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (14)The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Trade and Industry and to the Select Committee on Economic
              Affairs:


              (a) Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning Private Sector Development
                  Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                  Constitution, 1996.

              (b) Rider Number Two to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning SADC Finance and Investment
                  Research Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
                  the Constitution, 1996.

              (c) Rider Number Two to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning Private Sector Development
                  Programme: Small and Micro Enterprises, tabled in terms
                  of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (15)The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Finance and to the Select Committee on Finance:
               
              (a) Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning FISCU, tabled in terms of
                  section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

              (b) Rider Number Two to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning Technical Assistance
                  Consultancy Support, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
                  the Constitution, 1996.


         (16)The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Health and to the Select Committee on Social Services:


              (a) Rider Number Three to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning District Health System, to
                  be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
                  1996.

              (b) Rider Number Three to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning Health Technical Support,
                  tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
                  1996.

              (c) Rider Number Three to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning HIV/AIDS Programme, tabled
                  in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

              (d) Rider Number Four to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning District Health System,
                  tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
                  1996.

              (e) Rider Number Four to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning Health Technical Support,
                  tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
                  1996.

              (f) Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
                  Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                  European Community concerning Public Health Sectoral
                  Support Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
                  the Constitution, 1996.


         (17)The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
              Minerals and Energy and Portfolio Committee on Education and
              to the Select Committee on Economic Affairs and the Select
              Committee on Education and Recreation:
               
              Rider Number Two to the Financing Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
              Community concerning Non-Grid Electrification of Rural
              Schools, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (18)The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Water Affairs and Forestry and to the Select Committee on
              Land and Environmental Affairs:


              (a) Financing Agreement between the Government of the Republic
                  of South Africa and the European Community concerning
                  Sector Support for Community Water Supply and Sanitation,
                  to be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                  Constitution, 1996.

              (b) Amendment Agreement between the Government of United
                  States of America and the Government of the Republic of
                  South Africa on Community-based Water Board Development
                  Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                  Constitution, 1996.


         (19)The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
              Foreign Affairs and to the Select Committee on Economic
              Affairs:


              Agreement between the Government of Sweden and the Government
              of the Republic of South Africa on General Terms and
              Conditions for Development Co-operation, tabled in terms of
              section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (20)The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Select
              Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs:


              (a) Report of the Department of Justice for 1998-99 [RP 52-
                  2000].

              (b) Report of the South African Law Commission for 1999 [RP 53-
                  2000].

              (c) Report of the Judicial Service Commission for 1998-99.

              (d) Draft Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
                  Peoples' Rights on the Establishment of an African Court
                  on Human and Peoples' Rights, tabled in terms of section
                  231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

              (e) Explanatory Memorandum to the Draft Protocol.


         (21)The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
              Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and
              to the Select Committee on Economic Affairs for information:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              the Economic Co-operation Promotion Loan Fund for 1998-99 [RP
              63-2000].

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The vacancy which occurred owing to the death of Mr M I Vilakazi
         has been filled with effect from 1 May 2000 by the nomination of
         the following member:


         Moropa, R M.


     (2)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms L A Abrahams vacating her
         seat with effect from 1 May 2000, has been filled with effect from
         1 May 2000 by the nomination of the following member:


         Dithebe, S L.


     (3)    The following member has vacated his seat with effect from 1 May
         2000:


         Rockman, G.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 -
     South African Police Service and the Secretariat for Safety and
     Security for 1998-99 [RP 154-99].

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     (1)    Government Notice No 15 published in the Government Gazette No
         20793 dated 14 January 2000, Determination of an interest rate in
         terms of section 59(3)(a) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No
         36 of 1998).

     (2)    Proclamation No 6 published in the Government Gazette No 20897
         dated 25 February 2000, Commencement of certain provisions of the
         National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (3)    Government Notice No 212 published in the Government Gazette No
         20946 dated 10 March 2000, Request to register a water use in
         terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (4)    Government Notice No 213 published in the Government Gazette No
         20946 dated 10 March 2000, Request to register a water use in
         terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (5)    Government Notice No 234 published in the Government Gazette No
         20965 dated 17 March 2000, made in terms of section 50(4) of the
         National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (6)    Government Notice No 277 published in the Government Gazette No
         21017 dated 24 March 2000, Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority Notice
         made in terms of Chapter 10 of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).

     (7)    Government Notice No 338 published in the Government Gazette No
         21042 dated 7 April 2000, Rates and charges for the Water Research
         Fund made in terms of the Water Research Act, 1971 (Act No 34 of
         1971).

     (8)    Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
         for 1999, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 1998.

                             MONDAY, 8 MAY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Transport on 8 May 2000 submitted a draft of the
         Sea Transport Documents Bill, 2000, and the memorandum explaining
         the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Transport and the Select Committee on Public
         Services, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 8 May 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     National Youth Commission Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75). The Bill has not yet been
              referred to a committee.


     (3)    The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         8 May 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Sea Transport Documents Bill [B 28 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Transport -
                  National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
                  notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 21158 of 8 May 2000.]

         (ii)    Meat Safety Bill [B 29 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
                  76(1)) - (Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
                  Affairs - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill
                  and prior notice of its introduction published in
                  Government Gazette No 21155 of 8 May 2000.]

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Finance for
         1999, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements of Vote 14 - Finance for 1998-99 [RP 56-2000].

     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the Department of State
         Expenditure for 1999, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 - State Expenditure for
         1998-99 [RP 69-2000].

     (3)    Report of the Statistics South Africa for 1999 [RP 41-2000].

     (4)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
         Service for 1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 1998-99.
2.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Report of the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology for
     1999, Volume One.

                             TUESDAY, 9 MAY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The following paper has been tabled and is referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration for
         consideration and report:


         Draft Code of Ethics for Members of the Cabinet and Members of the
         Executive Councils.


     (2)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Lieut G Rockman vacating his
         seat with effect from 1 May 2000, has been filled with effect from
         3 May 2000 by the nomination of the following member:
         Fazzie, M H.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Correctional
     Services for 1999 [RP 50-2000].

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Report of the Department of Minerals and Energy for 1999.


