---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 February 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-02-10
---

THURSDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                            CELLPHONES IN CHAMBER

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please take your seats quickly.
Notwithstanding the mirth, cellphones should certainly not be left on in
the House.

                             PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS

              (Resumption of Debate on Subject for Discussion)

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker ... We are waiting for the hon
the Minister of Defence to sit down. [Laughter.]

'n AGB LID: Skiet hom! [Gelag.] [HON MEMBER: Shoot him! [Laughter.]]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, hon members, as this session
of Parliament was about to resume, attention was drawn to the fact that our
opening on 4 February would mark the tenth anniversary of the opening of
Parliament at which, among other things, the then President, Mr F W de
Klerk, announced the unbanning of various organisations. Accordingly, last
Friday we began by commenting on what we believe are some of the country's
major achievements during the past 10 years since the opening of Parliament
on 2 February 1990.

I make these remarks because some hon members have contested what we said
because they understood that we sought to deny the contribution to our
liberation of organisations that had not been banned prior to 1990. Nothing
that was said last Friday suggests this nor would we make an historically
incorrect statement of this kind. We have neither the desire nor the
intention to rewrite our history. Neither will we ever pursue the objective
of belittling any contribution made by anybody to the liberation of our
people, including the important contribution made by the legal
organisations which occupied various positions along the broad and common
front of struggle.

Remarking on this last decade, I also said:


  Surely, Madam Speaker, we are entitled to make the claim that as a
  people, both black and white, we did, in a mere decade, carry out a
  multifaceted task whose accomplishment speaks highly of the capacity of
  our people and all humanity to achieve results which can only be
  described as good and noble.

I went on to say:


  I am, therefore, privileged to have this opportunity to extend heartfelt
  congratulations to all our people, regardless of race, colour and gender,
  for the extraordinary and sustained effort over the past 10 years which
  has enabled the overwhelming majority among us to say: ``We are proud to
  be South African!''

I was, therefore, somewhat taken aback that some hon members sought to
teach us that those who had participated in this extraordinary and
sustained effort, as a result of which most of us are proud to call
ourselves South African, included people of all races, colours and gender.

On Monday I received a letter from a fellow South African, Paul A Dunn, who
said:


  It is with great shame that I write to you today as a white citizen of
  the Republic of South Africa. I live in Russia temporarily for study
  reasons and read this morning of the absolutely abominable and offensive
  e-mail from a fellow white citizen. Certainly, in your wisdom, you know
  that not all South Africans, despite their colour, are racists. However,
  I know that in the Afrikaans segment, from which I also come, there are
  still those who are racists. Be assured that you have my own individual
  support in the struggle against racism. In my heart I long for the day
  when we will not refer to each other as black and white, but as fellow
  South Africans.

[Applause.] I believe that it is this kind of honest and unequivocal
response that points the way forward for all of us, a response which says
that we are faced with the problem of racism and that we must work
together, both black and white, to end racism in our country.

It may be that some of us will still have to experience what Daniel Lemmer
has experienced. Again, on Monday I received two letters from Mr Lemmer.
Here is part of what he said:


  I was an active member of the right-wing group. I was a founder member of
  the HNP, the AWB, the CP and the National Front. I worked with good loyal
  Afrikaner South Africans in all the aforesaid organisations. If I
  analyse, in retrospect, our motivations, then, in my case, it was born
  purely out of fear and not racial prejudice or hate. I am an Afrikaans
  South African, living in Japan and Taiwan for the past seven years. I
  work for a very large Japanese multinational company, developing their
  export markets internationally. I have to admit that I used to be one of
  the sceptical white South Africans when the ANC first won the elections.
  I used to find great pleasure in listening to my white South African
  compatriots gossip regarding mismanagement and mistakes of the newly
  elected ANC Government. Fortunately this has changed. I have just
  returned from holiday, touring South Africa, and although difficult at
  first, I eventually had to admit that for the first time in history,
  South Africa has a responsible Government that offers so much hope to all
  its citizens.

[Applause.]


  There are so many things that impressed me, things I thought were never
  possible in the new South Africa. I found no bitterness or any feeling of
  revenge when mixing with my fellow black South Africans. Perhaps for the
  first time, I am proud to carry a South African passport, and for this
  reason I want to become part of the process and effort of the Government
  in its sometimes difficult task. You can be sure that from now on
  wherever and whenever I rub shoulders or meet with international
  businessmen, investors and tourists, I will do everything in my power to
  depict the positive picture South Africa and the Government deserve.

[Applause.] The Afrikaners Paul Dunn and Daniel Lemmer have committed
themselves to fight against racism and, as Mr Lemmer puts it, to depict the
positive picture our country deserves and to become part of the process and
effort of the Government in its sometimes difficult task.

On Friday we spoke of these difficult tasks. They include the
transformation of our country into a truly nonracial society and,
therefore, the intensification of the struggle against racism, an issue we
dare not trivialise, as the hon Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi put it.

At least 94% of the chartered accountants in our country are white.
Similarly, at least 95% of our professional engineers are white. I do not
believe that it would be sufficient for us merely to remark on these
figures and then do nothing. Among other things, we will have to engage the
issue of human resource development in the directions we indicated on
Friday, including the implementation of the comprehensive Tirisano
programme to which we referred and the radical improvement of the
management of our schools.
In this regard I would like to assure the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk that
what drives us as we strive to end both the racial and gender imbalances in
our country, among other things through the use of affirmative action, is
to offer hope to all our citizens, to use the words of Daniel Lemmer. I
trust that we all listened carefully when the hon Mosibudi Mangena warned
that those who do not feel our pain should beware of the ignorance they
display when they argue that ours is but a phantom pain.

We have, in the past, spelt out what we need to do to ensure that we
protect, promote and respect the cultural, linguistic and religious rights
of all our people. We have not departed from these positions and will
continue to work to do the things we promised to do.

The difficult tasks to which we referred also include the common challenge
to ensure that our economy grows, develops and meets the material needs of
all our people. To meet this challenge, we will need more Daniel Lemmers
and a continuous recognition of the fact that the search for partisan
political advantage will not necessarily take us to where we need to get
with regard to the economic objectives we have to accomplish.
We have to sustain the fight against poverty, among other things by
implementing the various programmes of which we spoke last Friday,
incorporating within this the objective of ending the racial and gender
imbalances in our society. This too will be done.

Just over six months ago we spoke of the work we have to do to combat and
prevent crime, detailing various measures that would be implemented. That
work continues and includes the preparation of new gun laws, whose
importance was demonstrated only yesterday when an unacceptable criminal
assault was made against the High Court in Pretoria. That work included the
establishment of new law enforcement units, raising the professional
capacity of the Police Service, the improvement of our judicial system,
focusing on the high crime areas in our country, and so on. This work will
also continue with the urgency which our situation demands.

Yet another of these difficult tasks is finding the modus vivendi between
the democratically elected institutions of government for which many of us
across party lines fought and the structures of traditional authority in
some of our rural areas. Again, as we indicated last Friday, we will
interact with our traditional leaders to arrive at a resolution of this
matter in a manner that, among other things, respects the rights of all our
citizens, including the traditional leaders, as enshrined in our
Constitution.

The construction of a properly functioning, corruption-free, people-
oriented and affordable system of governance is critical to the achievement
of many of the tasks we confront. Among other difficult things, we will
therefore implement the programme, some of whose elements the hon Geraldine
Fraser-Moleketi indicated when she addressed the National Assembly
yesterday.

Last Friday we said that while we are ready to engage in genuine
consultations with regard to the taxi industry, it was a mistake to think
that the Government could be intimidated into taking wrong decisions.
Statements reported yesterday and attributed to some people within this
industry, raising doubts about the possibility of a peaceful and amicable
resolution of issues affecting this industry, will not help. If the
intention of these statements is to force us to take decisions driven by
fear, that intention will not realise its objective. Accordingly, I would
like to repeat that it is a mistake to think that the Government can be
intimidated into taking wrong decisions. [Applause.]

The difficult tasks of which Daniel Lemmer spoke include the realisation of
the objectives of the African renaissance of which we spoke when we
participated in the millennium debate towards the end of last year. We will
work with everybody, both within our country and on the rest of our
continent, who is genuinely committed to the achievement of the life-and-
death objectives of peace, democracy, stability and development on our
continent, undeterred by those who are ready to resort to foul means to
subvert this effort.

I am convinced that the tasks we have mentioned and others constitute a
national agenda that calls for the united effort of all our people. Peace
on our continent and the elimination of poverty and unemployment, racism
and sexism in our country, the suppression of crime and the fight against
Aids, the promotion of the rights of all sections of our population and the
restoration of the dignity of each and every South African, must surely be
treated as central challenges which we are all committed to address every
day, by word and deed.
Surely, all of us must heed the heartfelt plea made by the hon Manie
Schoeman that we must continue still to fight to overcome all mistrust
among us, to emphasise what unites rather than what divides us, to
encourage inclusive processes of change and to see ourselves as a people
who share a common destiny. No greater good can be done than to work
without any apology to anyone towards the realisation of the vision that
Manie Schoeman conveyed to us and to the country. [Applause.]

Let those who will, work together to bring the gift of hope to all of us. I
am certain that hon members join me as we wish Bafana Bafana success in the
semifinal match ... [Applause] ... they will play tonight as they advance
towards reclaiming the African Cup of Nations.

I thank all hon members for their participation in this important debate.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 14:20.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces and National Assembly:

1.    The Chairperson and the Speaker:


     (1)    On 10 February 2000 the following Bill, at the request of the
         Minister of Transport, was introduced in the National Council of
         Provinces by the Select Committee on Public Services. It was
         referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         National Land Transport Transition Bill [B 5 - 2000] (National
         Council of Provinces - sec 76(2)) - (Select Committee on Public
         Services) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
         introduction published in Government Gazette No 20868 of 7
         February 2000.]


