---
title: 'National Assembly - 03 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-10-03
---

TUESDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the
ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Government programme on Aids is premised on the
       causality between HIV and Aids;
  (2) believes that -


       (a)  other factors such as the impact of sexually transmitted
           diseases, tuberculosis and aggravating factors such as poverty
           contributes to the development of this syndrome; and


       (b)  the challenge facing all sectors of the South African society is
           to intensify the HIV/Aids awareness campaign and ensure that a
           culture of living positively is encouraged amongst those
           infected with this virus; and


  (3) calls on the media, the opposition parties and lobby groups to
       support the Aids awareness campaign and the Government's
       comprehensive approach to fighting the scourge of HIV/Aids.

[Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  President Thabo Mbeki last week compounded the national and
           international alarm at his views on HIV/Aids by claiming that he
           believes the emphasis placed on the epidemic was the result of a
           conspiracy by United States pharmaceutical companies; and
           [Interjections.]


       (b)  Archbishop Njongonkulu Ndungane stated last week that South
           Africa's response to the Aids epidemic was "as serious a crime
           against humanity as apartheid", that the Human Rights Commission
           is instituting procedures to sue the Government for refusing to
           provide drugs for HIV-positive people, and that the South
           African Medical Association, which represents at least 75% of
           practising doctors in South Africa, has accused the President of
           confusing South Africans by questioning the causal relationship
           between HIV and Aids; and


  (2) calls on the President to cease inventing conspiracy theories and
       dallying with discredited flat-earthists, and instead put his weight
       firmly behind South Africa's Aids prevention campaign.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) acknowledges with due respect the call on the nation by the Minister
       for Welfare and Population Development, Dr Zola Skweyiya, to join the
       Government in various initiatives to deal with the problems faced by
       older people, orphans, people with disabilities and other vulnerable
       groups in our country;

  (2) acknowledges the Minister's declaration of the month of October as
       Social Development Month to address the extreme poverty under which
       our communities live;
  (3) acknowledges with satisfaction the Minister's unwavering belief that
       thousands of men, women and children do indeed die of HIV/Aids and
       other diseases, and that over 600 000 children will be orphaned by
       the year 2010 due to HIV/Aids; and

  (4) appeals to all role-players to assist the Minister and his Department
       in making the plight of women, Aids patients, the aged, and the
       disabled ...

[Time expired.]

Mr B W KANNEMEYER: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Minister Zola Skweyiya has declared October a month of social
           development; and


       (b)  this coincides with the beginning of hearings on the review of
           the social security system;


  (2) believes that this provides an opportunity for all to put social
       development and social security matters on the agenda; and

  (3) calls on all South Africans to support Government's efforts to focus
       its development strategies on the improvement of the quality of life
       of the poorest of the poor and fighting the scourge of HIV/Aids.

[Applause.]

Mr H A SMIT: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) requests clarification once and for all on the latest accusations
       regarding the alleged involvement of former ANC Ministers and
       dignitaries in irregularities concerning arms deals;


  (2) urges all retiring Ministers and/or Deputy Ministers, MECs in
       provincial legislatures as well as directors-general of state
       departments, for at least 24 months after vacating their offices, not
       to hold any post or accept any directorship that could in any way be
       associated with the activities of their former department or related
       activities; and

  (3) requests Cabinet to immediately launch an independent audit of this
       process, acting now, not tomorrow.

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) commends the President, Mr Thabo Mbeki, for meeting with the
       traditional leaders of this country over the past weekend at which
       meeting there was a convergence of views on the need to revisit the
       concerns regarding municipal demarcations affecting rural communities
       falling under the jurisdiction of traditional leaders;

  (2) notes with satisfaction that the postponement of elections will give
       the Government and the traditional leaders an opportunity to explore
       avenues in the local government electoral process that will
       accommodate the peculiar circumstances of rural constituencies;

  (3) welcomes the appointment of a committee in which both Government and
       traditional leaders are represented; and

  (4) regards this step as recognition and endorsement of the principle of
       broader consultation as a prerequisite for inclusive decision-making
       and implementation to ensure their legitimacy.

Ms I MUTSILA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the former President of South Africa, Comrade Nelson
       Mandela, Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu, and Nigerian author,
       Chinua Achebe were amongst the first winners of the Pan-African
       Broadcast Heritage Achievement Awards;

  (2) believes that these awards serve as an acknowledgement of the
       contribution of these sons of Africa to the human cause; and

  (3) therefore congratulates these heroes on receiving these precious
       awards.

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die VF sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met teleurstelling kennis neem dat Suid-Afrika nie op die Olimpiese
       Spele na wense gevaar het nie;

  (2) aanvaar dat deelnemers hulle bes gedoen het, hulle bedank daarvoor en
       bly is vir die ervaring wat opgedoen is;

  (3) met kommer kennis neem van die bestuurstyl van Noksa en die algemene
       insinking van die nasionale Olimpiese selfbeeld;

  (4) dit onaanvaarbaar vind dat Noksa genoeg bofbalspelers na Sydney
       gestuur het vir twee spanne, maar die manshokkiespan, wat die Afrika-
       kampioenspan was, teruggehou het;

  (5) Noksa se besluit om baie meer gaste en beamptes na Sydney te neem as
       deelnemers, bevraagteken; en

     6) 'n beroep doen op die Minister van Sport en Ontspanning om onverwyld
        'n kommissie aan te stel om Noksa as organisasie te ondersoek en
        meer doeltreffend te maak.
(Translation of Afrikaans motion follows).

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with disappointment that South Africa has not fared as desired
       at the Olympic Games;

  (2) accepts that the participants did their best, thanks them for that
       and is pleased at the experience that has been gained;

  (3) notes with concern the management style of Nocsa and the general
       decline in the national Olympic self-image;

  (4) finds it unacceptable that Nocsa sent enough baseball players to
       Sydney for two teams, but held back the men's hockey team, who were
       the African champions;

  (5) questions the fact that Nocsa took many more guests and officials to
       Sydney than participants; and

  (6) appeals to the Minister of Sport and Recreation immediately to
       appoint a commission to investigate Nocsa as organisation and to
       render it more effective.]

Mrs N R SHOPE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the outbreak of violence in the Gaza Strip which left a twelve-
       year old boy dead;

  (2) believes that this new wave of violence will not assist in reaching a
       negotiated settlement in the Middle East;

  (3) condemns the excessive use of violence; and

  (4) calls on all the stakeholders to work for a peaceful resolution of
       the conflict.

Mnr A J BOTHA: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) raadslid Nkosiyomsi Jolozo gelukwens dat hy in belang van die mense
       van Bloemfontein uit die ANC bedank het en by die DA aangesluit het;


  (2) sy kommer daaroor uitspreek dat 'n vuurwapen op raadslid Jolozo gerig
       is deur 'n toyi-toyiende, ANC vlag-swaaiende groep mense en dat die
       ANC nie hierdie optrede repudieer nie;

  (3) sy skok uitspreek oor die aanslag op die lewe van Bongani, die seun
       van raadslid Jolozo, en met dank kennis neem dat hy in die hospitaal
       aansterk; en

    4) die polisie dwarsdeur die land onderskraag met die handhawing van
       menseregte, veral gedurende die verkiesingsveldtog en ook omdat die
       ANC as meerderheidsparty klaarblyklik nie hierdie kultuur onder sy
       ondersteuners wil of kan vestig nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans motion follows.)

[Tussenwerpsels.]

[Mr A J BOTHA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -
  (1) congratulates Councillor Nkosiyomsi Jolozo on resigning from the ANC
       and joining the DA in the interests of the people of Bloemfontein;

  (2) expresses concern that a firearm was aimed at Councillor Jolozo by a
       group of toyi-toying and ANC-flag-waving people and that the ANC does
       not repudiate this action;

  (3) expresses its shock about the attempt on the life of Bongani, the son
       of Councillor Jolozo, and notes with gratitude that he is
       recuperating in hospital; and

  (4) supports the police throughout the country by way of the maintenance
       of human rights, particularly during the election campaign, and also
       because the ANC as the majority party clearly cannot or will not
       establish this culture among its supporters.

[Interjections.]]

Mrs I MARS: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with satisfaction that, finally, R180 million of national lotto
       funds will be made available to NGOs and other charitable
       organisations - many of them in dire need of financial assistance -
       in order to continue their valuable work on behalf of South Africa's
       most marginalised citizens; and

  (2) appeals to those concerned that the selection of organisations
       qualifying for assistance be done in an open and transparent manner,
       and to ensure that proper monitoring procedures are put in place so
       that the public may feel assured that the money is being used to
       benefit the most deserving causes.

Mr P M MATHEBE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the President of South Africa, the hon Thabo Mbeki, and his
       Nigerian counterpart, President Olusegun Obasanjo are discussing ways
       of reversing the brain drain and to encourage Africans to return to
       the continent;

  (2) believes that this is an important pillar in the realisation of the
       African renaissance, growth and prosperity in the continent; and

  (3) commends the two Presidents for embarking on this most important
       initiative.

[Applause.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the horrific and callous murders of two traffic officers in
       KwaZulu-Natal while carrying out their duties;

  (2) is shocked by the death of Manga Mahlangu, Deputy Police Commissioner
       in Mpumalanga, who was murdered in cold blood during a cash-in-
       transit heist;

  (3) further notes that when members of the South African Police Service
       and law-enforcement officers are randomly executed, it confirms that
       crime is out of control; and

  (4) once again appeals to the Government to impose the most severe
       punishment and to make an example of the trespassers so that the
       message will be clear: These cowardly actions will not be tolerated!

Prof L M MBADI: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the announcement of a campaign to address the problem of
       alien plants that have invaded South Africa;

  (2) notes that millions of cubic litres of water are annually lost to
       alien plants, a situation which places our scarce water resources
       under unnecessary pressure;

  (3) congratulates the Ministers of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and
       Water Affairs and Forestry as well as the Minister for Agriculture
       and Land Affairs for launching a holistic approach, in line with the
       integrated approach to policy which the UDM advocates; and

  (4) urges the Ministers involved to ensure that the campaign in October
       ...

[Time expired.]

Ms M M RAMAKABA-LESIA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the first report received from employers under the Employment
       Equity Act showed that employers did not care about employment
       equity;

  (2) believes that this demonstrates the unwillingness of many employers
       to adapt to the new democratic era and close the gap caused by
       apartheid inequality in the workplace; and

  (3) calls on -


       (a)  the employers to heed the requirements of the new Act; and


       (b)  the Department of Labour to monitor those employers that are not
           complying and to use the provisions of this Act to make them
           comply.

[Applause.]

  CONGRATULATIONS TO THE TEAM OF MEN AND WOMEN WHO REPRESENTED SA IN SIDNEY
                             2000 OLYMPIC GAMES

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I move without
notice:

That the House -


     (1)    notes that a team of men and women of South Africa represented
         our country at the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney;


     (2)    congratulates the five athletes who won medals and those
         athletes who achieved career-best performances; and

     (3)    calls on Nocsa to hold an inquiry into the performance of our
         team and to work out a detailed plan to send the strongest
         possible team to the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens.

     Agreed to.

                         DEATH OF MRS N T MAJOKWENI

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Mr Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House -
   (1)      notes with sadness the passing away of Mrs N T Majokweni, a UDM
        member of the provincial legislature of the Eastern Cape;


   (2)      notes that her efforts towards having transformation expedited
        will remain on record; and


   (3)      conveys its condolences to her family and wishes them strength
        in their bereavement.

Agreed to.

 RECOGNITION, ENHANCEMENT AND PROTECTION OF RIGHTS OF DIFFERENT COMMUNITIES
                               OF SOUTH AFRICA

                          (Subject for discussion)

Gen C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, alhoewel ek gewoonlik Afrikaans en
Engels praat, sal ek duidelikheidshalwe vandag net Engels praat. [Mr
Chairman, although I usually speak Afrikaans and English, today I shall be
speaking English only for the sake of clarity.]

Whereas history has brought together a great variety of us to share one
common land, which is a phenomenon common to most nations right across the
world in modern times; whereas we, after bitter strife and internal
conflict, have reached a negotiated settlement - close to seven years ago -
to move away from a divided past towards a united and peaceful future;
whereas we have together negotiated democratic Constitution based on the
fundamental principles of human rights to make South Africa a home for all
the peoples living within its borders; whereas, in negotiations towards
this Constitution, some major conflicts were averted by agreements on the
processes whereby the diversity in our country would be dealt with by the
acknowledgement and protection of national identities, thereby ensuring a
peaceful transition; and whereas the final Constitution was adopted in 1994
with a unanimous agreement on the formulation of a number of clauses by all
the participating parties, amongst others, on the issue of self-
determination for national and other minorities or people in South Africa,
I, therefore, move that this House today considers the progress on the
recognition, enhancement and protection of different communities in South
Africa after seven years.

The real danger is the tendency to perpetuate the black-white division.
Unfortunately, this had been the major division in the struggle for
freedom. But it is a racial approach and this racial criterion for defining
communities, after seven years, is still a bad one. It is not sound. Rather
than using criteria based on physical aspects such as the colour of the
skin, it should rather be done on the intrinsic values of the differences
in culture, language, customs and religion, as well as the common
perception within the community on historical heritage and the value
systems of a community. However, a community defines itself in a certain
way, because it is the right and liberty of every South African to
associate with others in terms of the Bill of Rights. This association, out
of the people's own free will, constitutes the common identity of specific
groups. Here in our country there is a wide range of diverse groups based
on differences on ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious grounds. South
Africa is, indeed, therefore a country of communities. That is a phrase I
borrow from a speech made by hon Minister Buthelezi some time ago.

From this diversity will come strength if it is managed in a way that will
steer away from conflict towards a common patriotism and national unity in
the national state. Recently in Germany, the representatives of a number of
minority groups from across the world deliberated and agreed on the text of
a declaration covering the rights of minorities. I have made copies
available of that for all the parties present here. Let me quote one
paragraph:


  It is a common tendency of modern states to assume a national identity,
  culture, etc, and hence a need for unitary national institutions and
  solutions. Far too often this tendency leads to a disregard for, or
  underestimation of the multi-ethnic, multicultural and multireligious
  diversities that exist within the boundaries of a nation state. Thus,
  nation states tend to be nationalising states, assuming uniformity where
  it does not exist and far too often misuse the coercive power of state
  machinery and legislation to impose such uniformity.

Is this not the case in our country? The present conflict between
traditional leaders and Government on the demarcation issue and the eroding
of the traditional leaders within their communities is nothing but the
systematic enforcement of uniformity, consequently denying communities any
form of internal autonomy at that level of government where it really
matters to the community which is the local one. The same holds for the
Afrikaner community of Orania which is basing its claim for its own local
government autonomy on the agreements with the ANC on self-determination.
This is a clear-cut example where a community initiative, at its own
expense, has created a situation which warrants the allocation of autonomy.
The principle involved in the concept of community autonomy is that, unlike
the forced or compulsory association such as we had in the apartheid era,
this is a free association and therefore not contrary to democracy.

The demarcation process used for the coming local election is a
manipulation of borders and systems that will result in the subverting of
certain communities against their democratic will in such a way that they
will further lose the right to live in accordance with community customs.
Such communities may eventually arrive at a position where their culture,
including language, education, traditions and religion, will be surrendered
over a period of time. This is against the individual human rights concept
and the broad spectrum of collective rights. In fact, it is enforced
assimilation.

On the most basic aspect of language rights, which is protected by the Bill
of Rights, only a mere 22% of the population in South Africa is prepared to
state unequivocally that they understand Government communications and that
is because of language. A mere 13% of black South Africans prefer education
only through the medium of English. A high fsigure, 72% of all South
Africans, value being served in their own language by Government and the
private sector. Only 5% of Afrikaners feel that the Government respects
their own language whilst about a third of blacks feel that the Government
is insincere, or even hostile, in respect of their minority language
rights. Yet, after seven years, there is still no national language policy
or any language legislation. The hon the Minister of Justice is, in the
meantime, promoting the idea of only one language of record in our courts.

The postponement of the long-delayed legislation on the Commission for the
Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
Linguistic Communities is another example of the low priority accorded this
major issue in our country!

It is my submission today to this House that this subject must receive the
urgent and immediate attention of the Government. That is a sure way of
winning loyalty and common patriotism towards national issues, for the
degree of democracy in our country is not only measurable against the much
applauded liberal Constitution that we have adopted, but, to a greater
extent, against the freedom that is perceived by diverse communities living
under the protection of such a Constitution, free from domination, free
from overregulation and free to control their own destity.

Ngaka M W SEROTE: Modulasetulo, ke ratile gore re itumele thata fa Rre
Constand Viljoen a kopile Ntlo-kgolo e go buisana ka kgang e tona ya morafe
wa rona, kutlwisano ya ona le go kgatlana ga ona. Ke tshwanelo gore kgang e
e tsenywe mo lenaneong la Ntlo-kgolo e, gonne re itse kwa re tswang teng.
Maloba re ne re laolwa ka kgetololo, me gompieno re tshwanetse go ipotsa
gore re tla tswelela pele jaang.

Setswana se na le seane se se reng ``Ga ra tshwanela go tshameka ka mathe,
metsi a le teng''. Go rialo, re le batho jaana, tlhaloganyo ya rona e gaisa
ya sengwe le sengwe se se tshelang, ka gonne re na le bokgoni ba go
tlhaloganya. Gompione re tshwanetse go ipotsa gore tlhaloganyo e re tla e
dirisa jang fa re rakana le mathata a Rre Constand Viljoen a a umakileng.

Maloba jaana re dumetse gore go se nne le kgetololo ka mmala. Re le Ma-
Aforika Borwa, re ne re ratile go dirisa tlhaloganyo ya go ipotsa gore
tswelelopele e tlhodiwa ke eng. Se ke ratileng go se botsa ke gore jaaka re
dutse mo Ntlong-kgolo e, a re ka dula ka dipelo tse di namileng le
ditlhaloganyo tse di fodileng tsa gore kgethololo e neng e le teng e
fedile. A ga se moo re tshwanetseng go dula teng, re buisane ka sona selo
se, eleng kgetololo ya mmala?

Sa bobedi, maloba re dumetse gore ga ra tshwanela go kgetolola ka bong. Se
re tshwanetseng go se dira ke go bona gore a re ka kgatlana, mme ra
dirisana mmogo.

Fa re ka ipotsa, re le ma Aforika Borwa, a re ka bua ka dipelo tse di
namileng gore ga go tlhole go na le le kgethololo ya bong?

Ntlha e ngwe e ke neng ke batla go bua ka yona ke gore maloba jaana re ne
ra dumelana ka kgang ya gore go nne le tekatekanyo gareng ga batho, le gore
batho ba nne le ditshwanelo jaaka batho Ma-Aforika Borwa. Gompione a re ka
bua ka kgotso le pula mo dipelong tsa rona gore dintlha tse, re di kgonne?
Ka mantswe a mangwe, a demokerasi re efitlheletse naa? Re tshwanetse go
baya dintlha tse fa pele ga rona, re di lekole, re ipotse gore a naare re
di kgonne kgotsa nnyaa. Ga gona mokgwa o mongwe o batho ba rona ba ka
kopanang ka ona, mme ba nna mmogo.

Go na le lentswe la sekgowa le go tweng ``minority''. Re tshwanetse go
ipotsa gore ke eng se se kayang gore batho ke ``minority'' me ba bangwe ga
se ``majority''? A ke mmala kgotsa puo? Fa re ka sekaseka kgang ya mmala,
kgethololo ya bong le demokerasi, re tla fitlha kwa e tla reng fa re bua ka
``minority'', e bo e se ka mmala kgotsa puo.

Mokgatlo wa ANC o dumelane gore mongwe le mongwe o na le tetla ya go dirisa
lengwao la gagwe. Ga go motho yo o kgoreleditsweng go dirisa lengwao la
gagwe. Ga go ise go golegwe motho ka ntlha ya gore e le Mo-Juta, Mo-
Aforikanere kgotsa Moyesemane.

Ke enge se se tlhodileng puisano e re buang ka yona gompieno?  Rre Constand
Viljoen o buile ka Orania. Ba santse ba le teng batho ba Orania, mme ba na
le ditshwanelo tse di tshwanang le tsa mongwe le mongwe mo Aforika Borwa. A
go na le mathata na? Re dumetse gore go nne le maleme a le ll. A seo ga se
bopaki ba gore kgatelelo ga e tlhole e le teng? Maloba jaana re ne ra ya go
buisana le Basarwa. Gompione fa re bua jaana ba na lekgotla kwa ba
kopanelang teng go buisanya ka tirisano mmogo.

Go fitile dingwaga di le supa fa esale re simolola go buisana ka kgang e. A
dintlha tse ga ra tshwanela go buisana ka tsona, re lebelele gore a re
tsweletse pele kgotsa nnyaa. Fa go ntse jaana ke ipotsa gore mathata e kabe
e le eng. Fa re bua ka se Afrikaans, nna ke kopa gore rohtle ba ba buang
puo eo, ebile dingwao tsa rona e le tsa yone, re gopole gore fa re bua
jaana ga re bue fela ka batho ba basweu, mme re bua ka mebala e le mentsi.
Ke ne ke eletsa gore dihtlaloganyo tsa rona di ka fetoga go le gonnye, mme
re nagane ka mokgwa o mongwe.

Afrikaans ga e buiwe gope kwantle ga Aforika Borwa. Go rialo ke amogetse
gore Afrikaans e le jalo, na le ngwao e tsamaelang le yona. Ka 1955 Freedom
Charter e ne e setse e bua ka sona selo se. E re mongwe le mongwe o na
tetla ya go dirisa ngwao ya gagwe. Bothata bo kae? Ke itumela fa Rre
Constand Viljoen a re lopile gore re bue ka ntlha e. [Nako e
fedile.][Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana speech follows.)

[Dr M W SEROTE: Chairperson, we should be glad that Gen Viljoen has asked
this House to discuss issues affecting our nation today. It is important
that this matter has been included in the programme of this House because
of our past history. We were governed by apartheid laws in the past and
today we have to find ways to proceed.

There is a Setswana saying which roughly translated means we should use
every little opportunity that we have and not waste it. This means that our
minds are further advanced than anything else that lives and we are capable
of understanding concepts. We should ask how are we going to use this
understanding to deal with the problems that Gen Vijoen has referred to.

The other day it was agreed that there should not be discrimination based
on colour. As South Africans we should apply our minds and ask how we can
proceed. As we are seated here in this august House, is it possible to
believe that discrimination is a thing of the past? Should we not discuss
discrimination based on colour? Secondly, the other day we agreed that we
should not discriminate on the basis of gender. What we should do is to
work together to end this. Can we as South Africans honestly claim that
gender discrimination no longer exists?

Another point that was made was that there should be equality among people
and that all South Africans should have rights. Today can we talk about
peace in our hearts and claim that we have been able to overcome our
problems? In other words, have we been able to democratise our country?  We
have to put these points on the table and see whether we have succeeded or
not. There is no other way for our people to meet.

The English have a word `minority'. We should ask what determines people as
a minority and others as the `majority'? Is it language or colour? When we
have investigated the question of colour, gender discrimination and
democracy we will reach a point where we will no longer talk about
`minority'. It will not be based on language or colour.

The ANC has decreed that everyone has the right to speak his or her own
language. No one is prevented from speaking his or her own language. No one
has ever been arrested for being a Jew, on Afrikaner or English.

What has prompted this discussion today? Gen Viljoen has spoken about
Orania. The people of Orania have rights like each and every South African.
Is there a problem? We agreed that there should be 11 languages. Is this
not proof that there is no longer discrimination? The other day we went to
speak with the Khoi-San. As we speak today, they have a place where they
meet to discuss issues relating to them and they are working together.

Seven years have gone by since we started to discuss this matter. Are we
not supposed to discuss these matters to determine whether we have
progressed or not? I constantly ask myself where the problem lies. I would
like to remind all those who claim to speak Afrikaans, that it is not only
white people who speak this language but people of many colours. I would
like us to change the way we think and think in other ways.

Afrikaans is only spoken in South Africa. I have therefore accepted that
Afrikaans has a tradition which correlates with it. The 1955 Freedom
Charter addressed this point. It stated that each and every one of us has a
right to use his or her language. Where is the difficulty? I would like to
thank Gen Constand Viljoen for having asked this House to discuss this
issue. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr R S NTULI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, it is pleasing to
note that there is a growing universal consensus on the universality,
indivisibility and the interdependence of all human rights.

The forces of globalisation and the end of the cold war have renewed the
desire for recognition and preservation of the unique identities of
ethnocultural communities, national minorities and indigenous people. Yet,
regrettably, there are still states all over the continent, which base
their constitutional, legal and governance framework on the suppression of
minority rights and ethnic dominance, leading to painful, massive human
rights abuse, regional and global insecurity and the denial of basic
freedom.

Freedom implies diversity. Uniformity in human society was never achieved
without coercion, nor will it ever be possible to do so without coercion.
Liberal democracy, in contrast, emphasises the rights and liberties of the
individual citizens. It is because these include the right to associate
freely with others and have a group-related dimension as well.

Belonging to a community based on common cultural, linguistic or religious
heritage is an important factor of identity for most people. While they
freely and voluntarily associate on this basis, no government may deny such
groups the right to be different within the limits of internationally
accepted human rights similar to those found in the Constitution of our
country.

One of the goals of our Constitution in articulating cultural and
linguistic rights of South African citizens, is to promote a pluralistic
society in which members of different groups treat each other with mutual
respect and dignity, and are willing to learn from and about one another.
This interaction can lead to the strengthening of the bonds within our
diverse society and stronger loyalty to the state.

Every cultural group has the right to manage the most central factor of its
identity, namely its culture. This includes matters of language, education,
cultural traditions and religion. Cultural self-determination means that
everyone has the unrestricted right to his or her own native language. This
includes the right to learn one's native language, the right to use one's
native language in public and unrestricted access to the media and
publications.

The right to be taught in one's own language and the employment of the
relevant medium of instruction in schools is very paramount. The DP
recognises the importance of mother-tongue education, particularly for the
first seven years of schooling.  Pursuant to the provision of section 29 of
the Constitution, the DP considers it to be the duty of the Government to
provide such facilities to committees and individuals who insist on mother-
tongue instruction.

The Constitution provides for the Pan South African Language Board and the
Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural,
Religious and Linguistic Communities. Only the first-mentioned has been
established. We are looking forward to the establishment of the other.

Finally, the DP believes that all South Africans should actively promote
the respect of all languages and should promote concept for
multilingualism. A preference for a particular language or languages may
well develop over a period of time, with a resultant shift in usage
patterns. This must however be the result of a national process driven by
the principle of freedom of choice. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Chairperson, I enjoyed listening to the speech by
Mr Serote and I think, if I understood him correctly, the important point
that he made is that we are not really discussing a particular community
today. We are discussing communities in principle. We are discussing all
the communities in South Africa, we are not confining ourselves to one in
particular.

The motion by the FF deals with the rights of communities in our country.
The motion therefore touches on the most important element of our civil
society. But, strange as it may sound, the motion appears to be an
unnecessary one, because all the elements contained in the motion already
form part of the Constitution. The motion deals with ``the recognition,
enhancement and protection of the rights of the different communities in
South Africa.'' I wish respectfully to remind Gen Viljoen that the
recognition, enhancement and protection of the rights of our communities
are specifically covered in our Constitution in at least three sections,
namely sections 31, 185 and 235.

These sections in the Constitution adequately recognise, enhance and
protect the rights of communities in our country. I do not have time to
quote all three of these sections in full, suffice to quote some parts of
them. The jist of section 31 of the Constitution reads as follows, and I
quote:


  Persons belonging to a cultural, religious or linguistic community may
  not ...

I emphasise - ...


  ... be denied the right ... to enjoy their culture, practise their
  religion and use their language ...

Section 185 deals with the establishment of a commission, namely the
Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural,
Religious and Linguistic Communities. Section 235 specifically recognises
that communities sharing a common cultural and language heritage have a
right to a form of self-determination in a territorial entity.

These three sections leave no room for any doubt about the intention of the
Constitution, and therefore also the intention of the Government of the
day, in respect of the rights of communities. For these reasons I say, with
respect to Gen Viljoen, that his motion could appear to be unnecessary.

However, the subject of communities is such an extremely important issue
that a discussion in this House would certainly serve a very useful purpose
and be in the best interests of all our people. What is also true is that
we have done very, very little during the past years to give effect to the
provisions of the Constitution as far as the rights of our communities are
concerned. In this respect we are all guilty and we cannot point fingers.

The motion therefore serves as a friendly reminder to us all that we still
have a lot to do to concretise the provisions of the Constitution in
respect of the rights of communities. It is true that after more than six
years we have not yet even established the Commission for the Promotion and
Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities.
I say: What a pity!

In conclusion, we have lost six years. We cannot afford to lose one more
year waiting to concretise the extremely important issue of the rights of
our communities. I therefore propose that this House resolves today to call
on the President and the Government forthwith to establish the Commission
for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
Linguistic Communities as required by section 185 of the Constitution. We
have no other option. Obedience to the Constitution of our country directs
that we do exactly that without delay. [Applause.]

Mnr J J DOWRY: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is duidelik dat die debat oor die
regte van verskillende gemeenskappe in Suid-Afrika die afgelope tyd baie
ruimte in beslag geneem het, en daarom is die voorstel uiters aktueel en
relevant.

Dit is 'n feit wat geen regdenkende mens ooit kan ignoreer nie, dat Suid-
Afrika uit 'n verskeidenheid kultuur- en taalgroepe bestaan. Dit is daarom
baie jammer dat wanneer oor hierdie belangrike gegewe in ons land
gedebatteer word, so 'n debat afgemaak word as sou die debatteerders
rassisme wil bevorder. Ons in Suid-Afrika is in die eerste plek almal Suid-
Afrikaners met 'n verskeidenheid kulturele herkomste.

Daarom word ons tereg die reënboognasie genoem. Elke deel van hierdie
reënboog het egter 'n behoefte om genoegsame erkenning, uitbouing en
beskerming te geniet. Hoe helderder al die kleure van die reënboog
uitstaan, hoe mooier en aantrekliker is die reënboog. Wanneer sekere
gemeenskappe ervaar dat hulle aan die agterspeen moet suig en voortdurend
in die beskuldigdebank geboender word wanneer dinge verkeerd loop, karring
ons aan ons eenheid, versoening en nasiebou. Dan word daar nie meer gebou
nie, maar afgebreek, en maak versoening plek vir vyandigheid.

Die Regering van die dag moet sorg dat gemeenskappe op 'n gelyke wyse
behandel word sodat almal mede-eienaarskap van hulle land kan neem en kan
help om 'n beter toekoms te bou. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ons moet daarteen waak
om gemeenskapsregte met rassisme te verwar.

Wanneer ons dit gesê het, moet ons ook elke gemeenskap aanmoedig, hoe
bedreig of verontreg hy ook al voel, om op te staan en hulle plek in die
samelewing in te neem, om weg te beweeg van die negatiewe en positief te
help bou aan 'n beter Suid-Afrika. Gemeenskappe moenie met oogklappe, soos
in die sogenaamde ``Boetman-debatte'', egoïsties slegs op eie belange
konsentreer en treur oor die verlede nie.

Dit is die ``Boetmanne'' wat vreeslik die dinges in is omdat hulle eens
verskanste regte weggeneem is toe selfs die staat met sy wetgewing die kerk
teen sonde probeer beskerm het. Dit is die ``Boetmanne'' van ons tyd wat
kwansuis nooit vir die NP gestem het nie, om daardeur te wil voorgee dat
hulle nie deel gehad het aan wat gebeur het nie. Steeds voer hulle debat
oor byvoorbeeld die reg van Afrikaans, maar sluit die groot
Afrikaanssprekende gemeenskap - die bruinmense - en hulle gevoel oor die
kwessie by dié debat uit.

Gepraat van bruinmense, dit is die gemeenskap wat steeds ná ses jaar in die
nuwe Suid-Afrika wag om te sien wanneer iets na hulle toe gaan kom. Vroue
uit hierdie gemeenskap, veral in die Wes-Kaap, se kindertoelaes is
weggeneem. Hulle kan nie meer hulle kinders skool toe stuur nie.

Die Regering bestee R8 000 per kind per maand om kinders in plekke van
veilige bewaring aan te hou nadat hulle misdaad gepleeg het - 'n soort
reaktiewe betrokkenheid - maar is nie bereid om R175 per maand aan
dieselfde kind te bestee - proaktiewe betrokkenheid - om die misdaad te
voorkom nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die ANC sê elke kind het die reg op
skoolopleiding, maar dan neem hulle die toelaes weg sodat hulle ouers nie
in staat kan wees om hulle vir skool te klee en te voed nie.

Artikel 185 van die Grondwet bepaal dat die Kommissie vir die Bevordering
en Beskerming van die Regte van Kultuur-, Godsdiens- en Taalgemeenskappe
die instelling of erkenning van gemeenskapskultuur of soortgelyke rade moet
aanbeveel. [Tussenwerpsels.] Rade soos hierdie kan die mees betekenisvolle
gemeenskapsbeskerming en -bemagtiging meebring. Die vraag is egter waarom
die Regering nou al so lank met die instelling van dié kommissie sloer, en
die Begroting van die land is net so swygsaam daaroor.

Die uitdaging vir ons lê daarin om 'n Suid-Afrika tot stand te bring waarin
daar ruimte is vir elke individu om sy kulturele aspirasies uit te leef, en
om ten spyte van die kulturele verskeidenheid saam te werk om 'n
eensgesinde en vreedsame Suid-Afrikaanse nasie op te bou. [Tussenwerpsels.]
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J J DOWRY: Mr Chairman, it is clear that the debate about the rights of
the various communities in South Africa has recently demanded a great deal
of attention, and for that reason the motion is extremely topical and
relevant.

It is a fact which no right-minded person could ever ignore, that South
Africa comprises a variety of cultural and language groups. It is therefore
a great pity, when this important given in our country is being debated,
that such debate is denigrated as if the debaters seek to promote racism.
We in South Africa, in the first instance, are all South Africans with a
variety of origins.

That is why we are quite rightly called the rainbow nation. Each part of
this rainbow, however, has the desire to enjoy adequate recognition,
expansion and protection. The clearer all the colours of the rainbow, the
prettier and more attractive the rainbow. When certain communities
experience that they are relegated to the back seats and more often than
not shoved into the dock when things go wrong, we are tampering with unity,
reconciliation and nation-building. Then there is no longer any building,
but breaking down, and reconciliation makes room for enmity.

The Government of the day should ensure that communities are treated
equally so that everyone can assume fellow ownership of of their country
and help to build a better future. [Interjections.] We must guard against
confusing community rights with racism.

Once we have said that, we must encourage each community, no matter how
threatened or wronged it may feel to be, to stand up and take its place in
society, to move away from the negative and to contribute to positively
building a better South Africa. Communities should not wear blinkers, like
in the so-called ``Boetman debates'', and egotistically concentrate only on
individual interests and grieve over the past.

It is the ``Boetmanne'' who are in high dudgeon because their previously
entrenched rights were taken away when the state, by means of its
legislation, even tried to protect the church against sin. It is the
``Boetmanne'' of our time who ostensibly never voted for the NP, pretending
that they had no part in what had happened. They are still debating the
rights of Afrikaans, for example, but they exclude the greater Afrikaans-
speaking community - the coloured people - and how they feel asbout the
issue from this debate.

Speaking of coloured people, this is the community that is still, after six
years into the new South Africa, waiting to see when something is going to
come their way. Women from this community, in the Western Cape in
particular, have been deprived of their child care grants. They can no
longer send their children to school.

The Government annually spends R8 000 per child per month to detain
children in places of safety after they had committed crimes - a kind of
reactive involvement - but they are not prepared to spend R175 per month on
the same child - proactive involvement - to prevent the crime.
[Interjections.] The ANC says each child has the right to a school
education, but then they take away the grants and render their parents
unable to dress and feed them for school.

Section 85 of the Constitution provides that the Commission for the
Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Language
Communities should recommend the introduction or recognition of community
culture or associated councils. [Interjections.] Councils such as this can
bring about the most meaningful community protection and empowerment. The
question, however, is why the Government has been so slow with the
establishment of this commission, and the Budget of the country is just as
quiet in this regard.

The challenge we are facing is to bring about a South Africa in which there
is room for each individual to realise his cultural aspirations, and, in
spite of the cultural diversity, to co-operate in building a harmonious and
peaceful South African nation. [Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Mr S NAIDOO: Mr Chairperson, hon members ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order!

Mr S NAIDOO: ... the UDM empathises with the FF's aspiration encompassed in
this motion. Nevertheless, the UDM cannot support the motion because it
focuses on ethnic and sectoral parameters which would ultimately decimate
and divide our communities. This is in conflict with our vision, our
mission and our core values. The UDM espouses that all South Africans must
be united in the spirit of South Africanism.

We endeavour to unite all South Africans from all communities, building on
the foundations, principles and ideals of our national Constitution. To
this end we will address the poverty and imbalances in our society,
inspired by our unifying love for our country and its people.

We aspire to set free the creative power inherent in our diversity and to
co-operate with all stakeholders to ensure a quality life and individual
freedom for every citizen based on good governance and civil order, to
become a winning nation.

We are now in the seventh year of our new democracy, and while sections 30,
31, 185 and 235 of our Constitution provide for our communities to live out
their cultural and social life, the greatest challenge is to build a nation
which logically follows on our constitutional provisions. The greatest
challenge for all our leaders of various political pursuasions, inside and
outside this House, is to pursue the noble goal of nation-building, rather
than the divisive promotion of ethnic and political interests.

Let us leave behind a legacy so that our children and our grandchildren
will remember us for having made the sacrifice, for having displayed
tolerance and for having contributed towards the development of a proud
nation which can take its rightful place in the world's communities of
nations. If we fail to do this, then the effect of globalisation will
reduce us to a nation of beggars which will be destined to play a minimal
role and which has failed to grasp the challenges which globalisation has
placed before every nation in this world.

In conclusion, the UDM does recognise that in South Africa there are
communities which practise and live out their lives in their beliefs and
operate within certain social circles. The greatest challenge is to unite
all South Africans and to weld all these focuses into a South African
nation.

I would like to quote two examples. In India, with its largest democracy
and various linguistic groups, they first regard themselves as Indians.
Likewise, in America they first regard themselves as Americans and
thereafter as Californians, etc.

Ms H M MPAKA: Chairperson and hon members, we, the ANC, believe that arts
and culture can play a crucial role in nation-building, reconciliation, the
development of a new national identity, and an ethos reflective of our new
democracy. Arts and culture can play an important role in the moral renewal
of our society.

The mission of the ANC continues to be the transformation of our country by
eliminating poverty generated by the apartheid system. If one looks at the
museums, for instance, the following questions arise: What do we mean by
transforming a country? Why do we need to transform?

The reason for transformation is that we want to see people of this country
owning these museums and contributing towards building the nation. We also
want to see them participating in decision-making and administration. The
reason for transforming the country is to put emphasis on appreciating and
promoting all cultures in South Africa, and acknowledging the rich heritage
of peoples and cultures that exist in our country.

The question that we need to ask ourselves, as a way of building unity in
this country, is: What is the relationship between the commemoration of the
1956 monument, which was unveiled on 9 August 2000, and the Vroue Monument
in Bloemfontein?

If we look at heritage, one realises it is a powerful agent for cultural
identity, reconciliation and nation-building. Therefore, we, as South
Africans, need to ensure the continuation of the heritage process. We must
ensure the preconditions for the expression of creativity so as to heal our
soul.

In conclusion, if our multicultural country, with its rich heritage, is to
develop and be united, then a genuine appreciation and understanding of
other cultures need to take place amongst our South African youth. For
these reasons, not to invest in arts, culture and heritage, could
constitute grave short-sightedness on the part of Government and a failure
to recognise the healing and recreational potential of arts and culture as
a period of national regeneration and restoration.
The ambit of arts and culture will always be highly charged and emotional
because arts, culture and heritage are concerned with the most central
aspect of humanity - the formation of identity. Arts and culture must bring
unity and spiritual upliftment in our society. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, as it has been indicated by previous speakers,
the context for the rights under discussion is to be found in the national
Constitution, more particularly sections 30, 31, 185 and 235.
If one, however, compares the wording of section 31 to the wording of a
similar article on International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
namely, article 27, there are certain significant differences as pointed
out by the Constitutional Court recently, and I quote:


  The recipients of the protection offered by section 31 are not referred
  to as minorities. Instead, the right refers to those who belong to a
  cultural, religious or linguistic community. Additionally, the word
  ``ethnic'', used in article 27, has been replaced with the word
  ``cultural''.

  A commentator on this, Mr Currie, considers that this reflects a desire
  to avoid any association of the new constitutional order with the ethnic
  particularism of the apartheid ideology. Rather than ties of blood, the
  Constitution values and protects ties of affinity. Rather than
  recognising the rights of minorities, with the accompanying connotations
  of a divided population, the Constitution prefers to emphasise that it is
  protecting connectedness.

  Whilst the ACDP readily acknowledges the need to enhance and protect the
  rights of different communities of South Africa in accordance with the
  constitutional provisions, we would earnestly caution against an over-
  emphasis of our differences as South Africans. Whilst we furthermore
  acknowledge that various forms of racism do exist in South Africa and
  need to be addressed, we are greatly concerned that an undue emphasis on
  racism, as well as on cause for volkstad, can undo the huge strides in
  reconciliation achieved since 1994. We should rather be focusing on our
  similarities - notably having all been created in the image of God. We
  must focus on what unites us, rather than on those centrifugal forces
  that threaten to tear us apart. [Applause.]

Mr G E BALOI: Chairperson, there is no doubt and no fear to the whole South
African citizens that the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
spells out clearly, in the Bill of Rights, that everybody is protected, and
that there is absolutely nothing to worry ourselves about. The Constitution
came into force against the backdrop of several centuries of ethnicity and
the race-based autocratic rule.

It is no exaggeration to say that in South Africa, universally recognised
fundamental freedom were observed in the bridge.

The 27 April 1994 brought about a new and complete freedom for the entire
South Africans from the apartheid system to a democratic society.

Section 15 of the Constitution of the Republic - under Chapter 2, the Bill
of Rights - which was accepted in 1996, provides protection for, among
others, minority rights. In terms of section 15, everyone has the right to
freedom of religion, conscience, thought, belief and opinion.

Section 19 of the Constitution speels out matters relating to the right to
vote. It has a decisive influence on free and fair political activities.

Section 30 deals with the right to freedom of association and protects the
freedom of every person to associate with others according to his or her
free choice. In this context it embodies the right to participate in the
cultural of a person's choice. The people also have the right to practice
their religion, culture and linguistic beliefs, provided that they are
consistent with the provision of the Bill of Rights.

South Africa is our country and for our children. [Time expired.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Mr Chairperson, hon members, before I continue, I would
like to note that neither the Minister nor the Deputy Minister for Arts,
Culture, Science and Technology are here to listen to this debate. One
wonders if their absence is an indication of how importantly or not they
view this motion.

South Africa boasts a truly cosmopolitan community. While many of these
communities are in the minority, be it by ethnic, religious or other
definition, their rights and their protection are a sensitive and a thorny
issue. Worldwide there is an increased tendency for the ruling majority to
push the minorities aside, with the majority's notion being that the
question of a separate identity for minority communities will endanger
national unity, and the minority's notion being that if they are not
careful about protecting their identity, the majority will absorb them and
ultimately assimilate them. [Interjections.]

For many minority communities around the world, the most urgent problem
concerns the denial of their basic human rights including genocide, ethnic
cleansing, economic discrimination and religious persecution, amongst
others.

While we are fortunate that, in South Africa, we are not faced with such
dire actions, it is quite concerning to note that,  to date, life has not
yet been given to a proposed commission for the promotion and protection of
the rights of cultural, religious and linguistic communities, as enshrined
in the Chapter 9 of the Constitution.

The fundamental duties owed to all kinds of ethnocultural minority
communities are nondiscrimination, the right to use one's own language in
nonofficial contexts, the freedom of opinions and its expression, including
the right to publish in any language without restrictions, and the freedom
to practice one's religion, in any way not infringing on the rights of
others.

Women within most ethnocultural communities have often been the most
severely disadvantaged. Quintessential to this notion is the importance of
protecting and promoting both gender equality and gender sensitivity.

We can perhaps take a lesson from India which has been, for centuries,
multireligious, multilinguistic, multicultural and multiracial in nature,
and has had no hindrance in accepting this reality right from the time of
her independence ...

[Interjections.]

Mr P M MATHEBE: Who wrote that speech?

Mrs S V KALYAN: I did. I wrote it. I have a mind of my own.

The Indian constitution, in the real sense, offers a balance between
national unity and its cultural as well as social diversity. And this
perhaps is because that constitution has fully accepted the principle of
unity in diversity or pluralism in togetherness. [Interjections.]

Europe also has framed a convention for the protection of the rights of its
different communities, especially those in the minority. This convention
goes a long way in promoting full and effective equality between its
national majority and minority population.

It is the DP's hope and wish that we aim for the peaceful co-existence of
all communities, and that we do not trot out the race card for every ill in
our country. This calls for a major paradigm shift in our attitudes. We as
politicians have a particular responsibility to encourage tolerance and to
practice, ourselves, what we preach. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairperson, the PAC long ago declared that this country
is an African country on the African continent. Therefore, its people are
Africans. [Applause.] We define an African as anyone who owes his or her
allegience to Africa and subscribes to African majority rule, and is
committed to the equitable redistribution of land and its resources as a
way of eradicating poverty and creating a nation of equals.

There can be no equality where one section of the nation monopolises all
the resources, including knowledge. I would like to remind this House that
the UN declared 21 March the international day for the elimination of
racial discrimination. This was in honour of those who challenged racism
through the Sharpville uprising in order to promote the ideals of
nonracialism and equality.

The PAC is satified that section 9 of the Constitution recognises, enhances
and protects human rights of different communities in this country. These
rights, however, must be implemented, but that implementation must be aimed
at forging one African nation on the basis of absolute equality. This is as
yet not happening for the majority of the population of this country,
especially in the economic context.

The Constitution of this country recognises eleven languages. This is a
recognition of the cultural diversity of this country. All these languages
and the people who speak them must be respected.

But, territorially, there can be no talk of self-determination, for many
reasons, which anyone familiar with the history of this country must
appreciate. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The following member, hon R J B
Mohlala, will be delivering his maiden speech. [Applause.]

Mr R J B MOHLALA: Mr Chairperson and hon members, I want to start off by
quoting one of the respected idioms in my language:

Re se re go šsitwa ke go itiya kati ra re kgoro ke ye nyenyane. [When we
fail to achieve a particular objective, we must not fabricate reasons for
that failure.]

Not all rights are absolute. Because of that, we need to be careful about
what we promote, recognise and enhance.

It is common knowledge that, within the confines of different traditions
and cultures of different communities, there are certain rights that, if
enhanced, will necessarily lead to anarchy as some of them do infringe on
the rights of other communities. It is for this purpose that I believe
culture in its totality is a dynamic phenomenon. It is something that
changes from time to time.

I would imagine therefore that, instead of moving from a point of trying to
look at something that members already know, we should take a route that I
believe is correct, which is towards the development and charting of a new
culture, a culture that will transcend traditional boundaries and seek to
bring about one united South Africa and one nation with a single, shared
vision of culture.

This does not necessarily mean the eradication of the existing cultures
that we know today. But we need to learn from the international community.
When one speaks of an American culture, one does not say that to the
exclusion or disregard of the culture that is practiced by the native
Indians of America. When one speaks of the British culture, this is not to
the exclusion of the different religious groups that one finds in Britain,
practising different religious beliefs.

In order for us to achieve this we need to infuse within our communities
the notion of this Government, which is to strive for a better life for
all. That can only be achieved if, among other things, we are able to
distinguish between languages, traditions, practices, rituals and
religions. And we need to say that the sum total of this will give us the
whole concept of culture. Therefore if we share culture, values and
standards, there will be no need, I want to believe, for us to be debating
this topic today.

The issue of protecting and recognising different groups has been one of
the core areas of concern since the inception of the transition process in
our country. It is, however, appreciated that there are still motions in
this regard. This confirms the argument that the ANC has always extended,
which is that transition is an ongoing process and does not need to be
speeded up. I doubt if the basis of today's debate stems from the legacy of
inequality that was deliberately created by past governments.

Having a good understanding of the dynamics of our country, the ANC put in
place measures that address the notion of diversity, basically addressing
the issue of the different communities that could be protected and
recognised. Such measures are included in the Constitution. What more do we
need? The Constitution - which is part of the decisions taken by this House
- ensure, among other things, that the Cultural Rights Commission provided
for in terms of section 185 of the Constitution is actually at a stage
where it is preparing a Bill that will soon be before this Parliament,
which will essentially promote cultural, religious and linguistic
expressions.

Being new in this environment, I think the more I talk, the more I would be
making a fool of myself. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, may I, at this point, congratulate the hon
Mohlala on his maiden speech. [Applause.]

By recognising, enhancing and protecting the rights of the different
communities of South Africa, the purpose of the South African Constitution
is to protect the human rights of all citizens, irrespective of race,
crede, sexual orientation or economic status.

The protection of human rights are reinforced by legislation and other
legal organs, such as the Human Rights Commission, the Commission on Gender
Equality, the National Youth Commission, the Promotion of Access to
Information Act, the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair
Discrimination Act, and so on.

Whether victims challenge the violation of their rights through the
available legal mechanism depends on the extent to which they are
concientised about the reality of democracy, responsibility, empowerment
and the enforcement ability of the legal system to ensure that justice
prevails.

The continuous demand to recognise, enhance and protect the rights of the
different communities in South Africa is a phobia experienced by most
colonial predecessors, who have to adapt to the complexity of democracy. At
the very infancy of democracy in South Africa, the Government openly
addressed this phobia in the form of sharing political authority with role-
players from the apartheid regime.

The Government has invited all peace-loving leaders to participate in
propagating a multiparty approach. Thus, the MF has made the best political
decision in the country to align itself with the majority party, to bridge
the gap between the zebra nation and the rainbow nation.
Every community has the right to self-determination, joint decision-making,
the acknowledgement of the rule of law, the rejection of discrimination,
the maintenance of order and stability in the reform process and collective
negotiation of solutions, as these affect the interest of our people.

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, the hon member, Mr M S Manie, said something
important the other day during the debate on the racism conference. He made
a plea: Please put on the glasses of the other one. Look at the reality
through the other person's eyes.

Today, I want hon members to look at South Africa in the year 2000 through
my glasses or from my point of view. One may differ from that, but that is
how I honestly view reality. I am a citizen of South Africa. I have no
other country or loyalty, no other destination than this beloved country
where my ancestors arrived in the year 1690. I oppose the present
Government, but I am not praying for the so-called great catastrophe. How
can I do it if scripture orders me to pray for the Government to govern
well, so that we may have peaceful and quiet life in the honour of God.
My children and grandchildren's future is closely connected to the future
of this country. South Africa's well-being is my wellbeing. But I am a
part, not only of the broad South African community: I am a proud member of
a specific people.

Ek is deel van 'n volk, 'n inheemse volk van Suid-Afrika, die
Afrikanervolk; 'n volk met 'n geskiedenis wat gestempel is deur die een
oorheersende drang, die drang na vryheid en selfregering. Die drang daarna
om homself te regeer is 'n voorreg wat bykans alle volke wêreldwyd geniet,
en is die ideaal wat hierdie volk met groot offers verdedig het teen die
grootste moondheid in die wêreld.

Die volk waaraan ek behoort, is egter 'n minderheid in sy eie vaderland.
Eers het ons met die beste bedoelings geprobeer om 'n bedeling te skep
waarin verskillende volke elkeen 'n meerderheid binne eie grondgebied kon
wees. Dit het nie gewerk nie. Daarna het ons met allerlei metodes geprobeer
om vir 'n tyd minderheidsdominansie in stand te hou. In 1994 het dit
verander na meerderheidsdominansie; hoe ons ook al daarna kyk, 'n situasie
waarin byna geen volk ter wêreld hom bevind nie.

Ja, daar is die algemene lotsgebondenheid van alle mense in hierdie land,
'n lot waartoe ons deur positiewe bydraes ons insette wil lewer. Daar is
egter ook die besondere, die eie, wat kosbaar en uniek is aan elke volk; 'n
groepering van mense met 'n gemeenskaplike taal, kultuur, afkoms,
geskiedenis en geloof, en mense met 'n roeping om dit te koester, te bewaar
en te bevorder. Daarvoor vra ek sensitiwiteit.

Agb lede moet daarna kyk deur die bril van die ander persoon, en nie ons
regmatige aansprake en strewes verteken as rassisme of nieu-apartheid nie.
Ons vra die ruimte om dit te kan uitleef, nie alleen as 2,5 miljoen
individue nie, maar ook as 'n volk.

Daar is talle voorbeelde in die wêreld van hoe sulke aansprake in 'n
multikulturele land tot heil van almal gehandhaaf is. Kom ons maak dit 'n
prioriteit, en elke volk in hierdie land, ook my mense, sal met toewyding,
oorgawe en entoesiasme die heil van almal in Suid-Afrika bevorder binne die
veilige geborgenheid dat ook ons volkserfenis vir ons kinders erwe sal bly.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Die gesprek hieroor het nie opgehou met die Grondwet van 1996 nie. Die
uitkoms van hierdie gesprek, waartoe ook die AEB bereid is en wat mnr
George blykbaar glad nie verstaan nie, is die sleutel tot die welsyn van
almal in ons land. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I am part of a people, an indigenous people of South Africa, the Afrikaner
people; a people with a history marked by one dominating desire, the desire
for freedom and self-government. The desire to govern itself is a privilege
enjoyed by virtually all peoples worldwide, and it is the ideal which this
people defended with great sacrifice against the greatest power in the
world.

However, the people to which I belong is a minority in its own fatherland.
Initially we tried with the best intentions to create a dispensation in
which different peoples could each be a majority within their own
territory. This did not work. After that we used all manner of methods to
attempt to maintain minority domination for a while. In 1994 this changed
to majority domination; however one looks at it, a situation in which
virtually no people in the world finds itself.

Yes, there is the general feeling of a shared common fate of all people in
this country, a fate to which we want to make our inputs by way of positive
contributions. However, there is also the particular, the own, which is
precious and unique to each people; a grouping of people with a common
language, culture, origin, history and faith, and people with a calling to
nurture, preserve and and promote this. I am asking for sensitivity in this
regard.

Hon members must look at this through the glasses of the other person, and
not distort our rightful claims and endeavours as racism or neo-apartheid.
We ask for the room to be able to express this, not only as 2,5 million
individuals, but also as a people.

There are numerous examples in the world of how such claims in a
multicultural country have been maintained for everyone's welfare. Let us
make this a priority, and each people in this country, including my people,
will promote the welfare of everyone in South Africa with commitment,
dedication and enthusiasm, secure in the knowledge that the heritage of our
people will also remain for our children. [Interjections.]

The discussion around this matter dit not cease with the Constitution of
1996. The outcome of this discussion, which the AEB is also prepared to be
involved in and which Mr George clearly does not understand at all, is the
key to the welfare of everyone in our country.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I have been informed that the hon Tshivhase
would like to address the House in her own language, Tshivenda, which is
one of the official languages. Now, we do want to warn the House that due
to the illness of the member of staff who interprets from Tshivenda into
English and vice versa, there will be a problem. However, the hon member
has a right to speak in her language.

Muf T J TSHIVHASE: Mulangadzulo,ṱhoho ya mafhungo anga ndi: Nḓivho na u
bveledza vhuṋe ha mvelele ya vhapo nga vhuṱambo ha vhutsila ha Tshirema.

Mbonele ya ANC ndi u vhuisa vhathu fhethu huthihi na u vha ṱanganya sa Ma-
Afurika. Ndeme ya vhutsila ha Vharema kha vhuṱambo uho ndi u bveledza
vhutsila uri hu vhe na mbuelo. Zwi ḓo vhonala musi thaidzo i tshi raruliwa
samusi Phuresidennde vho no ḓi amba nga ha tshaka mbili dza vhashai na
vhapfumi.
Ri tea u sedza izwo nga iṱo ḽa uri ANC i dzhiela nṱha vhushai ha vho
tambudzwaho. Vhuṱambo vhu tea u vha ha vhadzulapo vhoṱhe vhane vha ḓo shela
mulenzhe. Zwenezwo, zwi amba uri zwiṱaniwa  zwi tea u vha hone. Vhutsila
havho hu vhonale ho khwinifhadzea. Kha vhuṱambo honohu, ri tea u vhonala ri
lwone lushaka lwa musenga-vhadzimu lu fhaṱaho shango, hu sa sedziwi lukanda
kana ḽibulambeu ngauri hu na vha shumisaho lukanda uri vha wane mbuelo. Ri
tea u vhonala sa vhana vha muthu, zwi songo vha zwa tshaka mbili, dzine dza
ambiwa sa lukanda lutswu kana lutshena. Ndi zwe Phuresidennde vha bula
zwone musi wa guvhangano ḽa khethekanyo nga lukanda.

Vhathu vhashu vha tea u ḓibveledza nga u imba, matangwa, mitshino, zwilidzo
zwa mveledzo dzo fhambanaho uri roṱhe ri fhaṱe shango ḽashu. Vhana vhashu
vha sumbedzwe filimu dza vhubvo havho musi vhe vhaṱuku uri vha ṱuṱuwedzee u
vha vhaṅwali na vhabveledzi vha matangwa vha biko. Tshifhinga tshoṱhe vha
vhona: The Bold and the Beautiful and Days of our lives, zwine zwa si vha
ṱuṱuwedze uri vha vhe vhaṅwali kana vha vhaedzi vha vhukuma.

Ndayotewa yo zwi sumbedza uri ri na mvelele nnzhi fhedzi ri lushaka
luthihi. Vhuṱambo uho vhu fanela u kuvhanganya vhathu vhoṱhe uri vha vhe na
nzhele ya uri thaidzo ya vhushai i raruliwa nga u ṱana zwithu zwavho
zwavhuḓi. Vha songo vha na ṱhoni ya u ḓivhona sa Vharema vha bvaho kha
tshigwada tshiṱuku tsha vhadzulapo vha Afurika.

Zwo ralo, muṅwe na muṅwe kha ḓiswikise nga zwawe zwo fhambanaho, sa
zwiambaro, vhutsila na zwiṅwe zwinzhi. Vhaṅwe vhathu vho vha na mbuelo nga
u vhaisa vhaṅwe, vho vha dzhiela lupfumo nga nṱhani ha lukanda lwo
shumiswaho musi wa khethekanyo, sa phasipoto. Hu na ṱhoḓea ya uri Vharema
vhe vha tsikeledzwa vha ṱangane, vha shume sa ṅanda uri lushaka lu bvele
phanḓa na u fhelisa vhushai. Ndi hune senthara dza vhutsila dza fanela u
dzhielwa nṱha kha u shumiswa nga vhaimbi, vhaṱani vhane vha bveledza zwo
fhambanaho.

Ri songo sedza ḽibulambeu na lushaka, Zwoṱhe zwi nga konadzea arali vhathu
vha langulea, vha shumisana uri vha si pfumise rabulasi muthihi. Ri a zwi
vhona uri vhathu vhahashu vha shuma u rengisa mionva na zwiṅwe zwine zwa
vha zwa rabulasi muthihi. Vhathu kha vha ṱangane vha vhe tshithu tshithihi,
sa tsumbo, mimaraga ine Vharema vha vha nayo. Zwi nga konadzea u fhaṱa
shango ḽashu sa lushaka luthihi lwa mvelele dzo fhamabano.

Ri tea u tsireledza mvelele dzashu kha zwiimo zwoṱhe, dzi vhe na
mvelephanda kha u fhaṱa shango ḽashu ḽoṱhe. Ri bve kha zwigwada zwi no
ṱuṱuwedza phambano nga mirafho. Kha ri sedze zwi fhaṱaho zwine zwa ḓo bvisa
vhushai kha vhathu vhashu. Arali ri tshi lavhelesa vhathu vhashu u bva tshe
vha vha zwone, ndi hune zwigwada, sa ḽiṅwe ḽihoro ḽikangi ḽa imela uri ri
vhe vho fhambanaho kha u ḓibveledza. Nga inwe nḓila tshelede ya muvhuso i
fhelele kha u bveledza lushaka luthihi.

ANC a i nga tendelani nazwo ngauri i ḓivha vhushai na tsikeledzo ya
khethekanyo nga lukanda. Ra sedza vhuṱambo hu itiwaho ngei Grahamstown, hu
khou vha pfumisa ngauri vho vhumbana sa tshithu tshithihi. Riṋe-vho sa ANC
ro sedza vhushai hu si na tshiṱalula nga lukanda na ḽibulambeu. Musi ANC i
tshi amba nga tshaka mbili, i khou sumba vho pfumaho na vhashai. Lwa u
thoma, vhadzulapo vha fhano Afurika Tshipembe vha ṱuṱuwedzwa uri: Kha ri
fhaṱe shango ḽashu roṱhe. [U vhanda zwanḓa.]. (Translation of Tshivenḓa
speech follows.)

Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Madam Speaker, the topic of my speech is: Knowledge and
development of culture in communities and the African arts festival. The
vision of the ANC is to bring together all people as Africans. The purpose
of African arts at the festivals is to improve its profitably. This will be
seen when there is a solution to the present problem as indicated by our
hon President when he spoke of our country as consisting of two nations,
namely the poor and the rich.

We must look at that situation in which the ANC does not uphold the poverty
of those who were oppressed. The festival should involve all citizens, who
should participate freely. This therefore means that improved art displays
should be encouraged. At the festival, we should be seen as the rainbow
nation which is building the country without gender and colour
discrimination, because there are those who use colour for profit. Let us
be seen as children of one family and not belonging to two nations, namely
black and white people. That is what the hon President pointed out at the
racism conference recently.

Our people should develop themselves in music, drama, dance and the playing
of different musical instruments, so that we all build our nation. Our
children should be shown films about their origin and should also be
encouraged to write and be producers of quality drama. For they are always
shown The Bold and the and The Days of our Lives, which does not challenge
and motivate them to be real writers and actors.

The Constitution has shown that we have a diversity of cultures  even
though we are one nation. The festival must bring about an awareness
amongst all people that the problem of poverty can be alleviated by an
attractive display of art works. People should not be shy and consider
themselves as a minority among the citizens of South Africa.

Therefore, let everyone offer different wares, such as clothing, art works
and many other handicrafts. Some people gained a lot by marginalising
others. They did so by using the colour of their skin and managed to enrich
themselves through discrimination, especially when it came to acquiring
passports and so on. There is a need for the oppressed people to come
together and work as one in order to develop this nation and alleviate
poverty. There should be art centres to develop music and other activities.

We should not look at gender and nationality. Everything is possible if
people take control and work together so that they do not enrich one
farmer. We have seen our people who are in the business of selling fruit,
especially bananas which they buy from one farmer. Let people form small co-
operatives like the African markets that we see today. It is possible to
build our country and be one nation with a diversity of cultures.

We must protect our cultures in many ways so that there is development of
our country. We should isolate ourselves from groups that encourage
differences based on colour. Let us look at that which will help our people
out of poverty. If we can visualise what has happened since we came into
existence, we are astounded by a certain opposition party which wants us to
develop differently. In other words, more of the Government's financial
assistence should be spent on one group.

The ANC-led Government will not be party to that kind of attitude, because
it is aware of poverty and oppression due to discrimination. If we look at
the Grahamstown festival, it is a self-enrichment of the few. We in the ANC
have looked at poverty without discrimination based on colour and gender.
When the ANC speaks of two nations, it refers to the rich and the poor. For
the first time, South African citizens are being encouraged: Let us build
our country together! [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before I call on the next speaker,
I just want to add to what I said before the hon Tshivhase came to the
podium that the Hansard record will come out in both Tshivenda and English.
However, it is important that the many Tshivenda speakers out there should
be addressed directly in their language.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speker, I would like to start off by thanking all the
members of the different parties who participated in this debate this
afternoon. I think that it was a very interesting debate. Unfortunately, we
did not spend enough time discussing this very important issue.

Not only were the speeches of different members quite interesting, but I
must also say that the reaction of members across the House, with regard to
the interjections and observations that they made, was also interesting.

I do not think that we should beat about the bush. We are clearly miles
apart in this House and in this country. The interjections this afternoon
gave me the impression that we came here with some kind of special request
to discuss the recognition, enhancement and protection of the rights of
different communities in South Africa. Not a single word in that
discussion, this afternoon, in this subject was taken from anywhere else
but from this Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, for which each
and every member in this House voted and supported. No special treatment
was asked for. It is provisions that are obtained and set in this
Constitution that were discussed this afternoon. Yet, the reaction we heard
this afternoon was as if it is something strange from some strange world
that we have never heard of.

There are 20 million women in South Africa, 18 million men, eight
religions, 25 church denominations, 31 cultural groups, 14 languages, nine
race groups and one country. This was the advertisement used by the
Constitutional Assembly during the constitution-writing process to put the
message across on just how diverse this society of South Africa is. To make
it even more complicated, this one country that we referred to is one
country because of an arbitrary colonial boundary drawn by a colonial power
in 1910 when South Africa became a union.

If one looks at the preamble of this Constitution it reads:


  We believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
  diversity.

Regarding ``our diversity'', I would like to ask whether these words are
only words on paper. Do they mean anything? Are they supposed to be a
living reality? Is the saying ``united in our diversity'' something that
one can just ignore?

The hon Mr Wally Serote, who is not in the House at the moment, asked this
afternoon how we are going to use our brains today. He asked how we would
proceed and whether we had a proper democracy in South Africa. We want to
believe that we have the most modern democracy in the world. There is only
one thing that is certain in constitutional law, and that is that nothing
remains static. Nothing remains the same. True democracy means more than
just the right to vote. I urge members to go and have a look at how,
internationally, things develop and at how minorities are accommodated,
then one can try to speak of a true democracy.

Mr Serote referred to the question by saying that he did not know what a
minority is.

Hy het gevra wat 'n minderheid is? [He asked what a minority is.]

If one takes a table, puts four wolves and one sheep around it and then
takes a democratic vote as to what will be for supper, one will clearly
know who is the minority at that stage. It will be the sheep. Democracy
means more than just the right to vote. It means much more than that.

I can go to the Constitution itself. It clearly states which communities
are referred to. Section 31 refers to cultural, religious and linguistic
communities. Section 235 clearly refers to communities bound by a common
cultural and language heritage. What Mr Van Der Merwe said, is true: These
things are in the Constitution. But when are we going to see action from
the Government with regard to the implementation of these things?

A central theme this afternoon, which came from various members, was the
idea of nation-building. We should build one nation, of course, but how do
we do that? I have said in the past, and I want to repeat this afternoon,
that we will not build a nation with mere words, with nice preambles or by
stumbling from one sporting event to the next. We will build a nation by
addressing the diverse reality of this country, by accommodating the
reality of the different communities that exist in this country and by
accommodating their rights. It is only then that we can start to build in a
positive way and go forward. [Interjections.]

I want to tell members that they should go and have a look at section 233
of the Constitution that they supported, the application of international
law. In terms of international law, the rights of communities and the
protection of the minorities is a reality and is becoming stronger every
day. Go and have a look at section 233 in terms of the application of
international law in South Africa.

Obviously, we would all like to have a prosperous and a better South Africa
for everybody. We agree on that, but we cannot force people to be loyal and
give all their energy to build a better South Africa, if we do not
recognise the right that they have to exist and if we do not even want to
recognise the basic things that are made provision for in this
Constitution. Either we apply that or we ignore it. I am afraid we are
miles and miles apart. [Time expired.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, I wish to recognise the
presence of the Minister of Education, Culture and Science from the
Netherlands, the hon Mr Loek Hermans, and his delegation, accompanied by
the Dutch Ambassador to South Africa, Ms L van den Assum. They are seated
in the public gallery. [Applause.]

                   COUNCIL FOR MEDICAL SCHEMES LEVIES BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a first time.

                   COUNCIL FOR MEDICAL SCHEMES LEVIES BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

                       HIGHER EDUCATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, hon members, there are two reasons
why legislation is introduced in this House. The first is to pursue
Government policy or departmental policy. That is the usual reason. The
second reason is what lawyers call ``to cure a mischief, meaning the errors
and difficulties that have arisen in existing legislation, by way of
amendment.

Basically, this Bill before the House is intended to cure mischiefs that we
have found in the Higher Education Act. This is the second amendment to be
introduced since the promulgation of the Act in 1997.

The implementation of this Act has proved to be a challenge. The
transformation of education systems is a complex and difficult matter at
the best of times, but more so for a system that needs to address the
inequalities of the past, while positioning itself to meet the needs and
the demands of the 21st century. This Bill seeks to address some of the
shortcomings that have become apparent with the implementation of the
Higher Education Act of 1997.

Government's programme for the transformation of the South African higher
education system requires individual higher education institutions to
change the ways in which they operate, and especially to take into account
broad, system-wide interests. Unfortunately, it has become quiet clear that
certain higher education institutions, both public and private, have
extended the scope and range of their operations in ways which may not be
in the best interests of the system as a whole, and certainly not in the
national interest.

Let me give an example of the type of development that we are witnessing.
The past few years have seen the proliferation of satellite campuses,
whereby the map of public higher education institutions throughout the
country has changed, often without regard to the effects that these
campuses might have on sister institutions or to the quality of the
education infrastructural provision.

In fact, there was one remarkable example of a large Gauteng-based
university wanting to set up a satellite college in Bisho and therefore, in
fact, effectively injuring the prospects of the local higher education
institutions. In fact, these satellite institutions have been set up for
empire-building purposes, arbitrarily and capriciously in many cases.

Section 3 of the Higher Education Act places an obligation on the Minister
to determine higher education policy after consultation with the Council on
Higher Education. The proposed amendment before us gives the Minister the
discretion, under specified conditions, to determine policy for public as
well as private higher education institutions. The conditions are those
embodied in the co-operative governance model to which the Government is
committed, as spelt out in Education White Paper 3, which the House
accepted, so we are not making absolutely new law. The amendment is
entirely consistent with this model.

There are objections to the proposed amendment. One objection is that the
amendment gives the Minister extensive rights which are contrary to the
principle of institutional autonomy, which is upheld in the preamble to the
principal Act. It is alleged that the Minister will be given draconian
powers to override, by executive decree, the private Acts of universities.

The key claim of this objection is that the principle of autonomy, which is
upheld by the preamble, is contravened by the proposed new subsection. This
is misleading because no principle, in the sense of a statement having
universal or unconditional application, is in fact, built into the preamble
to the 1997 Act. I want to reiterate on behalf of the Government, and my
personal commitment, that the principle to which the as Government is
committed is that of academic freedom, which cannot be equated to autonomy.
The 1997 White Paper on higher education transformation lists academic
freedom as one of the fundamental principles that must guide the process of
higher education transformation in South Africa.

Academic freedom, a fundamental right protected by the Constitution, has to
do with the pursuit and practice of academic work without interference,
canvassing only one value, namely truth. The concept of autonomy, on the
other hand, is concerned with the relationship which holds between the
state and higher education institutions and, in particular, the ways in
which the state manages or steers the public higher education system.
Concepts of academic freedom and of autonomy are not identical, although in
the portfolio committee they tend to be confused.

Our choice has been to entrench the principle of academic freedom for all
higher education institutions, and to place limits or conditions on their
autonomy, in common with many democratic countries. I am suprised at the
extent to which Mrs Thatcher brought about changes in the United Kingdom to
the autonomy of institutions. The preamble to the 1997 Act refers
explicitly to higher education institutions in South Africa having
conditional autonomy. That was passed by this House.

It is clear from this preamble that no appeal to a so-called principle of
autonomy can exempt either an individual higher education institution or
the system as a whole from meeting these transformation goals or
conditions, particularly in relation to the participation of women and
blacks in the institutions, especially in senior posts, and changing the
value system under which higher education institutions are, in fact, worked
out. This is very similar to the debate we had earlier today.

The first annual report of the Council on Higher Education, which I
received at the end of 1999, clearly indicates that the higher education
system is moving, but only slowly, towards meeting the transformation
conditions in the White Paper and the Higher Education Act. The information
contained in the Council of Higher Education's annual report is supported
by my own department's analyses of the first two years of rolling plans
submitted to it by public higher education institutions.

The higher education system in South Africa is not meeting national
transformation conditions concerned with responsiveness to societal needs
and to equity.

The amendment gives the Minister of Education discretion to address the
laissez-faire development of higher education. It does so while respecting
fully the principles of academic freedom and of co-operative governance.

Now I move to the second key area addressed in the amending Bill. Certain
higher education institutions are facing serious, really serious financial
problems and have as a result raised large overdrafts with commercial
banks. The Auditor-General has drawn the attention of the House to
financial mismanagement in higher education institutions. Steps therefore
have to be taken to protect the substantial investment which the Government
has made in South Africa's public higher education system. About 14% of our
Education Vote goes to higher education, which puts us among the top 25
countries in the world.

The proposed amendments to section 40 of the Higher Education Act of 1997
are designed to do precisely that. Public investment in higher education
is, as I have shown, considerable. Nearly all the land and buildings, and
much of the teaching and research equipment, on the 36 public universities
and technikons in South Africa have been purchased with the assistance of
substantial government funding. The amendment recognises that public
universities and technikons are able to enter into legally binding
contracts. However, it lays down a set of requirements which institutions
must meet before entering into a loan or overdraft agreement or the
construction of a permanent building or any other immovable development,
the purchase of immovable property or long-time lease of immovable
property.

These requirements ensure that the council of the institution must approve
the agreement. Often the councils are not being involved in such
agreements. Secondly, the Minister's approval must be obtained if certain
limits will be exceeded by the raising of the loan or overdraft, or the
construction, purchase or leasing of immovable property. The limits
proposed are modest and reasonable ones. In the case of loans or
overdrafts, ministerial approval is required if there is the sum raised in
any financial year is higher than either an amount predetermined by the
Minister or where no such determination has been made, 5% of the
institution's average income for the previous two years. In the case of the
construction or purchase or leasing of immovable property, the approval of
the Minister must be obtained if the value of the construction or purchase
or lease is higher than 5% of the institution's average income for the
previous two years.

Objections have been raised to the effect that these new requirements would
limit significantly their rights to enter into contracts and will as a
consequence have a potentially severe impact on the functioning of higher
education institutions. The response to the first part of this objection is
straightforward. The Minister clearly has an obligation to ensure that
public funds are employed properly and responsibly.

The response to the second part of the objection is equally
straightforward. Many other countries have requirements of this kind with
other operations of higher education institutions being affected in a
serious way. I commend, for example the Higher Education Funding Council of
England, which operates as an agent of the United Kingdom Government. It
lays down details and conditions which must be met before universities can
borrow funds on a long-term or short-term basis. In fact, their threshold
is much lower. They say if it is 3% or 4% of the total income as reported
in the latest audited financial statements, then authorisation must be
sought. They say, 4%, ours is 5%.
Hon members must remember: We are in a transition mode. [Interjections.] Mr
Gaum's youthful enthusiasm will bear fruit when he speaks after me, so he
should please just listen. [Laughter.]

What we are doing is a modest attempt to meet the needs of our country,
when there is in fact often unbridled development which does not meet the
social needs. The conditions laid down by the Higher Education Funding
Council of the United Kingdom are much more stringent than those contained
in our amendments. I can give Mr Gaum chapter and verse. Summing up, other
democratic countries are in fact seeing higher education development as
part of human resource development, meeting the needs of our country,
meeting the needs of the culture and language development. Therefore we
need to work out a higher responsiveness to what the community requires.

Finally, the amending Bill strengthens the regulatory framework for the
operation of private higher education institutions. In particular, when we
have started the regulatory systems in January 2000, it will allow for
differentiation between local and foreign private higher education
institutions. No country,  particularly a Third World country which faces
this onslaught,  can afford to sit back and watch as the future
sustainability of the higher education system is threatened by foreign
universities looking for new markets here, for profits, not as part of our
wider education development. The chairperson of the portfolio committee
will deal with this.
I want to thank the portfolio committee, and particularly the majority, for
taking a very understanding role as to why this amendment is necessary. We
do not want any grandstanding about this. This is vital for the future
development of the country and therefore, after my thanks to the portfolio
committee's chairperson, I commend this piece of legislation to the House.
[Applause.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: Chairperson and hon members, the Portfolio Committee on
Education was given a task by this House, to look at the desirability or
otherwise of the Higher Education Amendment Bill. While agreeing on the
desirability of this Bill, unfortunately we could not reach consensus with
the New NP, the DP and the AEB on some clauses. I will try to highlight
some of these areas on which we could not agree. Some have already been
covered by the hon the Minister.

This Bill is intended to amend the Higher Education Act, 1997, among other
things, to extend the power of the Minister of Education with regard to the
determination of higher education policy; to provide that a public higher
education institution may not, without the approval of its council and
under certain circumstances without the concurrence of the Minister, enter
into a loan or overdraft agreement or develop infrastructure; and to make
further provision for the registration of private higher education
institutions, the requirements for their registration and the determination
of applications for their registration.
At face value, as some opposition parties want us to believe, these are
draconian amendments which are intended to give more powers to the Minister
and, by so doing, stifle the autonomy of the institutions of higher
learning. I was privileged to be part of a delegation that visited
Australia and New Zealand in June/ July and this year. I would like to
share some of their experiences with regard to the role of government in
higher education, even before addressing the Bill before us.

The Tertary Education Advisory Commission of New Zealand had this to say,
and I quote:


  The commission confirms that the tertiary education system requires a
  clear strategic direction. This direction will need to be responsive to
  the needs of society and the economy and those of tertiary education
  providers themselves, and will need to be able to evolve and adapt to
  sometimes rapid changes in those needs.
The commission goes on to say:


  The development of a tertiary education system that addresses these
  problems, challenges and opportunities will require the active engagement
  of the government. By this the commission means that the government will
  need to have a view about the purpose and function of the tertiary
  education system, its direction and the means to give effect to those
  views.

I want to believe that this need for active engagement of the government is
greater in a new democracy such as ours, and this Bill is intended to
provide just that. The higher education sector is flooded with a number of
foreign institutions over which the Ministry has no direct control. This
makes the students vulnerable to unscrupulous entities which are here to
make profits at whatever costs. As a first point of defence for the public,
according to this Bill, such institutions should be -


  ... recognised or registered as an external company in terms of the
  Companies Act of 1973 ...

This is the only way we can make them accountable as juristic persons, able
to sue or be sued in a court of law. Let us remember that these
institutions are involved in a serious business, selling their services to
the unsuspecting students who at this point in time have no recourse to law
even if they are aggrieved.

The Education White Paper 3 defines the principle of institutional autonomy
well. I am not going to go into that definition.

However, it says that there is no moral basis for using the principle of
institutional autonomy as a pretext for resisting democratic change or in
defence of mismanagement. Institutional autonomy is therefore inextricably
linked to the demands of public accountability.

It goes on to state:


  The principle of public accountability implies that institutions are
  answerable for their actions and decisions not only to their own
  governing bodies and institutional communities but also to the broader
  society. Firstly, it requires that institutions receiving public funds
  should be able to report how, and how well, money has been spent.
  Secondly, it requires that institutions should demonstrate the results
  they achieve with the resources at their disposal. Thirdly, it requires
  that institutions should demonstrate how they have met national policy
  goals and priorities.

A fundamental starting point in the Education White Paper 3 is that


  Higher education must be replanned, governed and funded as a single
  national co-ordinated system, in order to overcome the fragmentation of
  the past, and successfully address the present and future challenges of
  reconstruction and development. This is a fundamental point of policy on
  which all stakeholders in higher education system are agreed.

The policy determined through the provisions of clause 2 of this Bill will
give clarity to what the scope and range of operations of a university or
technikon are. It will give substance to the provisions of section 29(3) of
the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, by setting
benchmarks for what is a comparable public institution. During the
registration process of private universities or technikons, this clause is
particularly important for the regulation of private higher education
institutions. It will give the Minister the authority to ensure that the
growth and development of the private sector takes place in a way that does
not threaten the welfare and future sustainability of the system as a
whole. The fear expressed by some parties, that the Minister will be able
to interfere with the governance and management of the atoning of higher
education institutions, based on the authority of clause 2 of the Bill, is
unfounded. Section 39(3) and section 54 of the Higher Education Act of 1997
already gives him or her the measures to reasonably intervene, if so
required. The policy contemplated in clause 2 seeks to provide norms and
standards that are objective and transparent.

The Higher Education Act of 1997 provides various measures to monitor the
financial affairs of a higher education institution. Provision is also made
for intervention by the Minister if there is financial maladministration in
an institution. These measures are, however, reactive in nature, and can
only be detected when an institution faces financial difficulties.

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for a proactive approach where the
implication of loans and overdrafts of infrastructural improvements on the
budget and financial position of such institutions can be monitored from an
early stage. This clause provides that the Minister must approve the loan,
or overdraft agreement, or reaction to improve the immovable facilities if
it exceeds an amount determined by the Minister, specific to such an
institution and based on its specific circumstances. In the absence of such
determination, it would be 5% of the average income received two years
immediately preceding the agreement or action.

It must be noted that the provisions of the Promotion of Administrative
Justice Act of 2000 must be taken into account when the Minister makes a
determination of the account. This Act requires that, before an
administrative action is taken by the appropriate authority, such authority
must give the institution which is affected by that decision a fair
opportunity to make representation on the matter and such a representation
must be taken into account by the authority.

The authority provided to the Minister to determine an amount for a
specific institution will provide flexibility, because an institution which
manages its affairs well will receive a much higher amount before approval
by the Minister is needed, than an institution which is in dire straits
financially.

In short, no institution which is financially well-managed need have cause
for concern. It is, however, one important measure, amongst others,
intended to ensure accountability for the use of public funds. I propose
that this Bill be approved. [Applause.]

Mr R S NTULI: Chairperson, the hon the Minister and hon members, the
implementation of the Higher Education Act of 1997, we submit, has exposed
some problem areas. This Bill amends the Higher Education Act of 1997 and,
inter alia, has the following objectives: ... to extend the powers of the
Minister of Education with regard to the determination of higher education
policy; to provide that a public higher education institution may not
without the approval of its council and, under certain circumstances,
without the concurrence of the Minister, enter into a loan or overdraft
agreement or develop infrastructure; as well as to make further provisions
for the registration of private higher education institutions, the
requirements for their registration and the determination of applications
for their registration.

The DP indeed understands and accepts that mechanisms and systems must be
put in place for quality assurance purposes in our institutions. We are
also aware that, recently, there has been a proliferation of private
institutions of higher learning, and there is a resultant need to protect
our students and the community from possible exploitation by such
institutions.

Equally, we accept that there must be a balance between higher education
autonomy and public responsibility and accountability. These are real
issues, but the way this Bill addresses them is unacceptable. We have
serious concerns with regard to the proposed legislations. Some of these
concerns will be handled by my colleagues.

The amendment of section 3 of Act 101 of 1997 is very problematic, as it
gives the Minister very extensive rights to prescribe the scope and the
range of operation, including the size and infrastructural configuration of
higher education institutions. This is contrary to the principle of
institutional autonomy, which is upheld in the preamble to the principal
Act.

If such powers are required to transform the education sector, the criteria
upon which it might be exercised, its limits and the procedure applicable
to its invocation must be expressly provided. Unfortunately, the Department
of Education is not willing to narrow down this power. It is worth
mentioning that both the SA University Vice-Chancellors' Association and
the Alliance of Private Providers of Education were vehemently opposed to
this provision. So are we.

Clause 4, inter alia, requests ministerial approval for loans for overdraft
agreements entered into by higher education institutions if the sum of the
loans or overdrafts to be raised in any financial year exceeds the amount
determined by the Minister for such an institution. These envisaged
ministerial powers will significantly limit the rights of higher education
institutions to enter into legally binding contracts, which is contrary,
again, to the principle that a juristic person shall have legal competence
to enter into contracts, thus creating rights and obligations.
We cannot understand why the Minister needs these extensive new powers,
because he already possesses substantial authority to deal with matters
relating to financial irregularities at institutions of higher learning.
The possible alternative which is feasible is that the Minister could
invoke his right to place the institution under curatorship where such an
institution's liabilities exceeds the nett assets of the institution by a
certain percentage.

The proposed amendments of section 40 are an attempt to address the lack of
financial discipline at certain institutions by selectively limiting all
institutions' ability to finance core operations. The remedy, we submit,
lies in sound governance and financial management by higher education
institutions.

Clause 8, inter alia, provides that the registrar may, when considering an
application, differentiate between a foreign and a local juristic person
with regard to matters such as scope, range of operations and institutional
configurations. If there are valid reasons upon which an application by
foreign providers may be refused, these must be expressly set out and
presented. As the Bill is formulated, there is a danger that many foreign
and private institutions with good quality education and financial
management systems may be wiped off. For these reasons, the DP opposes this
Bill. [Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, in its
preamble the Higher Education Act of 1997 unequivocally spells out the
transformation of education in our country. In recognising the gross
limitations in our educational system, it introduced a democratic system of
education by establishing a single, co-ordinated higher education system
for the dissemination of knowledge. This, coupled with academic freedom, is
applauded.

The objective of the Higher Education Amendment Bill is to take this
transformation a step further. The Bill, therefore, provides for the
amendment of higher education so as to provide for additional provisions,
namely: to extend the power of the Minister of Education in respect of
policies/decision-making; to give power of delegation to the principal and
the Council of Higher Education; to ensure that loans and overdraft
measures are regulated and vigorously controlled by Council and to increase
the accountability of Council to the Minister. This we applaud.
The registration of private higher education is to be further scrutinised
and regulated to make provision for councils of public higher education to
provide the Minister with information in terms of the Reporting by Public
Entities Act of 1992, so as to ensure that only public higher education
institutions and private institutions registered or conditionally
registered in terms of the Companies Act of 1973 may provide higher
education.

An interesting feature of the amendment to the act, however, is in sections
39 and 40. The amendment empowers the institutional council to discriminate
fairly between foreign students who are fairly underlined, who are not
permanent residents of our country, who are citizens and those who are
citizens and permanent residents. While this practice has been a global
norm and is currently practiced in this country, the problem is that it
requires legal sanction for its implementation. With this in mind, the
drafters of the Bill found it necessary that the amendment be introduced.

The Ministry of Education, in reviewing the changes at the higher education
institutions, has become aware of violations of the fiduciary
responsibilities of certain councils and institions. There have been
serious lapses in financial management and maladministration of public
funds. The Minister of Education has viewed this as a serious breach of
public confidence in the Department, and has had to seek powers to deal
with such cases with the severity that it merits. Although the IFP applauds
the Minister's initiatives to transform the educational system, the party
is opposed to the creation of a situation in which the Minister of
Education and the Government will have an excessive say in the running of
tertiary institutions.

The IFP believes that universities and technicons are crucial institutions
of an independent, vibrant civil society whose autonomy needs to be
respected. The powers and responsibilities which the councils of these
institutions should have should not be reduced. We sincerely hope,
therefore, that these amendments and improvements will not affect the
autonomy of tertiary institutions. [Interjections.]

The IFP advocates a creative approach to the establishment and governance
of tertiary institutions. The IFP also believes strongly that the private
sector partnerships will contribute tremendously to the financial resource
base of tertiary institutions. The management of tertiary institutions will
be enriched through business practices and principles.

To conclude, the IFP supports the Minister's initiatives to transform
higher education, because the IFP recognises the importance of a high
quality tertiary education. ... [Interjections.]

Mr G B D MCINTOSH: You are contradicting yourself.

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: We also believe that tertiary educational excellence
will be maintained. I am not contradicting myself.

Adv A H GAUM: This Bill is about more centralised power in the hands of the
Minister of Education and the Registrar of Higher Education and less
autonomy for higher ducation institutions. It is about more government
control and prescriptiveness, less educational choice for students. It is
about trying to protect dysfunctional state institutions against increasing
student numbers instead of allowing the market to determine what is quality
tertiary education and what not. It is ultimately about an attempt to limit
competition, the cornerstone, of achievement.

The Bill provides that the Minister may, in the so-called interest of the
higher education system as a whole, determine the scope and range of
operations of public and private higher education institutions. As the
Minister is on record for complaining about the so-called proliferation of
the higher education landscape due to the activities of several private
providers in South Africa, it is feared by these institutions that he will
use these far-reaching power to put many of them out of business. There can
be no doubt that this provision will introduce substantial uncertainty and
risk that will seriously prejudice both existing private education
providers and those wishing to enter the market.

While the need for a private institution to be commercially sustainable is
the registration requirement imposed by section 51 of the Higher Education
Act, this new power may seriously compromise its ability to remain
commercially sustainable. It is therefore clear that this new ministerial
power is evasive and an undermining of the registration process for private
higher education providers. This provision is also contrary to the
principle of institutional autonomy, which is so important to guarantee the
independence of institutions and ultimately academic freedom.

If it is taken into account that the Minister already possesses the
authority to determine the conditions for the payment of subsidies in the
case of public higher education institutions as well as to determine the
conditions for registration in the case of private higher education
institutions, it requires little imagination to realise the potential
threat to the principles of academic independence and freedom if a
ministerial sword of altering the scope and range of operations of
institutions is hanging over their heads. In addition, certain public
higher education institutions also exist by virtue of a public act. And the
Minister will now be able to oververride these acts almost by means of an
executive decree.

In a sincere endeavour to be constructive, the DA and the New NP suggested
from the outset that criteria or parameters against which the Minister may
determine what is in the interest of higher education system as a whole and
an adequate interpretation on the standing or definition of the term, scope
and range of operations, should be included in the Bill. Unfortunately,
neither the Minister's department nor the ANC was willing to consider this.


We are therefore not willing to support a clause that creates vast
uncertainty ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Honourable members, quiet side-
by-side conferencing is permissable. Anything over and above that
definitely disadvantages the person at the podium.

Adv A H GAUM: ... gives unbridled powers to the Minister and is likely to
infringe on the constitutional right provided for in section 29(3) of our
Constitution and is strongly opposed by both the SA Universities Vice
Chancellors Association and the Alliance of Private Providers of Education
Training and Development.

As referred to by my colleague, Mr Ntuli, clause 4 of the Bill also
provides the Minister with another set of far-reaching new powers which
amount to yet another onslaught on institution'  autonomy and their ability
to effectively govern their day-to-day affairs. Read together with clause
3, the Minister will now be able to regulate the broad policy, prescribe
the scope and range of operations, prescribe to a council of an institution
how it must govern the instition when it comes to loans and overdrafts or
when he will allow any immovable infrastructural development or the
purchasing of immovable property and, ultimately, when long-term leases
agreements regarding immovable property will be allowed.

This would, in effect, give the Minister the power to micromanage higher
education institutions.

Although this clause, obviously, stems from the desire to address the lack
of financial discipline in certain institutions, it boils down to the
selective limitation of all institutions' ability to finance core
operations. The remedy lies in ensuring sound governance by all higher
education institutions, not in a ministerial veto that may inhibit the
activities of smoothly functioning institutions. The Minister should rather
adopt a policy which is aimed at forcing dysfunctional institutions to
shape up or ship out.

The current Higher Education Act also provides that the Registrar of Higher
Education Institutions must register an applicant as a private higher
education institution if it complies with the requirements for registration
as set out in the Act.

This Bill changes the situation radically. It provides that even if an
applicant meets all these requirements, the Registrar may still decide
whether to register it or not. He is therefore provided with complete and
unrestricted discretion, which is virtually impossible to test in a court
of law. It makes of the Registrar almost a law unto himself

Meer as enigiets anders is hierdie 'n poging om private
hoëronderwysinstellings by te kom deur nuwe applikante te verhinder om die
mark te betree as dit teen die Regering se wense is. Die gevaarligte begin
in 'n land flikker wanneer die regering vir hom wye, ontoetsbare diskresies
begin toe-eien. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[More than anything else this is an attempt to get at private institutions
of higher education by preventing new applicants from entering the market
if this is against the wishes of the Government. The warning lights begin
to flash in a country when the government starts to arrogate to itself
broad, nverifiable discresions.]

Section 29(3) of the Constitution provides that everyone has a right to
establish and maintain, at his or her own expense, an independent
educational institution. The ability of the Registrar to exercise a
discretion on almost arbitrary grounds is clearly a denial of this basic
human right and open for constitutional challenge.

The Minister's vendetta against the private education providers will
ultimately be to the detriment of education in South Africa. It will not
improve excellence, but it will suppress it. It will not attract students,
but will chase them away to other countries.

The Minister of Trade and Industry tells us to create an environment that
is investor-friendly. Currently, we are getting large numbers of students
from other countries, many of them from Africa, who are coming to South
Africa to study here, students who are investing in our country. By
creating an unfriendly environment for private providers, which attract
many of these students, we run the real risk of losing them. This
Government is sending out very confusing messages. [Interjections.]
Ms N E HANGANA: You are confusing them.

Adv A H GAUM: It is clear that the one hand does not know what the other
hand is doing. The DA suggests that the Minister stop his hostile approach
towards private higher education providers and accept them as partners
towards opening the gates of higher education for the nation.

Die DA glo dat hierdie wetsontwerp nie sal bydra om ons land se
hoëronderwysprobleme op te los nie. In plaas van hoop en sukses, dra dit
die kiem van groot onsekerheid, die onderdrukking van vrye keuse en
mislukking. Ons kan ongelukkig nie so 'n wetsontwerp steun nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The DA believes that this Bill will not contribute towards solving our
country's higher education problems. Instead of hope and success it carries
the seed of great uncertainty, the suppression of free choice and failure.
Unfortunately we cannot support such a Bill.]

Mr S J DE BEER: Mr Chairperson, the UDM will support this Bill.

As 'n mens die bespreking van die komitee deurgaans bygewoon het - en ek
moet sê 'n mens kan dit ongelukkig nie van die DA se verteenwoordigers sê
nie - is 'n mens eintlik verbaas oor die teenstand en die graad van
teenstand wat kom van agb lede soos die agb lid mnr Gaum.

Dan bly dit steeds duidelik dat lede soos mnr Gaum en die ander
verteenwoordigers van die DA steeds na Suid-Afrika en sy situasie kyk
vanuit die oogpunt van die bevoorregte deel van die bevolking en dat hulle
baie weinig kennis dra van wat die situasie in die breë gesien is en wat in
die belang van al Suid-Afrika se mense is. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die bespreking van hierdie wetsontwerp vandag vind plaas in 'n tyd ...
[Tussenwerpsels.] Daar is baie min lede aan hierdie kant van die Raad wat
my iets kan vertel van wat in die swart onderwyswêreld aan die gang is.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Dié bespreking vind plaas in 'n tyd waarin die toekoms van hoëronderwys in
Suid-Afrika al meer in die kalklig val. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek het nog altyd
gehoor dat as 'n mens op iemand se tone trap en dit is raak, dan tjank
hulle, soos hierdie agb lede nou maak. [Tussenwerpsels.]

By die meeste rolspelers op die terrein bestaan daar vandag groot
onsekerheid oor hoe hierdie toekomstige bedeling gaan lyk en hoe die
wesenlike probleme gehanteer gaan word. [Tussenwerpsels.] Vandag se
bespreking moet dus eerder help om kalmte te bring as om die onrustigheid
te vererger, en hierdie agb lede het net 'n belang daarin om die
onrustigheid te probeer aanhits. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Daar bestaan ingrypende probleme op hierdie terrein en hulle kan nie
misgekyk word nie. Die inskrywingsgetalle by hoëronderwysinrigtings het
byvoorbeeld die afgelope tyd ingrypend gedaal. Sedert 1997 het dit met 7%
gedaal, en kenners meen dat hierdie daling steeds sal toeneem.
Finaleskooljaar-getalle het met 17% afgeneem en minder leerders bly in die
stelsel. Ook die vermoë om leerders met sukses deur die stelsel te voer
plaas universiteite en technikons nou voor 'n geweldige uitdaging.

Al hierdie verwikkelings plaas die rolspelers op hierdie terrein onder
geweldige druk om positief betrokke te raak. Dit geld die universiteite en
technikons, wat 'n groter bydrae sal moet lewer deur nouer te skakel met
onderwys op sekondêre vlak. Dit geld ook die Regering, wat sal moet probeer
om fondse doeltreffend aan te wend, en dit is juis die poging waarmee die
Minister besig is. Ook die werknemerskorps van Suid-Afrika, waarvan 76% na
bewering 'n tekort aan professionele werkers ervaar, sal moet uitreik na
universiteite en technikons om nouer samewerking te bewerkstellig.

'n Gesamentlike poging van alle rolspelers op hierdie terrein is dus nou
meer nodig as ooit vantevore om die uitdagings die hoof te bied om 'n
voorspoedige Suid-Afrika te bewerkstellig. Ons vertrou dat hierdie
wetgewing 'n positiewe bydrae daartoe sal lewer. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[If one attended the discussions of the committee throughout - and I must
say that unfortunately one cannot say this of the representatives of the DA
- one is really surprised with the opposition, and the degree of
opposition, from hon members such as the hon member Mr Gaum.

Then it becomes clear that members such as Mr Gaum and the other
representatives of the DA are still looking at South Africa and its
situation from the perspective of the privileged section of the population
and that they have very little knowledge of the situation in general and of
what is in the interests of all the people of South Africa.
[Interjections.]

The discussion of this Bill today takes place at a time ...
[Interjections.] There are very few members on this side of the House who
can tell me what is happening in the world of black education.
[Interjections.]

This discussion is taking place at a time when the future of higher
education in South Africa is coming under the spotlight more and more.
[Interjections.] I have always heard that when one steps on someone's toes,
and the aim is true, then they raise a hue and cry, as these hon members
are now doing. [Interjections.]

Among the majority of the role-players in the field there is great
uncertainty about what this future dispensation is going to look like and
how the core problems are going to be dealt with. [Interjections.] Today's
discussion should therefore contribute towards bringing calm rather than
trying to encourage the disquiet. [Interjections.]

There are radical problems in this field and they cannot be ignored. The
entrance figures at higher institutions of education have for example
dropped dramatically recently. Since 1997 they have declined by 7%, and
experts are of the view that this decline would continue to gather speed.
The numbers of final year students have decreased by 17% and fewer learners
remain in the system. The ability to process learners through the system
successfully is also a tremendous challenge facing universities and
technikons.

All these developments are placing role-players in this field under
tremendous pressure to become involved positively. This goes for
universities and technikons that would have to make a significant
contribution by means of closer liaison with education at the secondary
level. This also goes for the Government, who will have to make an effort
to use funds effectively, and this is precisely the effort in which the
Minister is now involved. The employers' corps of South Africa, of which
76% allegedly has a shortage of professional workers, will also have to
reach out to universities and technikons to bring about closer liaison.

A joint effort by all role-players in this field is therefore more
necessary now than ever before to overcome the challenges in order to
create a prosperous South Africa. We trust that this legislation will make
a positive contribution to that end.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, I regret your
speaking time has expired.

Mr S J DE BEER: It is a great pity! [Applause.]

Ms P K MOTHOAGAE: Mr Chairperson, the amending Bill before this House gives
us the opportunity to reflect on the work that has been done since the
President assented to this Bill on 19 December 1997.

It is an open secret that the implementation of the Higher Education Act
and the White Paper policy framework that seeks to establish a single co-
ordinated higher education system which promotes co-operative governance
and provides for programme-based education is hampered. One of the
compounding factors is the one that most members have referred to - there
is a large unco-ordinated private sector, especially as far as foreign
universities are concerned.

Surprisingly, this afternoon, the New NP and the DP are now spokespersons
for these private education providers, accusing the ANC-led Government of
not seeing the private education provider as allies. The fact of the matter
is that the Higher Education Act defines higher educations and goes on to
define public higher education institution and private higher education
institutions. We are not undermining the Constitution in any way.

The private higher education institutions are mushrooming in a very
alarming way, and are of great concern to us. The Bill requires the
Minister to determine the scope and range of operations for higher
education.

The New NP and DP are against this. Today, we are reviewing implementation
as we transform since this is a process, not an event. Technical colleges
are not meeting the needs of our young people. Nobody from among the
members on that side is complaining. They still want to maintain an
inferior standard of education. To hon Gaum, I say: Gone are the days when
the 1959 Extension of Universtity Education Act required black students to
obtain ministerial consent before they could attend a white university.
[Interjections.]
Dit is nou twak! [That is nonsense!]

Private institutions cherry-pick courses, especially the MBA ...

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it permissible
for a member of this House to call another member a ``lowlife''?
[Interjections.] The hon Momberg called the hon McIntosh a lowlife.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, in a debate, you
should expect an exchange of interjections. I do not think that the Chair
is going to be in a position to rule unless it is exceptionally
objectionable. But, otherwise, it is a fair exchange between two sides, and
I do not think that we should make too much of this. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I would like to address you on that point of
order. I would like to ask you to reconsider that ruling and, perhaps,
consider it outside the House and give a ruling later, because the effect
of that ruling is that the hon lowlifer over there can call anybody a
lowlife if he likes. I would think that that would be unfortunate.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Mr Gibson, if you would
like me to review that point of order. I am quite happy to do so and I
will, indeed, do so. Hon member, you may now proceed.

Ms P K MOTHOAGAE: Thank you, Chairperson, I am sure that I am going to be
compensated for injury time.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson ...

AN HON MEMBER: High life. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I think that when
the Chair is being addressed, it is important that you preserve the decorum
so that it is possible for the Chair to concentrate on the point of order.
I would like to ask for your co-operation in that regard.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, Mr Van Jaarsveld who
just raised the point of order has just referred to me as ``high life''.
[Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, in your ruling, I think
that you should take that comment into account. But, more importantly, the
hon Mr Gibson ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member over there, there
is a point of order that is being taken and you are holding a conference. I
just asked a moment ago that we should deal with one item only. This is
interrupting - yes, that goes for everyone - we are interrupting the
business of the day, and I would like to be able to proceed with one item
at a time.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, Mr Gibson referred to Mr
Jannie Momberg as ``Mr Lowlife'' in what he has said to you. Could you
please, in your ruling, take that into account?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITEES: Order! Yes, I will, most certainly. If
it is found that that was objectionable, as much as the first hon member
would have to withdraw, then it would follow ipso facto that the hon Mr
Gibson would have to do similarly.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, on the same point of order: The hon Mr
Yengeni is absolutely correct. I think that what I said is unparliamentary.
I wish to withdraw it unreservedly. [Interjections.]
 
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Thank you very much, hon
member. If there are no other points of order, we may now proceed with the
business of the House.

Ms P K MOTHOAGAE: Chairperson, the debate before the House is a lively one
and members in the House are awake.

I was at a point where I was saying that the private institutions cherry-
pick courses, especially the MBA courses, and compete with public
institutions. They take students away from these institutions which might
be one of the factors why the number of students in the institutions of
higher learning are declining - I am addressing that to Mr Gaum. The Act
requires the Minister to regulate that issue.

The registration process of private institutions is a responsibily of the
director-general who must designate any employee of the Department of
Education. At the moment, accreditation of these institutions is done by
Saqa, the S A Qualifications Authority, until a committee on higher
education quality assurance is operational. This must be a permanent
committee to perform quality promotion and quality assurance.

We should not lose track of where we come from. In 1995, this House passed
the SA Qualifications Authority Act which places education and training
within a coherent curriculum and an institutional framework called the NQF,
the National Qualifications Framework. The key principles of the NQF are to
provide quality education, access and redress, and to value and accredit
all learning, formal and informal. Saqa has just circulated its 1999-2000
annual report. The report indicates that a number of private higher
education institutions have gone through the accreditation process.

I think it is important, this afternoon, to share these statistics with
this House. The report indicates that the deadline by which all private
institutions were required to have registered was 1 January 2000. But, by
22 August, 28 institutions were conditionally registered, 61 institutions
were offered extension, 23 institutions were offered conditional
registration, 102 institutions were accredited and 71 were granted
preliminary accreditation status. By July 2000, 158 applications had been
received by Saqa for accreditation. Most institutions had not yet applied
to the department for registration. This is what we have at hand. The hon
members must tell us how to deal with this, because tranformation needs to
go on.

The ANC-led Government is committed to restructuring and transforming
programmes and institutions in order to respond better to the human
resources, economic and development needs of the republic. There is no
truth in the recent statement in the media that we have come up with 40
policy documents and have not implemented any. What has happened is that
such things keep on reporting on the responsibility of implementing
legislation and policy.

We are aware that the two parties in the Democratic Alliance are going to
vote against this Bill. But, this House should make it its responsibility
to use its majority for the benefit of the majority of South Africans. The
ANC supports this Bill. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, before I call the
next speaker, I want to inform you that in order to assist the Whips,
should there be a division, the bells will be rung for five minutes to
enable those who are proceeding with other business to make it into the
House. This is just to notify the Whips that they will have five minutes to
get their members in.

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Mr Chairperson and hon members, to say that this Bill is
aimed at curing a mischief is an insult to our institutions. These are not
enthusiastic youths, as the Minister referred to hon Gaum, but institutions
of higher learning.

South African tertiary academic institutions have contributed a great deal
to economic, social, legal, scientific, technological and medical
development not only in this country but also globally. Despite these great
contributions, South African institutions of higher learning have gone
through their greatest crisis over the past decade. Much pressure, both
internal and external, has been placed on these institutions to transform
in various ways. Some had to expand their student base in order to make
them more representative. After that, they had to seek the necessary staff
components in order to comply with labour legislation. Then came the
financial cuts in subsidies that forced many of them to rationalise both
staff and their academic activities.

These financial constraints have impacted negatively on the number of
courses taught and the amount of research carried out, as well as the
important additional task of community service.

The economic climate and the huge increase in unemployment have also left
their marks on universities and technikons. Students have built up huge
debts at some tertiary institutions, and their ability to repay these
accumulated debts seems at the very least, bleak.

Many tertiary institutions have, however, made positive attempts to
transform and comply with the requirements of a new society in which each
individual has a constitutional right, not only to a basic education, but
also to further education.
Programmes to revitalise many of these institutions have been implemented
by their various managements, and I would like to point out to the hon De
Beer that we are acutely aware that some have been more successful than
others. As a former Minister of education, he will, perhaps, be more aware
than many other members here of the reasons for that.

Now, however through these amendments, the Minister has decided to place
additional restrictions on all of these institutions. After surviving years
of political and other challenges and overcoming many difficulties, these
institutions are faced with their greatest obstacle yet, and that is the
current threat to their autonomy.

With these amendments, the Minister will be given the power to determine
the scope and range of operations, including the size and institutional
configuration of the various institutions of higher learning. At the same
time, the Minister will have the authority to determine if higher public
institutions may enter into a loan or overdraft agreement or develop
infrastructure.

With these and various other restrictions proposed in these amendments, the
institutions of higher education face the danger of becoming additional
bureaucratic entities within the national Department of Education.

In brief, the proposed amendments threaten to strip our institutions of the
innovative spirit and freedom that have allowed them to make their greatest
contributions to society.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, before I recognise the
next speaker, I think I am in a position to comment on the point of order
that was taken.

The connotations that attach to the word ``lowlife'' generally are unduly
negative. I am of the view that hon members here should recognise that
there is dignity in the office of the elected representative, and that it
would therefore not be reflecting the situation correctly to use the
extremely emotively loaded word ``lowlife''.

Neither does the term ``high life'' have a fitting place within the
vocabulary of Parliament, because, once again, it has certain connotations
which would be unnecessary in the context of the work of a public
representative.

I would therefore like to ask the hon member who made this remark to
withdraw in order that we may proceed.

Mr J H MOMBERG: I withdraw it, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you very much. If any reference
was made to ``high life'', I would also like that to be withdrawn.

Mr J J NIEMANN: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit verbaas my dat ek dit moet
terugtrek, want dit is die teenoorgestelde van ``lowlife'', maar as dit dan
so is, trek ek dit terug. [Mr Chairperson, I am surprised that I have to
withdraw it, because it is the opposite of ``lowlife'', but if that is the
case, I withdraw it.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the principle
in the Bill is noble and in keeping with ensuring that legislation does not
remain static and antequated, but is dynamic and abreast of developments.

However, the Bill is quite clear that, among other things, it is intended
to extend the powers of the Minister of Education with regard to the
determination of higher education policy. Well intended as this may sound,
there lurks behind it a degree of authoritarianism, such as that proposed
in clause 2 of the Bill, which states that the Minister may determine the
scope and the range of operations of public higher institutions, private
higher institutions and individual public or private higher institutions.

In the long run, this prerogative may degenerate into a situation where the
Minister may, inadvertently, lay down curricula for these institutions, a
measure which could be construed as interfering with the academic autonomy
of these institutions.

The hon chairperson of the portfolio committee has just said that the
Minister has the powers, in any case, as given to him in Act 101 of 1997,
and the question is: Why ask for more if the power is already there?

Clause 6 of the Bill, which deals with the registration of private higher
education institutions is cause for alarm. While the clause does recognise
the registration of these institutions, the requirements are such that it
may be very difficult to have them registered.
The Government needs to be reminded that some churches hailed the demise of
apartheid as a possible way in which they could lend a hand in higher
education and training, as is the case elsewhere. These churches are
running successful universities that are awarding degrees, and these
churches are such that the degrees awarded by them are of a very high
calibre and can match any other degree elsewhere.

The new requirements, as proposed for section 51(b) of Act 101 of 1997,
will certainly put paid to any organisation, other than the state, that
wants to provide higher education, and this is unfortunate. Clause 7 of the
Bill, which has reference to the functions of the registrar, spells out
clearly that no private higher education institution may be termed a
university or a technikon.

It sounds as if the state should have the monopoly on providing higher
education and control on the awarding of degrees. Some theological
seminaries elsewhere award degrees, subject to strict accreditation
principles. Our country can take a leaf from the book of these
institutions. We have watchdogs, such as the SA Qualifications Authority,
that will monitor the quality of the degrees awarded.

Section 53(1) of Act 101, 1997, as amended ... [Time expired.]

Mr K MOONSAMY: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the present Bill
is yet another giant stride in the transformation of our educational
system.

Before I read the text of my statement, I would like to refer to the public
hearings on the Bill that is before us this afternoon. Some representatives
referred to this Bill as being draconian, giving the Minister unfettered
powers and also stating that the Minister would use a sledgehammer to push
through this Bill.

That is the language that we used during the apartheid era, and rightly so,
because the apartheid system passed, not only draconian, but savage and
criminal legislation, against a voiceless and voteless majority.

We have entered a new era in our country, in upholding democratic
principles. We have not forgotten the Bantu Education Act, which we
referred to as the slave Act. That was during the apartheid system.

The ANC will not, under any circumstances, pass any legislation that not
only undermines the Constitution, but also, in any way, introduces
draconian measures or laws in our country.

Now to the text. An historical analysis of higher education indicates that
we have inherited a highly fragmented system. The underdevelopment of human
resources and the subsequent geographical underdevelopment of higher
education provision and facilities have led to a three-tier system of
higher education being offered in our country.

This has been compounded by management of the system especially in the
historically disadvantaged institutions. Poor management has resulted in a
number of historically disadvantaged institutions experiencing serious
administrative and financial problems. For many of the historically
disadvantaged institutions, their financial state is the result of
admitting learners from depressed economic backgrounds who genuinely
struggle to pay fees.

This means that we have to transform the institutional values and
philosophies of both historically disadvantaged and historically advantaged
institutions. This transformation must reconfigure these institutions in
order that they can serve the mandate and goals set out in the Education
White Paper 3 and the RDP base document.

The restructuring higher education institutions must ensure a greater
contribution towards the national development of the country. The end
result must be the production of a new South African, schooled in the
democratic paradigm.

The restructuring of higher education must further lead to the development
of a learning society which can stimulate, direct and mobilise the creative
and intellectual energies of all people towards meeting the challenges of
reconstruction and development. A restructured higher education system
should give the student socially relevant knowledge that will equip the
graduate with the necessary skills and tools to make a far greater
contribution back into the society.

As part of this process the gap between the schooling system and higher
education must be narrowed. In this respect we need to be looking at
establishing bridging courses for those school-leavers who are destined for
higher education institutions.

In welcoming the introduction of this Bill before the National Assembly
today, it is clear that it has become necessary to tighten up areas in the
Higher Education Act of 1997. This is quite natural, since the process of
transformation consistently throws up new challenges which require
additional amendments.

The amending Bill gives the opportunity to introduce criteria for systemic
transformation. This Bill will mean that a national plan needs to be put in
place to effect its implementation. This Bill needs to be seen alongside
the legislation passed in Parliament last year which put in place a
national framework for human resource development in the form of the Skills
Development Act. Therefore the introduction of this Bill must be seen as
part of a broad range of focused legislation, aimed at the transformation
of education in the country and, in turn, higher education.

Our concern must equally be to lift the culture and ethos both of teaching
and of learning in higher education. Quality of teaching and support to
students is vital if the type of legislation we are considering today is to
succeed. Key to the transformation of higher education is the value system
of higher education that we should be striving to implement. Our human
resources are the most valuable source we have, and we have to ensure that
we harness and direct this valuable resource by creating a higher education
system that is going to serve the needs of reconstruction and development
on the one hand, and the strengthening of the role of the state to provide
quality higher education on the other. State and affordable public higher
education is one of the most debated areas, and correctly so. For
Government to achieve this, three critical areas need to be addressed:
Firstly, institutional transformation; secondly, the governance and systems
of higher education; and thirdly, curriculum development. Without these
being addressed, no transformation will take place.
This then brings us to another often debated area, that of historically
advantaged and historically disadvantaged institutions. Critically, co-
operation and sharing of resources is essential if we are to bridge the
huge divide between these two. Often this is sadly lacking, and this draft
Bill is an important mechanism in addressing this.

Today's debate cannot take place in the absence of reminding ourselves
about the White Paper on Transformation of Higher Education Institutions.
This policy document is an important reference point and our debate today
should not attempt to locate itself outside of this framework or pretend
that there is no policy.

On the question of the autonomy of universities - Comrade Minister has
already made reference to this - I would like to say the Bill begins
effectively to deal with this: The situation of the state providing
resources to build the historically disadvantaged institutions and
historically advantaged institutions, but at the same time being unable to
effect the necessary transformative changes due to the autonomy status of
universities, is untenable. This has reduced the state to the status of an
outsider, whilst institutions decide where to develop and contract
faculties, disciplines and areas of research and scope of operation.
Clearly, if the state provides, the state must have a say. Higher education
is not the domain of independent intellectuals who, for financial reasons,
are happy to back privately funded research projects which often have a
tenuous link with the development of a strong base for social knowledge and
learning.

Higher education is an important tool in the ambit of any state. The
functioning of the higher education sector must contribute to the
development of the state and Government's policies and programmes.

In this context, the manner in which autonomy has been advanced by a number
of institutions seeks to continue practices over which there is
acknowledged concern of Government ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Deputy Chair, a Bill that brings amendments to the Higher
Education Act needs all the serious attention that is available, because
the higher education of a country impacts on the present and future life of
that country. The potential   locked up in a country and the human
resources that a country can marshal all flow from higher education that is
stable and progressive. The PAC supports these amendments and is
appreciative of the consultation with the wide spectrum of stakeholders,
many of whom commented openly and sometimes critically.

With an Education budget of R50,5 billion, 13% or R7 billion is of which
earmarked for higher education, our institutions of learning should begin
to turn out products of high quality and excellence as their contribution
to the developmemt of our country. Of course, a developing country such as
ours needs greater monetary investment to make up for the skewed
development of the past, but, in the final analysis, it is greater
production and seriousness in our institutions which will encourage
Parliament and the executive to think of even higher expenditure in
education.

Our Constitution and democratic institutions are the envy of the world. Few
countries would involve students, employers and even the gardeners of a
university, and allow the participation of trade unions of teachers,
universities and technikons in the appointment of a principal. This really
sounds noble, but only if the whole institution turns out to be a success.
Our barometer of success is placed in the world around us. If we have
exceptional democratic institutions that produce students who cannot stand
up to their peers in the contemporary world, then we shall become the
underdogs in the highly competitive global economy.

The recent Sydney Olympics have put the challenge clearly before us. We
have a lot of work to do. Paper democracy is no substitute for hard work.
We in Africa have had our share of slavery. We do not want to become slaves
again. In education, in the workplace, we just have to work hard. Paper
democracy is good but it will not take us far. [Time expired.]

Miss RAJBALLY: Chairperson, higher education is a necessity for human
development throughout the world. According to Article 26 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, it is the conscious responsibility of
the government of the day to fulfil the provision of education for the
nation.

The new democratic South Africa is experiencing many teething problems in
the education system. Therefore, the appropriate implementation of the
Higher Education Amendment Bill has the power to decide the social,
economic and political destiny of this country.

The international convention on economic, social and cultural rights, 1966,
also stressed that higher education is the responsibility of the state.
South Africa has experienced an influx of foreign private education
institutions which are competing with the local higher education
institutions. This mandates our Government to exercise its constitutional
right to closely monitor the higher education system by distinguishing
between foreign and private schools.

The transformation of the administrative procedure to speed up the filling
of a vacancy in the Council for Higher Education, and the identification of
institutions which developed  infrastructure without proper planning and
budgeting gives the Minister swift and effective powers to address crises-
hit campus, thus protecting and cultivating graduates to serve the diverse
needs of our comunity.
The MF supports the Higher Education Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Hon Chairperson and the hon the Minister, I thank you for the
opportunity to give expression to my youthful enthusiasm.

Die AEB het begrip daarvoor dat daar groot probleme bestaan op die terrein
van hoër onderwys. Enersyds beskik Suid-Afrika oor van die beste tersiêre
inrigtings ter wêreld, en andersyds is daar inrigtings met groot probleme.

Ons het egter nie begrip daarvoor dat die oplossing van haas elke probleem
in die land aldeur maar gesien word in die sentralisering van mag nie. Dit
is ook die geval met hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp. Kragtens hierdie
wysigingswetsontwerp kry die Minister gesag oor rade van
onderwysinstellings wat hy voorheen nie gehad het nie; onder meer oor
kardinale aspekte van die finansies van hoëronderwysinstellings, die
bevoegdheid om die bestek en omvang van hulle werksaamhede te bepaal, en
selfs oor die verandering van 'n instelling se naam.

Die registrateur kry die bevoegdheid om registrasie te belet al voldoen die
aansoeker aan al die vereistes. Op hierdie wyse kom die outonomie van die
inrigtings in gedrang. Ons moet onthou, daar is reeds kanale vir
ministeriële betrokkenheid. Hy doen sekere benoemings in die rade van
inrigtings. Die hand wat die begroting uitdeel, is ook reeds die hand wat
die beheer uitoefen. Nou kry hy nog meer mag. Ons probleem met hierdie
wetgewing is dat daar geen onderskeid getref word nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The AEB understands that major problems exist in the sphere of higher
education. On the one hand South Africa has some of the best tertiary
institutions in the world, and on the other there are institutions with
great problems.

However, we do not have understanding for the fact that the solution to
virtually every problem in the country is forever seen to lie in the
centralisation of power. This is also the case with this amending Bill. In
terms of this amending Bill the Minister acquires authority over councils
of educational institutions which he did not have before; inter alia
regarding cardinal aspects of the finances of higher education
institutions, the authority to determine the range and scope of their
activities, and even regarding the change of the name of an institution.

The registrar has the authority to refuse registration even if an applicant
meets all the requirements. In this way the autonomy of the institutions is
prejudiced. We must remember that there are already channels for
ministerial involvement. He makes certain nominations to the councils of
institutions. Furthermore, the hand that divides up the budget is the hand
that is already exercising control. Now he receives even more power. Our
problem with this legislation is that no distinction is made.]

No allowance is made for differentiation, and there is no possibility for
higher education institutions to move away from this ministerial
supervision through a track record of proven performance and merit.

Die AEB het voorgestel dat die Minister die bevoegdheid wat hierdie
wysigingswetsontwerp hom gee, moet uitoefen in oorleg met die rade van die
onderskeie inrigtings. Die ANC wou nie daaraan byt nie. Ons moet onthou,
besluite en optrede wat nie berus op die oorreding en samewerking van
instansies nie, maar wat outoritêr afgedwing word, is van meet af aan tot
mislukking gedoem. Die ANC-lede was nie eens bereid tot die floue ``ná
oorleg met die raad'' nie.

Ernstige finansiële beperkings word op die rade van die
hoëronderwysinstellings gelê, weer eens sonder onderskeid. Elke inrigting
sal ingevolge hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp eintlik in beginsel onder 'n
soort finansiële administrasie geplaas word. Dit word vir ons 'n ernstige
probleem. Reformeer en transformeer word dikwels vir die ANC sinoniem met
sentraliseer, telkens met die verskoning dat daar 'n krisis is.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The AEB recommended that the Minister should exercise the authority which
this amending Bill affords him, in consultation with the councils of the
various institutions. The ANC did not want to accept that. We must remember
that decisions and actions which are not based on the persuasion and co-
operation of institutions, but which are enforced in an authoritarian
manner, are doomed to failure from the start. The ANC members were not even
prepared to accept the mild wording ``after consultation with the
council''.

Serious financial limitations are placed on the councils of the higher
education institutions, once again without distinction. In terms of this
amending Bill every institution will actually, in principle, be placed
under a type of financial administration. This becomes a serious problem
for us. To the ANC reform and transformation are often synonymous with
centralisation, time and again with the excuse that there is a crisis.]

To use the hon the Minister's words, ``there is a mischief''.

Elke krisis in Suid-Afrika word dan egter beskou as 'n rede vir
ministeriële ingrype.

Die oordeel van die AEB is dat ware demokrasie en vryheid in 'n land nie
net geleë is in die vryheid van die individu nie, maar ook in die outonomie
van sy burgerlike instellings. Die huidige Minister het die beste
bedoelings. Die vraag is egter of hulle hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp sou
goedgekeur het as mnr De Beer nog die Minister was.

Die AEB opponeer elke stuk wetgewing wat 'n ingryp maak in die outonomie
van gemeenskapsinstellings. Daarom sal ons hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp ook
opponeer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[However, every crisis in South Africa is then regarded as a reason for
ministerial intervention.

The opinion of the AEB is that true democracy and freedom in a country are
not only based on the freedom of the individual, but also on the autonomy
of its civic institutions. The current Minister has the best intentions.
However, the question is whether they would have approved this amending
Bill if Mr De Beer were still the Minister.

The AEB opposes every piece of legislation that intervenes in the autonomy
of community institutions. Therefore, we shall also oppose this amending
Bill.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Chairperson, the Higher Education Amendment Bill seeks to
solve some problems manifesting themselves in the area of tertiary
education and, by so doing, protects both students and the integrity of
this level of education in our country.

One such problem is the poor management of resources by some universities
and technikons, as well as the undertaking of expensive projects that are
beyond the financial capacities of the institutions concerned.

As a results, some institutions find themselves in huge debts that have a
debilitating effect on their proper and efficient functioning.

The Bill proposes restricting the ability of institutions to put themselves
in financial trouble. While some of us wholeheartedly agree that the
Ministry of Education must intervene, and we have been assured that the
Ministry has sufficient capacity to handle applications by institutions for
expenditure beyond a stipulated amount, we worry that we might be creating
bigger bureaucratic hurdles in the Ministry of Education, which would
hamper the smooth and efficient running of the healthy institutions. We
fear we might be solving a problem by creating another one.

The other problem is the proliferation of private institutions of higher
learning, both local and foreign, in our country. Some are of dubious
character, dubious quality, origin and intention. Many parents and students
have fallen victim to some of these universities or colleges.

This Bill seeks to strengthen the registration process of these private
institutions and to impose penalties for those who provide tertiary
training without registration. This will protect our people against some of
these institutions which have questionable credentials while, at the same
time, it will protect those institutions that provide quality education.
Azapo will support the Bill. [Applause.]

Dr J BENJAMIN: Chairperson and hon members, this House passed the Higher
Education Act of 1997 and the Education White Paper 3 with the intention of
transforming higher education from its apartheid base.
Apartheid policies permeated the higher education system, both in terms of
structure and content, causing irreparable damage to the development of our
society. So deep was this racist ideology embedded within the system of
higher education that black campuses were often referred to as microcosms
of the broader society. The extent to which black campuses became targets
for attack from security forces in the 1970s and 1980s bears witness to
this assertion.

It is ironic that the DP and the New NP use words such as ``onslaught'',
``threat'', ``undermining'', and ``draconian measures''. This is part of
their culture, not ours.

The Constitution, the Higher Education Act of 1997 and the Education White
Paper 3 of 1997 provided for the democratisation of institutions to ensure
autonomy and academic freedom. The doors of learning were to be opened,
through physical access, but also making the deeper levels of higher
education accessible, that is, by producing knowledge through reearch -
knowledge that would address both the challenges of national development
and global competition.

The expected massification of higher institutions did not materialise. This
is not surprising, given that during this debate the previous DP speaker
referred to the transformation of the campuses, and access and
representivity as the greatest crisis facing certain institutions.

It is no wonder that, at present, white universities now reap the benefits
of increased black students. Despite this, it seems as if the higher intake
of black students is still seating in distant and satellite campuses.

The higher education system has been characterised by a number of
inefficiencies which, no doubt, cannot be separated from the irreparable
damage created in the past through depriving the majority of our people the
opportunity of having access to educational, managerial and economic
resources.

Last week the Minister explained to this House the different factors which
account for the low enrolment of students in black institutions. One of the
factors mentioned was the proliferation of private higher institutions that
operate for profit and which are unregulated. The Council for Higher
Education recommended to the Minister in December 1999 the following:
Firstly, the examination of the generally unplanned growth of private
higher education institutions on the basis of national need and in the
light of the Constitution.

Secondly, the re-examination of the present legislation and the development
of a regulatory framework for higher education as a matter of urgency, and,
thirdly, the placing of a moratorium on the registration of new and
especially multipurpose private higher education institutions ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I do not think it is possible
for the speaker to be heard. The conferencing is now slightly dominating
the main purpose of this House.

Dr J BENJAMIN: I was saying that the Council for Higher Education had
recommended to the Minister that he place a moratorium on the registration
of new and especially multipurpose private higher education institutions,
and on the development of new joint programmes between the public and
private higher education institutions.

The legislation that is being considered by the House is therefore, a
result of extensive consultation with the Council For Higher Education as
well as those stakeholders consulted by the department and through the
parliamentary process of public hearings. This bill has been introduced to
provide for Government regulation of the higher education sector as a
whole, both in terms of financial accountability measures and in terms of
regulating the private higher education institutions.

Initially, when the doors of learning were opened, the apologists of White
privilege clung to their monopoly over the resources by clamouring for
higher academic standards. Today, it suits those who continue to oppose
change, to oppose measures that will ensure that institutions do not offer
narrow skills-based programmes primarily for the purpose of making a profit
in competition with public institutions offering holistic courses that are
addressing the national need for advancing skills and scientific knowledge.

The provision of clause 2 enables the Minister to determine the scope and
range of operations of the different higher education institutions. Far
from this being draconian measures, as indicated by the DA, these
provisions allow for the co-ordinated development of the differentiated
system of higher education. Government through the Ministry must be enabled
to ensure that policy is set, across the board, in order to distinguish
between a university that is offering broad and diverse programmes and a
fly by night institution operating on the basis of a profit motive. It is
the duty of the democratically elected Government to protect the public
against unscrupulous practices in the private sector.

While the smaller opposition parties support this Bill, the DA is
constantly opposed to giving the power to the Minister to govern
effectively. In their attempt to limit the power of Government to effect
transformation in the interest of the vast majority of this country they
elevate the principle of institutional autonomy to that of a holy cow at
the expense of public accountability. Institutional autonomy and public
accountability go hand in hand. Institutions receiving public funds must
account to the broader society and must educate in the national interest,
and must meet national policy goals and priorities as set out in the
education white paper number three of 1997.

The Minister has pointed out the need for co-operative government and other
members have argued that the kind of autonomy the DA wants is not
attainable even in Britain, Australia or any other country that we know of.
The Higher Education Amendment Bill is intended to enable the Minister to
effect the balance between private and public institutions in the interest
of developing a single, nationally co-ordinated - though differentiated -
higher education system addressing national goals.

The Constitution grants the right for private institutions to exist,
provided that such institutions are comparable to public institutions. The
provision that private institutions register under the Companies Act
provides a framework within which a private higher education institution
can be accountable to the public in the same way as the public institutions
require a council. The Board of Directors serves to provide a mechanism for
financial accountability for the submission of audits, and it provides for
small as well as large companies.

The ANC supports the Higher Education Amendment Bill and salutes the IFP,
the UDM and all the other smaller opposition parties who have been prepared
to understand and reason, rather than oppose simply for the sake of
opposing.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Mr Chairperson, this morning I spoke to 300
students and staff of the University of Cape Town's Faculty of Medical
Science. I think members of the House would have been enlightened by
attending that meeting. At their request, I talked about the pace of
transformation.

This is a word that never appears from the opposition. Transformation is a
swear word. [Interjections.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Did you ask them if HIV causes Aids?

The MINISTER: They talk about equity. Equity is a small word with enormous
meanings. [Interjections.]

Mr G B D MCINTOSH: What are you doing about Fort Hare?

The MINISTER: It sticks in their throats. I will talk to the hon member
privately. This Natalian has a nerve to talk about my being a colonial
master. He comes from a province that adopted Shepstone's policy of
separation, the older qualities of Milner's kindergarten.
I am ashamed that the FF could associate with Milner's kindergarten of
cultural suppression and language suppression. [Interjections.] What he is
afraid of is not my being a dictator. He might be calling me that, but what
he is afraid of, as in J M Coetzee's book, are the barbarians at the gate.
What basically they are afraid of is that barbarians will take over this
education.

What came out of this meeting with the UCT students was an extraordinary
responsiveness from Black and White. However, we must grapple with the
issues, that the status quo, that `things will never change' is not good
enough.

I am afraid to say this. The DP and the New NP, whatever fancy names they
have, have never supported any progressive piece of education legislation
since 1994. [Interjections.] Never! In fact, they mobilised against the
Schools Act and took it to the Constitutional Court. [Interjections.]
Nobody else took the Schools Act to the Constitutional Court. They did it,
and the Constitutional Court unanimously rejected them. [Interjections.]
There was a lot of hoo-ha about it.

I must remind the hon member, Adv Gaum, that a first year law student knows
that no right is absolute, and that the Constitutional Court has upheld the
restrictions imposed by the Constitution in a liberal democracy. He cannot
say that the registrar will be a law unto himself because there is, of
course, the procedures of the Administrative Justice Act which we passed
and one must give reasons. Secondly, there is the whole question of an
appeal to the Minister. Thirdly, even Adv Gaum ... [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: The hon advocate!

The MINISTER: ... the hon Adv Gaum, must recognise that there are enormous
restrictions placed on this.
It is not in a state of agitation, it is in a state of shame that I make
these points, because I am ashamed. I have this increasingly developing
``gatvol'' factor - I think ``gatvol'' is a wonderful word - about this
obstructionism that comes on every progressive piece of legislation.
[Interjections.]

Of course, the more depressing thing is that there is no interaction
between what happens in the portfolio committee and the speeches made here.
There is no interaction.

I feel that Mr Ntuli - who is the most dispassionate, most involved person
in education - has to carry the burden of an impossible brief from the DP.
[Interjections.] A burden that he cannot fulfil because he is asked to do
things that basically he cannot have any conviction over, and because,
fundamentally he recognises that one cannot have subsidy cuts. Subsidy cuts
take place afterwards. One wants to prevent overdraft exploitation and that
is a fundamental thing.

One calls upon the adminstrator. As an administrator, it is an extreme step
to take over the running of the whole institution.

Therefore, ours is a very practical thing. It does not go far. Mr Gaum
wants the market to decide everything. This is a kind of a ``bitch
goddess'', as D H Lawrence used to say. The market with the full powers of
the ``bitch goddess''. When is the market interested in providing the full
range of courses, such as modern languages and sociology? When is the
market interested in providing history courses? It is interested in what
pays - profits.

Let me say it quite clearly: I am not against the private sector. We have
had 700 applications from private-sector bodies who want to register. This
week, I overruled the Registrar-general. I have overruled the Director-
General of the department in three cases and upheld the appeal, because
they are providers of that information.

Then, let me tell the House that we will have to recruit more staff, both
for the regulation of the private sector and, of course, for implementation
of the funding mechanism, and, especially, the restrictions on overdrafts.
We will have to do that because we need speedy interventions from the
Government. We cannot continue in this way, because we understand that the
South African private sector is playing a significant part, but there must
be proper regulation.

As far as overseas bodies are concerned, they will not fulfill the minimum
regulations that we impose. They come here because of the financial
problems that they are having overseas. The cream of the students are here.
They provide courses in information technology, science and MBAs. There are
25 MBA courses in South Africa at enormous fees. In fact, they impact
directly on highly prestigious universities such as the Witwatersrand
University, next door to them. We must take this into account. It would be
irresponsible of us not to take this into account. Of course, Mr Moonsamy
is right. We will have a national plan which will have to be implemented,
and some of the powers that will be there in the new Bill, will be used to
implement the national plan.

However, this should be done openly, and the House will be involved in
this. Every power exercised here must be done after consultation with the
Council for Higher Education. But so much for being a dictator. In fact, as
the Minister of Water Affairs, I transferred most of the powers to
catchment management bodies. Therefore, what we want to do is to have a
rational system based on the transformation model which is vital for our
country.

We should be gatvol. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] We should be gatvol about
the continuing inequalities, the lack of access and the lack of promotion
and the lack promotion for women senior posts. I commend this Bill to the
House. [Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 206: Abrahams, T; Abram, S; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M
  N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Belot, S T; Benjamin, J; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N
  R; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M N; Capa, R Z N;
  Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chikane, M M; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-
  Kasper, M P; Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N;
  Didiza, A T; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Duma, N M;
  Fankomo, F C; Fazzie, M H; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T; Fihla, N B;
  Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; Gcina, C I; George, M E;
  Gerber, P-J A; Gininda, M S; Gomomo, P J; Goosen, A D; Govender, P;
  Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C;
  Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R;
  Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, N N;
  Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A;
  Landers, L T; Leeuw, S J; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lobe, M C;
  Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Maduna, P M;
  Magashule, E S; Magazi, M N; Mahlangu, G L; Mahlangu, M J; Maimane, D S;
  Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C
  J; Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I;
  Mashimbye, J N; Masithela, N H; Mathebe, P M; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M;
  Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mbuyazi, L R;
  Mfundisi, I S; Mgidi, J S; Mkhatshwa, S; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N;
  Mngomezulu, G P; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J;
  Mohamed, I J; Mohlala, R J B; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G;
  Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M;
  Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Mothoagae, P K; Mpaka, H M; Mpehle, M;
  Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mtsweni, N S; Mutsila, I; Mzizi, M A; Nair, B;
  Nash, J H; Ncinane, I Z; Ncube, N Z; Ndabandaba, L B G; Nel, A C; Nene, N
  M; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V; Ngubeni, J M; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa,
  D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M; Nqodi, S B; Ntshangase, I B;
  Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, L P M; Oliphant, G G; Pahad, A G H;
  Phala, M J; Phantsi, E; Pieterse, R D; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M;
  Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P; Rasmeni, S M; Ripinga, S
  S; Schneemann, G D; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C;
  September, R K; Serote, M W; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sibiya, M S M;
  Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D J;
  Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H; Smith, V G; Solo, B M;
  Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B;
  Tolo, L J; Tsheole, N M; Tshivhase, T J; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I;
  Van der Merwe, J H; Van Wyk, A (Annelize); Van Wyk, J F; Verwoerd, M;
  Vilakazi, B H; Vos, S C; Woods, G; Xingwana, L M T; Yengeni, T S; Zita,
  L; Zondo, R P.

  NOES - 47: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bell, B G; Beukman, F; Blaas, A;
  Bruce, N S; Clelland, N J; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Dowry, J J;
  Durand, J; Ellis, M J; Gaum, A H; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Gous, S J;
  Greyling, C H F; Grobler, G A J; Heine, R J; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V;
  Lee, T D; Leon, A J; Le Roux, J W; Maluleke, D K; McIntosh, G B D;
  Moorcroft, E K; Morkel, C M; Nel, A H; Niemann, J J; Ntuli, R S;
  Opperman, S E; Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Schalkwyk, P J; Schippers, J;
  Schmidt, H C; Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smit, H A; Swart, P S;
  Taljaard, R; Van Jaarsveld, A Z A; Van Niekerk, A I; Van Wyk, A (Anna);
  Viljoen, C L.

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

The House adjourned at 17:17.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           MONDAY, 2 OCTOBER 2000

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled and are now referred to the relevant
     committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs. It is also referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration and report:
         Special Review by the Auditor-General of the Selection Process of
         Strategic Defence Packages for the Acquisition of Armaments at the
         Department of Defence [RP 161-2000].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Select Committee on Finance:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Corporation for
              Public Deposits for 1999-2000.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
              Southern Africa for 1999-2000.

         (c)     Government Notice No R.896 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21545 dated 8 September 2000, Amendment of
              Prescribed Fees made in terms of section 36 of the Pension
              Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport and to the Select Committee on Public Services:


         (a)     Report of the Regulating Committee for the Airports
              Company and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Companies for
              1999-2000.

         (b)     Report of the Regulating Committee for the Airports
              Company and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Companies:
              Approach to the 2001/2 - 2005/6 Permissions.


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Select Security
         and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Government Notice No R.501 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21204 dated 19 May 2000, Amendment of the Rules of
              the Magistrates' Courts made in terms of the Rules Board for
              Courts of Law Act, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).

         (b)     Government Notice No R.502 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21204 dated 19 May 2000, Amendment of the rules
              regulating the conduct of the proceedings of the several
              Provincial and Local Divisions of the High Court of South
              Africa, made in terms of the Rules Board for Courts of Law
              Act, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).

         (c)     Proclamation No R.38 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21353 dated 7 July 2000, Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, made in terms
              of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

         (d)     Proclamation No R.44 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21410 dated 28 July 2000, Commencement of the Justice Laws
              Rationalisation Act, 1996 (Act No 18 of 1996).

         (e)     Proclamation No R.52 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21529 dated 1 September 2000, Commencement of sections 1 to
              5 and 10 of the Judicial Matters Second Amendment Act, 1998
              (Act No 122 of 1998).
         (f)     Proclamation No R.53 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21529 dated 1 September 2000, Commencement of section 2 of
              the Sheriffs Amendment Act, 1998 (Act No 74 of 1998).

         (g)     Proclamation No R.54 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21529 dated 1 September 2000, Commencement of sections 1,
              2, 3, 4(2), 5, 6, 29 (with the exception of subsection (2)),
              32, 33, and 34(1) of the Promotion of Equality and Prevention
              of Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000 (Act No 4 of 2000).

         (h)     Government Notice No R.850 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21504 dated 1 September 2000, Amendment of
              Regulations made in terms of the Prevention of Organised Crime
              Act, 1998 (Act No 121 of 1998).

         (i)     Government Notice No R.865 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21519 dated 1 September 2000, Determination of
              amounts and exclusion of employees for the purposes of section
              98A of the Insolvency Act, 1936 (Act No 24 of 1936).
         (j)     Government Notice No R.874 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21517 dated 1 September 2000, Establishment of
              Equality Review Committee and appointment of members thereof,
              made in terms of the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of
              Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000 (Act No 4 of 2000).


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and to the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
         report:
          
         Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
         Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration for 1998-99, including
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 1998-
         99.


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health and to the Select Committee on Social Services:


         (a)     Government Notice No R.650 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21313 dated 30 June 2000, Amendment of Regulations
              made in terms of the Medical Schemes Act, 1998.

         (b)     Government Notice No R.755 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21399 dated 28 July 2000, Amendment of Regulations
              relating to milk and dairy products made in terms of the
              Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972.

         (c)     Government Notice No R.837 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21486 dated 25 August 2000, Amendment of
              Regulations relating to milk and dairy products made in terms
              of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972.

         (d)     Government Notice No 757 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21409 dated 28 July 2000, Notice of ratification of
              Protocol on Health in Southern African Development Community
              (SADC).

         (e)     Government Notice No R.836 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21486 dated 25 August 2000, Amendment of
              regulations regarding maximum limits for pesticide residues
              made in terms of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants
              Act, 1972.

         (f)     Government Notice No 838 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21483 dated 25 August 2000, Explanatory summary on
              Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Amendment Bill, 2000 published for comment.

         (g)     Government Notice No R.872 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21533 dated 8 September 2000, Regulations regarding
              the use of names which may not be used made in terms of the
              Medical, Dental and Supplementary Health Service Professions
              Act, 1974.

         (h)     Government Notice No R.872 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21533 dated 8 September 2000, Regulations on
              flouridating water supplies made in terms of the Health Laws
              Amendment Act, 1977.

         (i)     Government Notice No R.921 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21552 dated 15 September 2000, Regulations
              regarding fees to be paid to the South African Nursing Council
              made in terms of the Nursing Act, 1978.

         (j)     Government Notice No R.925 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21552 dated 15 September 2000, Regulations defining
              scope of profession of emergency care made in terms of the
              Medical, Dental and Supplementary Health Service Professions
              Act, 1974.

         (k)     Government Notice No R.943 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21569 dated 22 September 2000, Regulations made in
              terms of the Medical Schemes Act, 1998.

         (l)     Government Notice No 942 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21569 dated 22 September 2000, Explanatory summary
              of the Mental Health Care Bill, 2001 published for comment.

         (m) Government Notice No 876 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21535 dated 4 September 2000, Publication of the
              Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 6 of 2000).


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs:
          
         Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
         Industrial Innovation for 1999-2000.

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Education:


     (1)    Government Notice No 777 published in the Government Gazette No
         21444 dated 11 August 2000, The date on which TEFSA ceases its
         functions made in terms of the National Student Financial Aid
         Scheme Act, 1999 (Act No 56 of 1999).

     (2)    Government Notice No 789 published in the Government Gazette No
         21438 dated 11 August 2000, Approval that the pilot project Travel
         and Tourism Standard Grade, Grade 10 - 12 becomes a fully fledged
         instructional offering, made in terms of the National Education
         Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

     (3)    Government Notice No R.848 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21501 dated 1 September 2000, Correction notice to Government
         Gazette No 21192 dated 18 May 2000, made in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

     (4)    Government Notice No 3102 published in the Government Gazette No
         21539 dated 6 September 2000, Call for public comment on draft
         document - The National Policy Framework on Whole-school
         Evaluation, made in terms of the National Education Policy Act,
         1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

National Assembly:

Bills:


     1 The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


         (1)     Wetsontwerp op Plaaslike Regering: Munisipale Stelsels [W
              27 - 2000].


              The Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill [B 27 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) was introduced by the Minister
              for Provincial and Local Government on 5 May 2000 and referred
              to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated 6
     September 2000:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered and
     examined the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
     of Vote 4: Agriculture for the year ended 31 March 1999 [RP 129-99], as
     well as certain papers referred to it, and having heard evidence,
     reports as follows:


     1.     Unauthorised expenditure (Par 2.2.1(a), page 2)

         The Committee heard evidence on the exceeding of delegated
         authority by a director in the Department when he approved
         expenditure of approximately R150 000, which was R136 303 more
         than the delegated approval level. Although the Committee welcomes
         the Director-General being accompanied to the hearing by the
         official concerned, for that official to personally clarify the
         circumstances, the Committee is disappointed that the Accounting
         Officer had not conducted a formal enquiry, as required by the
         applicable Public Service Regulations. It is the Committee's view
         that when heads of department appear before the Committee, all the
         appropriate internal and, if necessary, external disciplinary and
         other administrative and human resource practices should have been
         completed within the responsibility sphere of heads of department.
         The Committee wishes to be presented with a clear indication of
         the extent of possible negligence, culpability or mala fides, and
         whether the State suffered any loss. As set out in section
         38(1)(h) of the Public Finance Management Act, it is the
         responsibility of the accounting officer to -


              "take effective and appropriate disciplinary steps against any
              official in the service of the department who -


                  (ii) commits an act which undermines the financial
                         management and internal control system of the
                         department, ... or

                  (iii)      makes or permits an unauthorised expenditure,
                         irregular expenditure or fruitless and wasteful
                         expenditure;".


         The flouting of limits in terms of delegated authority is totally
         unacceptable to the Committee, and the Committee was not convinced
         that the official concerned did not have better options in terms
         of which to have managed the extension of the contract.

         Without wishing to delay progress in this matter unnecessarily,
         but in view of the abovementioned, the Committee recommends that
         the Director-General provide at least the following further
         information to the Committee before it can make a recommendation
         to Parliament on the unauthorised expenditure in question:

         The Accounting Officer must provide assurance that -


         (1)     no form of favouritism was evident during the awarding of
              the contract to the service provider in question, or that
              anyone unduly benefitted;

         (2)     in future a system exists whereby appropriate enquiry and
              disciplinary procedures are initiated in all cases where
              regulations are breached; and
         (3)     appropriate processes exist within the Department to
              prevent unauthorised staff committing the Department to
              contracts of an extended nature.


     2.     Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP)
         (Part C of Report, page 35)

         The Committee heard further evidence on the corporatisation of
         Onderstepoort, with the aim of establishing a company so that it
         can negotiate the terms of a shareholder arrangement or a
         partnership arrangement in order to attract additional capital.
         The Committee took note of the procedural weaknesses regarding the
         appointment of the Board and the Chief Executive Officer; it was
         also not clear what impact the corporatisation process would have
         on the OBP Board's relationship with the State as the primary
         shareholder. The Committee also took note that the OBP has not yet
         been listed as a public entity, as was requested by the
         Department.
         The Committee recommends that the Director-General provide the
         following information on the corporatisation process to
         Parliament:
         (1)     Details on the chairperson and members of the Board, and
              which of the members bring financial expertise to the Board.

         (2)     Whether a Chief Executive Officer has been appointed and,
              if not, when this will take place.

         (3)     How the possible external shareholder interests will be
              balanced against the interests of the State as shareholder.

         (4)     Whether the financial management system is fully
              functional and producing appropriate and reliable monthly
              management information by the third week of the following
              month, and whether this information is used by management.

         (5)     Whether a shareholder agreement has been entered into with
              the Board, and what the salient features of the agreement are.


         In addition, the National Treasury must immediately indicate by
         which date the OBP will be listed as a public entity.


     3.     Financial management


         The Committee wishes to commend the Department on the progress
         made with the establishment of a reliable internal audit function.
         The Committee recommends that the chairperson of the Audit
         Committee provide the Committee with a brief report on the
         following:


         (1)     The risk profile of the Department, based on a proper risk
              analysis by the internal auditors of the Department's
              operations.

         (2)     A brief report on the current effectiveness of the
              internal audit section, including the appropriateness of the
              scope of its audit planning.

         (3)     An indication of whether the internal auditors' work
              complies with the standards of the Institute of Internal
              Auditors (IIA), as required by new Treasury Regulation 3.2.5,
              and if not, which standards are applied in the meantime and by
              when they will be able to comply with the IIA standards; and

         (4)     an indication of the responsiveness of the Department's
              management to the findings of the internal auditors.


     4.     Budgeting and planning


         The Committee is encouraged by the Accounting Officer's intentions
         of ensuring that departmental programmes have "clearly targeted
         programmes" that will be measured in terms of their impact, and
         that many of the programmes will be targeted at the poor.

         In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Accounting
         Officer ensure that the Department timeously prepare itself to
         apply proper principles of performance budgeting, as required in
         terms of the strategic plan, to be submitted to the relevant
         Executive Authority as well as the National Treasury by 30 June
         2001 for the MTEF period commencing 1 April 2002.


     5.     Production Loan Scheme (Par 3.1, page 2)

         Four cases have been referred to the State Attorney for recovery
         of outstanding debts. In two cases, agreements have been entered
         into to repay amounts on a monthly basis. The Committee has been
         assured by the Director-General that she is exerting pressure on
         the State Attorney to enter into acceptable pay-back arrangements
         regarding Bakgaga Bakopa and CPAC.

         The Committee has been informed that it is likely that the
         outstanding debts will be recovered in all four cases.


     6.     Loan securities


         The Committee took note of the decrease of 1 769 accounts,
         compared with previous years. A total of 130 accounts have been
         written off, and their value, as well as the value of accounts
         that have been repaid, must be supplied to the Committee by the
         Director-General.

         Of concern to the Committee is the number of reported losses to
         the State through write-offs. The National Treasury must monitor
         this to ensure that the Department's risk management is adequate,
         and that the conditions in terms of which these are written off,
         are not too lenient.


     7.     Loans to farmers


         The Committee has been assured that the reported shortcomings in
         this regard have been addressed.


     8.     Agricultural Credit Account Financing of agricultural equipment:
         Belarus tractors
         (Par 3.1, Part C of Report, page 24)

         With respect to this matter, the Department must provide the
         Committee with clarity on the legal position, and must ensure that
         support in terms of spares and a local agent will be sustained.


     Report to be considered.
2.    Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated 20
     September 2000:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered and
     examined the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
     of Vote 34: Trade and Industry for the year ended 31 March 1999 [RP 158-
     99], as well as certain papers referred to it, and having heard
     evidence, reports as follows:


     1.     Internal control [Par 3.7.2, page 7]

         The Committee heard evidence relating to the reported shortcomings
         in the internal controls of the Department. It is encouraging to
         note the corrective steps taken by the Department to prevent a
         recurrence of the reported shortcomings. However, the Director-
         General is reminded that internal control forms one of the main
         pillars of effective financial management in any organisation, and
         therefore the Committee cannot over-emphasise its importance.

         It was evident that the Department had a significant problem
         regarding the integration of management information systems. The
         Committee therefore recommends that the Accounting Officer consult
         with the National Treasury on how to urgently address the
         deficiencies, including the interface between BAS and LOGIS, and
         report to the Committee on how the matter will be resolved.
         Thereafter, the Accounting Officer must report to the Committee
         quarterly on the progress made.


     2.     Provisioning Administration System [Paragraph 2.2.1, page 2]

         The Committee notes the evidence by the Department and the former
         Department of State Expenditure relating to the transfer to LOGIS.
         However, the Committee is concerned about the process followed to
         establish absolute certainty that the State did not suffer any
         loss. The Committee has doubts about the "red-lining" process that
         was used in this case.

         The Committee wishes to recommend that in future "red-lining"
         should always be regarded as a last resort, only after full
         consultation with the National Treasury.


     3.     Unauthorised expenditure [Paragraph 2.2.2, page 3]

         The Committee commends the Department for having identified and
         acted on the matter of unauthorised expenditure. The Committee
         also welcomes the establishment of the financial control
         committee, aimed at, inter alia, preventing such incidents in
         future.


         (1)     The Committee heard evidence on the payment of an amount
              of approximately R108 970 to a consultancy group, cost which
              should have been borne by the National Lotteries Board. The
              Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer confirm the
              exact amount in question and whether value had been received
              for the services provided by the firm in question, before
              considering a recommendation on the authorisation thereof.

         (2)     The Committee notes that an amount of R4 384 922,09 was
              reported by the Auditor-General as unauthorised expenditure
              incurred over a period of three financial years. The
              expenditure is reported as expenditure of a "technical
              nature", in respect of which the State had not suffered any
              loss and where no mala fides were at stake. The Committee
              therefore recommends that the amount be authorised by
              Parliament.

         (3)     In its Nineteenth Report for 1999, the Committee
              recommended that an amount of R1 199 022,19 in respect of the
              hosting of the Second National Conference on Small Business
              not be authorised. Having received further information in this
              regard, the Committee feels it is in a position to now
              recommend authorisation of the amount in question.


     4.     Debtors [Par 3.1, page 4; par 3.3, page 6]

         The Committee notes that debtors relating to the now terminated
         General Export Incentive Scheme (GEIS) have escalated owing to new
         disputable claims identified during the verification process that
         the Department had embarked upon, as well as the interest charged
         on the amounts owing. The Committee also notes that the Department
         was dependent on the assistance of the State Attorney for legal
         action in respect of disputed claims. Having noted the list of
         companies that the State Attorney is dealing with, it is obvious
         that a substantial amount of time will be required to clear up all
         the cases. The danger of companies going into liquidation is a
         matter of concern to the Committee.

         The Committee therefore recommends that the Accounting Officer -


         (1)     consider separating the debtors under GEIS from the normal
              debtors; and


         (2)     provide a brief progress report on -


              (a) the verification process;


              (b) the various cases being dealt with by the State Attorney;
                  and
              (c) whether any debts have prescribed.


     5.     Phase VI - Local Content Programme [Par 3.2, page 5]

         The Committee noted a number of cases of suspected irregularities
         in respect of the ceding of export credits to motor vehicle
         manufacturers and the accompanying rebates against excise duty.
         The Committee awaits the Accounting Officer's progress report in
         this regard.


     6.     Unspent Funds [Paragraph 3.5, page 6]

         The Committee recommends that the Department submit a plan on how
         they intend overseeing the funds allocated and voted by Parliament
         before the end of February 2001.


     7.     Backlog [Trade Mark Applications]


         The lengthy delay in processing Trade Mark Applications is totally
         unacceptable, and the Committee requests a report on the current
         position and a quarterly report in future. The Committee notes the
         appointment of 12 additional staff members, and trusts that the
         extra resources will speed up the issuing of Trade Marks to
         applicants.


     Report to be considered.

3.    Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated
     20 September 2000:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 15: Foreign
     Affairs for the year ended 31 March 1999 [RP 138-99], as well as
     certain papers referred to it, and having heard evidence, reports as
     follows:


     1.     Financial management


         Compared with the previous Report of the Auditor-General, the
         current Report generally points to an improvement in financial
         management. The Committtee also recognises the difficulty faced by
         the Accounting Officer and financial managers in trying to remain
         within budgetary limits, owing to the volatility of the exchange
         rate.

         The Committee wishes to report on the following matters dealt with
         during the hearing, which the Accounting Officer should attend to:


         (1)     Audit Committee and internal audit


              The Committee was informed that by 1 April 2000 the Audit
              Committee will be constituted in terms of the requirements of
              section 77 of the Public Finance Management Act.

              The Committee recommends that it be furnished with a report
              from the chairperson of the newly constituted Audit Committee,
              containing the following information:


              (a) Details of the members of the Audit Committee.


              (b) A copy of the Audit Committee's own charter and date of
                  adoption, as well as a copy of the internal audit
                  section's charter, as ratified by the new Audit
                  Committee.


              (c) A brief report on the internal control systems within the
                  Department.


              (d) Whether the internal auditors have conducted a risk
                  analysis of the Department's operations, and if so,
                  whether the Audit Committee is satisfied with such
                  analysis.


              (e) A brief report on the effectiveness of the internal audit
                  section, including their audit planning.


              (f) An indication of whether the internal auditors' work
                  complies with the standards of the Institute of Internal
                  Auditors (IIA), as required by new Treasury Regulation
                  3.2.5, and if not, which standards are applied in the
                  meantime and by when they will be able to comply with the
                  IIA standards.
              (g) An indication of the responsiveness of the Department's
                  management to the findings of the internal auditors.


         (2)     Public Finance Management Act implementation


              The Committee is seriously concerned about the problems
              reported by the Department on its information technology
              capacity and the resultant effect on financial management
              practices. As a consequence, the Department has expressed
              doubt about its ability to deal with certain requirements of
              the Public Finance Management Act, claiming that, for example,
              it will not be able to close its books and submit financial
              statements for auditing within two months after the end of the
              financial year. Attempts at rationalising its IT systems and
              rolling out appropriate new software are being delayed by the
              National Treasury's requirement that such software must be
              able to interface with its own software, but that the
              specifications of that software have not been finalised yet.
              The Department is also faced with financial constraints with
              regard to new software to be purchased, estimated at between
              R9 million and R12 million.

              The Department also reported experiencing problems with the
              appointment of financial management staff with appropriate
              expertise, especially with respect to budgeting.

              The Committee recommends as follows:


              (a) That the National Treasury indicate by when final
                  specifications will be available to all departments
                  regarding interface requirements, and to what extent
                  departments may proceed with the purchase of financial
                  management software.


              (b) That the Accounting Officer of the Department indicate
                  whether progress has been made since the hearing on
                  obtaining the necessary funding for the purchase of
                  financial management software once the Department has
                  received the necessary information, enabling it to
                  proceed. In this respect, the Committee wishes to point
                  out to the Accounting Officer that in terms of section
                  38(1)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, he "must
                  ensure that the Department has and maintains effective,
                  efficient and transparent systems of financial and risk
                  management and internal control".


         (3)     Overspending of budget (unauthorised expenditure)


              The Committee notes the explanation that the excess of
              R8 378 896,51 in respect of the allocation to Programme 2:
              Foreign Relations was due to foreign exchange losses incurred
              during a year of considerable foreign exchange volatility,
              which the Department did not succeed in managing down
              completely before the end of the financial year, despite
              various bold steps taken by it to do so in a short period of
              five months. The Committee commends the Accounting Officer and
              staff on managing to bring the deficit down to the level it
              had, thereby limiting the eventual excess on the Budget Vote.
              The Committee has also taken note of steps taken by the
              Department and the National Treasury, subsequent to the
              hearing, to better plan through the budget process for the
              possible effect of foreign exchange losses on the budget.


              (a) In view of the circumstances, the Committee recommends
                  that Parliament authorise the amount in question.


              (b) In addition, the Committee recommends that -


                  (i)  in general, effective monitoring of the Department's
                         expenditure continue throughout the year in respect
                         of all its programmes and subprogrammes and that,
                         where necessary, corrective action be taken
                         immediately;

                  (ii) the Department and the National Treasury ensure
                         continued effective communication in order to
                         prevent a recurrence of such a situation in future
                         MTEF budgets;

                  (iii)      with regard to the Programme: Foreign
                         Relations, the Department immediately inform the
                         Committee if circumstances develop that may again
                         result in excess expenditure; and

                  (iv) the Department timeously prepare itself to apply
                         proper principles of performance budgeting, as
                         required in terms of the strategic plan to be
                         submitted to the relevant Executive Authority as
                         well as the National Treasury by 30 June 2001 for
                         the MTEF period commencing on 1 April 2002.


              (4) Suspense accounts (notes 2 and 4.1 on pages 14 & 15)


              The Committee accepts that some of the suspense accounts
              relate to amounts still to be cleared once the next Finance
              Bill is adopted by Parliament. However, the Committee
              recommends that the Accounting Officer permit the use of other
              suspense accounts only in cases where it is absolutely
              necessary and that they be considered for clearance on a
              monthly basis. The chief financial officer should furnish the
              Accounting Officer on a monthly basis with explanations
              regarding the bigger suspense accounts that had not been
              cleared.


     2.     Management of office and residential accommodation in foreign
         countries


         The Committee heard evidence that the function pertaining to the
         procurement of, disposal of and major works in respect of foreign
         properties had been transferred to the Department with effect from
         1 May 1999. The estimated value of the foreign properties owned by
         the State is R2,5 billion. It is estimated that an amount of R2
         million will be needed for this project. However, the first
         meeting between officials from the Department and the Department
         of Public Works to discuss the processes according to which the
         transfer of the function should take place, only took place on 6
         July 1999. The first documentation was handed over to the
         Department during August 1999. However, by May 2000 not all
         relevant documentation, such as building files and plans in
         respect of the function, had been received from the Department of
         Public Works.

         In correspondence subsequent to the hearing, the Department
         indicated that a formal evaluation process will have to be
         initiated in order to determine the proper value of the
         properties, as this has never been done before. The Department
         assured the Committee that it has the capacity to properly manage
         the assets.

         The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer -


         (1)     expedite the compilation of a proper asset register and
              ensure a proper asset management regime in terms of the Public
              Finance Management Act and Chapter 10 of the new Treasury
              Regulations, as well as provide a progress report, together
              with the estimated time of completion, within 60 days of the
              adoption by Parliament of this Report;


         (2)     ensure that, in respect of all capital projects, a system
              as required by section 38(1)(a)(iv) of the Public Finance
              Management Act exists for properly evaluating all major
              capital projects prior to a final decision being taken on
              them; and


         (3)     ensure that all relevant records still in the possession
              of the Department of Public Works immediately be obtained, and
              that the Committee be informed once this has been completed,
              as well as whether the documents were complete and in
              acceptable condition.


     3.     Case of misconduct against official at Dakar


         The Committee was informed that the services of the official
         concerned has since been terminated on grounds of abscondment, and
         that by absconding he was deemed to be guilty of the misconduct
         charges. On 29 October 1999, the State Attorney was approached to
         recover the debt to the State.

         The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer, in
         consultation with the State Attorney, report on progress made in
         this regard, specifically indicating by when the matter is
         expected to be finalised and what the nature of the former
         official's debt to the State is.


     4.     Amalgamation-related costs


         The Department made payments of R6,8 million to certain provinces
         in respect of personnel expenditure without supporting
         documentation. This related to salaries for staff from former TBVC
         states still to be absorbed into the Department. The provinces
         therefore acted as agents for the Department in terms of own
         accounting practices. Vouchers submitted by the provinces were of
         such a nature that it could be ascertained that the necessary
         payments had been made, but it did not contain the necessary
         detailed information required for audit purposes. The Department
         was of the view that "with the information and vouchers at the
         disposal of the Department ... it does not appear that the State
         suffered any loss".

         In an earlier Treasury Reply to the Committee, the Treasury
         indicated that "...amounts not classified as debts of the past
         would be carried by the departments on whose books these balances
         were. Full details regarding the absence or unavailability of
         records regarding debt/suspense accounts should be provided with
         the financial statements for 1997/98 when they are presented for
         auditing. Thereafter, as previously stated, uncleared accounts and
         unauthorised expenditure, as indicated in the qualified audit
         report, should be presented to SCOPA for authorisation to finalise
         matters as a formality to complete the process".

         In a letter from the Deputy Director-General of the former
         Department of State Expenditure, Mr Gulston indicated that the
         National Treasury did not regard the information provided by the
         Department as sufficient for the Treasury to "make an order
         dispensing with the production of a voucher or such other proof as
         may appear just in the circumstances", in terms of section 34 of
         the Exchequer Act. He suggested that the Department consider
         establishing an audit trail, to the satisfaction of the Auditor-
         General, to prove that the amount was spent correctly, even though
         not all of the documentation required under normal circumstances
         will be produced.

         Although the Committee is eager for this matter to be resolved, it
         recommends that it be carried over until the transversal issue of
         expenditure related to the TBVC amalgamation is addressed and
         finalised by it and all the relevant stakeholders.


     Report to be considered.

                               3 OCTOBER 2000

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     (1)    Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the event
         of Armed Conflict (the Hague Convention) with regulations for the
         execution and the coverence resolutions, 14 May 1954, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.

2.    The Minister for Welfare and Population Development:


     National Report on Social Development for 1995-2000.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Rome Statutes of the International Court of Justice, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Rome Statutes.

     (3)    Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
         Political Rights, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (4)    Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
         and Political Rights, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (5)    Explanatory Memorandum to the protocols.

     (6)    Extradition Treaty between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of the United States of America,
         tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (7)    Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the United States of America on Mutual Legal
         Assistance in Criminal Matters, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
         of the Constitution, 1996.

     (8)    Explanatory Memorandum to the treaties.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the RSA/Nigeria
     Double Taxation Agreement, dated 29 September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
         Republic of Nigeria for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and
         on Capital Gains, referred to it, recommends that the House, in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
         Agreement.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the RSA/China Double
     Taxation Agreement, dated 29 September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the People's
         Republic of China for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
         referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.


     Report to be considered.


