---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 March 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-03-08
---

WEDNESDAY, 8 MARCH 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS see col 000.

                          INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The first item on the Order Paper is a subject
for discussion in the name of the hon Lulama Xingwana. Before I call upon
her, in response to her own request, I should like to make some remarks
from the Chair.

Hon members, today, International Women's Day, offers an opportunity for us
to reflect on the challenges we continue to face in our country's quest to
create a nonsexist society. It is also an occasion on which we should
reflect on the even bigger challenge of working with the rest of the
continent to improve the lot of the women of Africa.

In section 1 of the Constitution we commit ourselves to building a society
founded on human dignity, the achievement of equality and the advancement
of human rights and freedoms. We go further to list nonracialism and
nonsexism. In the Bill of Rights, the first right listed is equality. We
provide for affirmative action in section 9(2). In section 9(3) the grounds
on which discrimination is prohibited include gender, sex, pregnancy,
marital status and sexual orientation. Human dignity and life are
entrenched in this Bill, yet many women still do not enjoy these rights.

Of particular importance in our society today is the right to freedom and
security of the person. This right provides for every citizen to be free
from all forms of violence from either public or private sources; not to be
tortured, treated or punished in a cruel, inhuman or degrading way. The
women of this country struggled over the years to ensure that the country's
Constitution would protect them and lay a basis for the creation of a
society that treats them better.

The questions we must ask ourselves are: What progress are we making? What
more do we need to do? These questions and their answers must continue to
preoccupy us as long as there is even a single woman who complains that she
does not enjoy her constitutional rights.

There can be no dawn for the continent while its women wallow at the bottom
of the mud and the blood of its present crisis. Taking a lead from our
President, we must be introspective regarding our readiness to respond to
the continent's needs, especially the position of its women. As a society,
we must acknowledge our ignorance, arrogance and indifference towards our
fellow Africans. We can only make a more meaningful contribution towards
Africa's development if we relate more positively and are prepared to learn
from the lessons of our history as a continent.

In closing, I wish to quote briefly from the Zanzibar Declaration on the
Women of Africa for a Culture of Peace, of May 1999:
  We, the women of Africa, having suffered massive violations of
  fundamental human rights and having had to shoulder the burden of
  sustaining our societies while at the same time handling traumas,
  miseries, violence, social injustices and poverty, commit ourselves to
  promote nonviolent means of conflict resolution and African values for a
  culture of peace.

[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker and hon members, today all over the
world, women are commemorating this day. I have little doubt that the
events will fall into two categories: celebrations and regrets.

This is understandable, given the fact that women have significant things
to celebrate like Cedaw and the Beijing Platform of Action. But there is
also much to lament, particularly the appallingly slow delivery on some of
the most crucial elements of the Cedaw Convention.

Here in South Africa, we too have things to celebrate and things to regret.
Amongst the things that we are celebrating are the coming into force of the
new Domestic Violence Act and the open discussion around the
differentiation of sexual offences, including rape, that is part of the
ongoing investigation by the SA Law Commission. These are or could be
significant steps forward for women in South Africa.

But the picture is not all rosy, and I believe very strongly that on a day
like today we should take some time to think carefully and constructively
about our regrets as well. Two regrets preoccupy me particularly today.
Firstly, the ongoing domestic abuse of women and, secondly, the
disproportionate effects of HIV/Aids on women. Let us look at the at the
issue of domestic abuse. Obviously, this is a complex subject and I cannot
hope to do justice to it in the seven minutes allowed me this afternoon.

However, there is something I would like to draw attention to, and that is
the definition of domestic violence. Domestic abuse is only one form of
abuse, but it is particularly unpallatable and ugly, given the fact that it
happens in the one place where women should feel and expect to be safe, viz
in their homes. Here, we are looking at four kinds of abuse. I am going to
read them quite slowly and I hope that while doing so, members will all
think about them and examine their consciousness.

Physical abuse includes actions like punching a woman, slapping a woman,
hitting her with one's hands or fists or any object, pulling her hair,
pushing her, tripping her, abandoning her in unsafe places, locking her in
the house or out of the house, and keeping her from sleeping.

Emotional abuse includes calling a woman names, insulting her, embarrassing
her in front of other people, making her feel small or worthless or stupid,
ignoring her when she is speaking to one, intimidating her or threatening
her.

Financial abuse includes taking away a woman's money, not giving her enough
money to take care of the children and the home, not paying maintenance,
spending all or most of the household money on drinking, gambling, cars,
clothes or girlfriends.

Sexual abuse includes making a woman do sexual acts that she does not want
to do, calling her bad sexual names, forcing her to have sex, making her
wear clothes that make her feel uncomfortable, or making sexual remarks
about her in front of other people.
I regret, on this International Women's Day, to have to say that all these
forms of women abuse are happening all around us in South Africa - in our
own homes or in the homes of our friends or our families. Unless we stand
up and speak about them, they will continue. Every act of abuse that is
ignored is an act of abuse that is condoned. Let us take our courage in our
hands; let us name, blame and shame those who do these things, and let us
make them stop.

Turning to the disproportionate effects of HIV/Aids on women, I want to say
that it seems to me that as I discuss HIV/Aids with people all around the
country, few people realise how much more vulnerable women are in the face
of this epidemic. Women are at great risk for three main reasons. Firstly,
women are biologically more susceptible to the infection. The structure of
their genital organs makes it easy for them to be infected. Secondly, our
social structure is such that women are often unable to negotiate safer
sexual practices - like using condoms, or abstaining. As the dominant
partners in most relationships, particularly in the traditional,
conservative or rural homes, men often determine when and how the sexual
relationship is conducted. Thirdly, poverty often forces women into
practices such as commercial sex work and these expose them
disproportionately to the risk of infection.

The key to turning this around lies in the education and empowerment,
particularly economic empowerment, of women. As long as women are neither
well educated nor trained to earn a living, their position will always be
one of social and economic disadvantage, and as long as gender oppression
and sexism continue, women will rarely be able to control their lives,
especially their sexual lives.

People who are in positions of power - and this obviously includes
parliamentarians like hon members and members of the Cabinet like me - must
do whatever we can to provide opportunities for women to develop. We must
focus on strengthening the position of women in the economy, and in
creating income-generating projects for women. We must double and redouble
our efforts to provide information for women in an accessible way on a wide
variety of topics, and we must ensure that our girl-children receive a high
quality education.

In terms of HIV/Aids - and to an extent also in terms of domestic abuse of
women - we are running out of time. Women are dying physically of Aids, and
emotionally; and sometimes physically of abuse. We must not be cowards. We
must look into the abyss, and we must respond in a positive way.

To the men and to the women who seem not to care, I say: Please join us.
Join with us in deeds, and not just in words. Let us all involve ourselves
in solutions that are mutually satisfying. We can address men's fears, but
only if men themselves take responsibility for their behaviour - sexually
and in every other way. Let the year 2000 be the year of our challenge.
[Applause.]

Miss N B SIGABI: Madam Speaker, hon members, as we celebrate International
Women's Day I ask hon members to indulge me when I say that there are no
ugly women, only bad acts and deeds; no stupid women, only cunning and
subtle characters.

As we try to know and establish who we are, we need to establish the
paradigms ourselves, not aspire to ascend and acquire standards set by men,
because in that quest, we forget the designer and architect, who is God and
who has set the standards since time immemorial. We waste a lot of time and
thought at self-imaging to fit in. We as mothers and girls must realise
that the time we put into technical thought processes lags far behind the
time we dedicate to self-imaging.

Again, as we celebrate this day, we as women need to ask ourselves who we
are, not in terms of the values and norms established by men, but in terms
of who we are in God's kingdom. Does an impact assessment of the influence
we exert wholesale as women on the universe define and re-evaluate our
standing in God's kingdom for wisdom?

We should also, at critical moments such as this day, critically evaluate
the present status of women in our societies, using our own Constitution as
a benchmark. Again, we should ask: ``Is there meaningful delivery in terms
of fair representation of women in all sectors of the economy?''

We should enjoy being women, love being women and be proud of being women.
[Applause.]

Prof H NGUBANE: Madam Speaker, hon colleagues, I am happy to represent the
IFP in commemoration of the International Women's Day of Prayer. I have an
extra minute, thanks to the kindness of the hon Mangena of Azapo, who
understood that although men and women are equal, they are nevertheless
different. [Applause.]

This balanced understanding is very crucial in attaining a correct
perspective of the world, whose thought processes tend to be cast into
binal oppositions of black and white, left and right, evil and good, bad
and good, etc. In this structure of thought, women have often been
associated with the negative side. Hence, very often, weather experts have
given feminine names to the most violent hurricanes. As hon members know,
in medieval Europe, belief in witches cast them as old women riding brooms.

An example that would demonstrate this quite literally before us today in
this House is if hon members were to look at the buttons on any jacket or
blouse they are wearing. Could hon members touch their buttons? Mine and
Madam Speaker's are on the left-hand side, and men's would be on the right-
hand side.

HON MEMBERS: Why?

Prof H NGUBANE: Right, of course, is auspicious and linked with what is
good. Left symbolises weakness, danger, vulnerability, etc.

Although we may not take this seriously, it nonetheless represents a way of
thinking which is common in world society. This thinking can, at its worst,
have harmful consequences. For instance, during the past 10 years here in
South Africa, we have experienced a good measure of such harmful
consequences. In certain rural areas, there have been sporadic witchcraft
accusations levelled especially against elderly women, often leading to
summary mob execution. This has often been represented as an African
tradition, which, of course, is a gross misrepresentation of African
traditions.

In the past, African society had a very clear mechanism for handling
antisocial behaviour without leading it to mob executions. Such events
constitute a serious breakdown in the traditions of African society, and I
call upon women to take the harassment of elderly women in our society
seriously.

Ngiyacela ukuthi ke sikufakele izibuko impela lokhu. Ngicela nabaphethe
umthetho, abezobulungiswa, ukuthi bayibukisise le ndaba yokuthi abantu
besifazane bayahlukumezeka futhi akukho muntu obavikelayo ngoba imvamisa
yabo bangabodwa ekuhlaleni kwabo, abekho ezinhlanganweni ezikwazi
ukubavikela beyiqembu labesifazane asebekhulile. (Translation of Zulu
paragraph follows.)

[I would like us to take this issue seriously. I appeal to police and
people in the justice services to pay special attention to the fact that
women are abused and nobody is protecting them because they are living as
individuals; they are not in organisations which can protect them as a
group of liberated women.]

Apart from that, there is also harassment of elderly women such as pension
earners. Callous groups of people take their pension on pension days and
they suffer exploitation by their own kinsmen in having to support families
with their pension money. These are the issues which need to be
highlighted, particularly because in a society such as the one I am talking
about, elderly women used to enjoy a high degree of security and a very
respectable position.

It is very common for us to concentrate essentially on whether women are
gaining employment in high-powered professional positions. It is very
common for us to think about what is made visible to us through the press,
such as incidents of rape and other incidents of domestic violence, but the
elderly women are a hidden factor which we do not talk about in this House
very seriously. I am therefore calling on this House to pay special
attention to this issue, and I am especially calling upon the women in this
House to put this issue on their agenda as one of their priorities.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, International Women's Day is an appropriate
opportunity to examine where South Africa stands internationally as far as
our achievements are concerned in terms of our international commitments.

We have two major international obligations in this field of gender
empowerment, both of which were entered into in 1995. They are, firstly,
Cedaw, which was ratified without reservation in December 1995 and,
secondly, the Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action dating from
September 1995. Our Government reports back annually to the United Nations
on these international commitments.

As far as fulfilling our commitments is concerned, there is good news and
there is bad news. Let us hear the good news first. Both international
documents require us to ensure the removal of discrimination against women
in political life and to ensure women's entry into and full participation
in political decision-making. There is no doubt that South Africa has
answered the international call, especially as articulated by the
International Parliamentary Union, that women's participation of this
nature is a fundamental right and that for women to make an impact on
political decision-making, they must constitute a critical mass of at least
30% of the structure concerned.

According to their report, in our National Assembly we have achieved this
critical mass, with 30% of the 400 members of Parliament in this House
being women as at 25 January this year, not to mention the 15 female
members of Cabinet out of 40 Ministers and Deputy Ministers. This puts us
in eighth position around the world, which I believe is a great
achievement.

The evidence that this critical mass of women has made a difference is
there for all to see, firstly in the legislation aimed at benefiting women
that has been passed and the national machinery in place to ensure
implementation. So much for the good news, now for the bad news.

Unfortunately, thus far, many of the benefits that we are legislating here
have not reached the women we wish to empower. These international
commitments also demand, as a high priority, that the participating
governments act to eliminate violence against women and the endemic poverty
among women.

We, the women in this House, will therefore have to examine our strategies
to ensure that we make a difference for South African women on the ground.
It is no good just legislating in an ivory tower. For instance, our country
is still ravaged by violence against women. We have, by far, the highest
rape rate in the world, which is aggravated by an extremely low conviction
rate for rape in the courts, since only 8% of reported rapes lead to
convictions.

No woman or girl child is safe on our streets. This fact is graphically
illustrated in the media every day. No legislation that we have passed has
changed this. Part of the reason identified for the high rate of violence
against women is their low status, and the national machinery now in place
to empower women has managed to do precious little about this so far. To
make matters worse, measures introduced by Government to combat the scourge
of HIV/Aids have failed to make any impact on the exponential growth of
this pandemic among young women of marriageable age, that is women between
the ages of fifteen and thirty.

Legislation passed by this House to benefit women nearly two years ago,
such as the Prevention of Domestic Violence Act and the Maintenance Act, is
still not being properly implemented, because of delays by the Justice
department and insufficient resources being allocated for this purpose.
Nothing that we have done here has made any discernible dent in the very
high rate of poverty and illiteracy among women. We have done very little
to empower rural women. There is still a long road ahead. [Time expired.]

Adv J H DE LANGE: Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen ...
[Interjections.]. Mense, moenie nou al skree nie! [People, do not shout
just yet!]

May I firstly pay tribute to all the womenfolk in our country: all the
women in this House, the ones that have attended this debate today and
those outside this House, for the tremendous role that they play in our
society against tremendous odds. [Applause.] Secondly, I have a message for
the men: Real men do not abuse or violate women or children. [Applause.]

I am, of course, always mindful of the fact that whenever one discusses the
marginalised and disadvantaged position in which women find themselves in
our society and in all societies, that such position derives from the
unequal, institutionalised and structured power relations in which women
find themselves vis-à-vis men. Therefore, it is these unequal power
relationships that we need to address in a holistic, integrated and
comprehensive manner, through a progressive programme, if we want to really
level the playing field as far as women are concerned and, secondly, if we
want to remove those factors and circumstances which place women in
vulnerable positions and therefore make them the targets of violence and
abuse. Therefore, we should not singularly look at the legislative and
administrative steps that we take to change these power relations, but look
holistically at how we do so and if we are doing so quickly enough.
Since April 1994, the Justice department has submitted 70 Bills to this
Parliament for passing. One of the areas which received a great deal of
attention and focus in terms of legislation was particularly the
marginalised and disadvantaged position women and children find themselves
in, with specific emphasis on their protection from all forms of abuse and
violence.

Let us analyse these Bills. Firstly, the Commission on Gender Equality Act
has now established a commission that has the power to investigate gender-
related matters and that, through mediation, conciliation and negotiation,
can deal with and try to resolve problems in those areas. Similar to the
Human Rights Commission, in certain circumstances, it has the power to
institute proceedings in court on behalf of others. Then there is the
Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act that has
just been passed recently to give effect to section 9 of the Constitution.
It is obviously not yet operational. It prohibits three forms of
discriminatory activity which affect women. These are the prevention,
prohibition and elimination of unfair discrimination, hate speech and
harassment. As far as discrimination is concerned, there is a general
prohibition of unfair discrimination on grounds entrenched in the
Constitution, and there are 17 such grounds.

Then there is the special prohibition of unfair discrimination on the
grounds of race, gender and disability. Hate speech, any form of hate
speech, particularly that which is directed at women, placing them in a
vulnerable position, and also the dissemination or publication of
information that unfairly discriminates, is also of course, except in
certain circumstances, prohibited.

Lastly, any form of harassment is also prohibited in this Act. Harassment -
this is important - is defined as serious, persistent and unwanted conduct
which demeans, humiliates or creates a hostile environment or is calculated
to induce submission, and which is related to sex, gender, sexual
orientation or a person's membership of a group identified by one or more
persons. There is no defence in the Act in the case of hate speech or
harassment, but there is, of course, the defence that it must be unfair in
terms of discrimination.

As far as the Domestic Violence Act is concerned, it is one of the most
important pieces of legislation that has been passed particularly to help
fight abuse and violence against women and children. This Act has now been
promulgated and the national instructions of the police are in operation.
The Act is in the process of unfolding in our society. This Act allows, of
course, for many things. But, particularly, it deals with the domestic
violence situation itself. It places certain duties on the police and
Government at the scene of domestic violence incidents.

There are now special regulations that have been passed for the police to
make sure that, firstly, they arrest the perpetrator of violence at a
domestic violence scene; and, secondly, that they assist the person against
whom it has been perpetrated. The Act allows, without one informing the
perpetrator thereof, to seek an interim order of protection in a court.
That order then gets served on the perpetrator and, if the court is
satisfied that the person perpetrated the domestic violence, then the court
must issue a final order. This final order prohibits the respondent - who
is usually a man - from committing any act of domestic violence, from
enlisting the help of another person to commit an act of domestic violence,
entering a residence shared by the complainant and respondent, entering a
specific part of the shared residence, entering the complainant's workplace
and many other prohibitions.

There are many other issues that the Act is dealing with. I am not going to
deal with all of them. Of course, when one has such an order, a warrant of
arrest must also be served on the perpetrator. If he does not comply, then
that perpetrator must be arrested. Lastly, the Act also allows for the
court to order the seizure of arms and dangerous weapons which are in the
possession or under the control of the perpetrator in appropriate
circumstances.

The Maintenance Act has changed at least five major areas of maintenance as
far as women are concerned. It now provides that garnishee orders are
obligatory. This means one is given a garnishee order against the salary of
one's husband unless it is impractical. [Applause.] Secondly, it is no
longer necessary in law that the respondent should be present in court when
a maintenance order is being granted. In the past, they just did not arrive
at court, and they got away with it. Now, an order can be given in their
absence and they then have to justify why that order does not have to be
put into effect. [Applause.] Lastly, when one obtains a maintenance order
against one's husband or whoever does not pay their maintenance, one can
now get an execution order against their property. In the past one could
not do so. [Applause.]

My time is running out. The legislation has also been changed in terms of
bail and minimum sentences, particularly focused on violence against women
and children. There have been Acts passed in terms of the recognition of
customary law marriages. The black divorce courts have been done away with.
There are at least five other pieces of legislation that I can mention, but
will not deal with now.

In the pipeline, we are looking at a Sexual Offences Act which should be
passed, hopefully, during this year or early next year. We are also looking
at the amendment of the customary law on succession, to change the
succession laws pertaining to customary marriages. [Applause.]

Ms O N MNDENDE: Madam Speaker, today is International Women's Day, a day
that should awaken the consciences of those suffering from delusions of
grandeur to come to their senses and realise that men and women were
created equal but differently. Strangely, this day leads to concerns from
many males who ask why women are having a special day, yet males do not.
They never ask why we have a Freedom Day to celebrate the eradication of
institutionalised racial oppression in our country.

This day serves to remind all men that male chauvinism is gender oppression
and a social sin in a democratic society. Oppression, whether racial or
sexual, is a crime against humanity and needs to be eradicated. Therefore,
no one should feel guilty about this day if he lives a responsible life at
his home and work. Thanks to hon Mangena for giving me one minute to talk
more. [Laughter.]

Even the one who perhaps thinks that he has a liberated mind, should listen
to women today because no one is perfect. It may well be that there are
flaws in his liberal life at home. Men must wait for us to say that they
are not oppressive, but female oppression is something that is only felt by
women and is experienced by women. Men are just sympathisers and not
victims.

Since South Africa's democratisation in 1994, many institutions have been
put in place and legislation enacted to address the plight of women. The
Domestic Violence Act, the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair
Discrimination Act and others have been passed by this Parliament. These
laws show our Parliament's commitment to fight against any form of violence
against women. But there is still one institution, that is lacking. It is a
treatment centre to help those suffering from the effects of male delusions
of grandeur in differing degrees.

Most males, even today, even here, still impose the assumption that these
laws have been implemented as lip service to gender equality, yet decision-
making remains patriarchal. These men think that women are still male
appendages that are catered for or sympathised with by males. The time is,
however, long overdue to realise these good intentions on paper and bring
them into reality. Government must make a difference in the lives of the
millions of women in South Africa.

The significance of this day should be meaningful to the following men, and
I hope they are listening even outside this House. I refer to those
husbands, brothers and sons, who cannot resolve their own frustrations of
inefficiency and failure and then resort to using guns and other means to
terminate the lives of their wives and children who still wish to enjoy
their lives in this world. [Applause.]

Also, I refer to those men who because of their selfish and cruel interests
do not feel that rape on its own is a sin, but go to an extent of raping
infants who cannot even recognise what dad or uncle is doing until the poor
child dies, and the psychopath does not even care about the suffering cries
and the suffering eyes looking at him, as long as he satisfies himself.
Unemployment does not frustrate men only. It frustrates the whole family,
more especially the mother who cannot provide food for her family. It is
never an excuse that when a man is jobless, his frustration drives him to
rape.

The Government should not only legislate gender equality to improve the
lives of women and children. It must also bring to life these very good
intentions. Until we have brought the message to the mothers, daughters and
all the women in this country, and it is implemented, we cannot claim that
the lives of the women have improved, and all these laws and this
afternoon's debate will be mere window-dressing. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP joins this House in saying no to
violence against women and children, no to family slaying, no to women -
and child-bashing, no to the cutting open with a knife and scissors of a 16-
year-old girl by a 26-year-old woman. No! No to violence in any shape or
form by anyone against anyone. Violence against women and children takes
many forms. I think of my sister whose 18-year-old son was murdered in
Johannesburg, knifed in the neck by another 18-year-old boy. Two mothers
devastated by violence.

Our sons and daughters are abused, raped, stabbed and gunned down right in
our homes, on our streets and in our classrooms. Who or what is to blame?
Anger, jealousy, pornography, alcohol, drugs, greed? Absolutely, but the
Bible says the reason people commit crime so easily is because crime is not
punished quickly enough. Even when perpetrators are convicted, inadequate
sentences erode confidence in the criminal justice system, and lead to
anger and despair.

The ACDP believes the increase in violence against women and children has
been as a result of the breakdown of family values. Today the ACDP adds its
voice to those of the marching women who call for an end to gun violence.
The ACDP is in favour of the confiscation of firearms from criminals,
perpetrators of domestic violence, alcohol and drug abusers and those who
are irresponsible. Yes, police should have stronger powers to deal with
illegal guns, and yes, we would like to see gun-free zones created in
schools, crèches and clinics. However, the ACDP supports the right of law-
abiding citizens to own and use firearms for self-defence.

A gun-free society is not necessarily a crime-free society. In fact, more
South Africans are murdered by knives, sharp objects and clubs than by
firearms, and more people are killed in vehicle accidents and more children
drown in pools than are shot each year.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I regret your time has expired, hon member.

Ms C DUDLEY: The death penalty would be the deterrent we need. The ACDP
says no to violence against women and children. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, I have recently read the book Wild Swans by
Jung Chang. It is an epic account of the lives of three generations of
Chinese women in China in the 20th century. As a true story it makes one
aware of the plight and the suffering of women in other countries all over
the world.

After the floods in Southern Africa we see and hear of the suffering of
women in the Northern Province, losing their houses, their crops and their
farms. In Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and in Mozambique the same has
happened. On behalf of the FF we want to thank the SA Air Force for its
efforts over there. [Interjections.]

Dit is vanjaar ook die honderdjarige herdenking van die Engelse Oorlog,
oftewel die Anglo-Boereoorlog, in Suid-Afrika. Ek wil van hierdie
geleentheid gebruik maak om ook hulde te bring aan die vroue en die kinders
wat tydens daardie oorlog gely het. Die totale Boerebevolking in 1900 was
ongeveer 300 000. Hiervan is 110 000 vroue en kinders in 35 Britse
gevangeniskampe, oftewel konsentrasiekampe, geplaas. Een uit elke drie het
in daardie kampe gesterf.

Vir elke man wat op die slagveld gesterf het, het bykans sewe vroue en
kinders in die konsentrasiekampe gesterf. Volgens sekere syfers was daar
115 000 swartmense ook in sulke kampe, van wie 14 000 gesterf het.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This year is also the one hundredth anniversary of the English War, or the
Anglo-Boer War, in South Africa. I want to take this opportunity also to
pay tribute to the women and children who suffered during that war. The
total Boer population in 1900 was approximately 300 000. Of these, 110 000
women and children were detained in 35 British prison camps, or
concentration camps. One out of every three died in those camps.

For every man who died on the battlefield, almost seven women and children
died in the concentration camps. According to certain figures there were
also 115 000 black people in such camps, of whom 14 000 died.]

Emily Hobhouse wrote a book after the Anglo-Boer War, and dedicated the
book in the following way:


  To the women of South Africa, whose endurance of hardship, resignation in
  loss, independence under coercion, dignity in humiliation, patience
  through pain, and tranquility amidst death kindled the appreciation of
  the writer and the sympathy of the world.

In die wêreld is baie monumente opgerig vir mans wat in oorloë gesterf het.
Die Vrouemonument wat aan die begin van die vorige eeu in Bloemfontein
opgerig is, was egter die wêreld se heel eerste monument wat vir vroue
opgerig is wat in oorlog gely het. Dit is 'n gepaste manier om hulde aan
vroue te bring, en ook aan hulle lyding.

Die VF verwelkom hierdie geleentheid om op hierdie wyse dan ook vandag
hulde te kan bring aan die vroue van Suid-Afrika. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Throughout the world many monuments have been erected for men who died in
wars. The Vrouemonument that was erected in Bloemfontein at the beginning
of the previous century was, however, the very first monument in the world
to be erected for women who had suffered in war. This is an appropriate way
of paying tribute to women, and also to their suffering.

The FF welcomes this opportunity to pay tribute in this way to the women of
South Africa.]

Mr G E BALOI: Madam Speaker, International Women's Day has its roots in the
labour movement of the late 19th and 20th centuries, when workers protested
against the working conditions and low wages in textile industries, which
employed many women. On 8 March, the same day as today, in 1857, hundreds
of women workers in the garment and textile factories in New York staged a
strike against low wages, long working hours and inhuman working
conditions.

In 1909, women working in the same textile factories rose up in a strike
that eventually led to shorter working hours, better wages and the right to
unionise.

In 1909 the strike also began on 8 March, just like today.

International Women's Day was first celebrated on 8 March 1911 and had
universal female suffrage as its theme. In 1977 the UN officially called on
all countries to set aside a date to recognise women's advancement. This
day is now celebrated throughout the world. Its symbols were adopted by
labour movements and, at the turn of the century, bred the present struggle
for economic equality and rose to present continued efforts for better
quality.

Letsatsi la Boditšhabatšhaba la bomme ke motlha o ka one bomme ba
gakologelwang kgaratlho ya bone ya diphetogo. Ke letsatsi le ba ketekang
tshwelelopele mo togamaanong ya go bona tekatekano ya bong, ebile ke
letsatsi la go tlhomamisa gore tshiamo ya bong e matshwanedi.

Fa go ketekwa Letsatsi la Boditšhabatšhaba la Bomme, go botlhokwa go dira
jalo ka kitso e e tletseng ya gore Ditšhaba-Kopano e goeleditse ngwagasome
ya boditšhabatšhaba ya 1997 go fitlha ka 2006, gore e nne ngwaga wa go
fedisa lehuma. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows).

[International Women's Day is a day on which women remember the struggle
for change. It is a day on which women celebrate progress in their quest
for gender equality and ensuring that this equality is necessary.

When International Women's Day is celebrated, it is important to do so with
the full knowledge that the United Nations has declared the decade from
1997 to 2006 as the decade to end poverty. [Applause.]]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I have just returned from a march with all
the women whom you see in the gallery, and I must say   that it was really
a show of solidarity between the women and other members of Parliament to
show the women of South Africa that we care, and that we are there to march
with them whenever we are called upon to do so.

There was one woman with a T-shirt on saying: ``There is no excuse for
women abuse''. I want to fully agree with her, because although we have the
best Constitution in the world, although we have the Domestic Violence Act,
although we have ratified all the conventions, women and children abuse is
on the increase.

We need to ask ourselves today: Why? Who is responsible for this? Why do we
as women allow this to happen to us? We must then begin to say: What must
be done? Do we need more marches or speeches? What do we need? What we need
is the kind of unity and solidarity that we saw today, cutting across party-
political differences and marching together to say that, as women, we have
had enough.

We will protect other women within our communities, and we call on all the
men, fathers and sons in our communities also to isolate those who are
responsible for the abuse of women and children. It is only through unity
that we will be able to isolate the criminals and those responsible for
women and child abuse, and that we can move forward together.

Nksz L M T XINGWANA: Somlomo, ndiyabulisa koomama abaze kuhlonela olu suku
namhlanje. Malibongwe!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILEYO: Igama lamakhosikazi! (Translation of Zulu
sentences follows.)

[Ms L M T XINGWANA: Madam Speaker, I salute the women who have come to show
deference to this day. Let their name be praised!

HON MEMBERS: The name of the women!]

First of all I would like to start off by pledging support for the flood
victims, especially women and children in our rural provinces in the north
and in Mozambique. I would like to mention Sophia Pedro and her baby, who
were rescued by the SA National Defence Force after she had given birth to
the baby in a tree.

Ndiphinde ndibalule omnye umama ofunyenwe ephethe abantwana bakhe bobabini
ngezandla sele etshonile emanzini engakhange abalahle abantwana bakhe.
Wafunyanwa phantsi kwamanzi esababambile abantwana bakhe bephila.
[Kwaqhwatywa.]

Lo ke ngumzekelo omkhulu obonisa ubukhalipha nokuzinikela kwamakhosikazi
ekulweleni ubomi nokhuseleko, ngakumbi ukulwela abantwana be-Afrika.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Again I wish to mention and honour another woman, who was found holding
onto her two children when she had already drowned in the water, but never
let go of her children. She was still holding onto her two children, who
were alive, when she was found. [Applause.]

This is a great example that shows bravery and commitment on the part of
women to fight for life and the protection of especially the children of
Africa.]

This, indeed, demonstrated the immense commitment of the women of Africa
not only to give life, but also to nurture, preserve and defend that life.

We also salute the heroic contribution of members of the SA National
Defence Force, both black and white, in our provinces and in Mozambique.
The role that they have played in the flood-stricken areas has demonstrated
the important role that the army has to play in humanitarian work and in
nation-building.

International Women's Day originated from a protest march in New York in
1857 organised by women workers protesting against inhuman working
conditions in their factory. They demanded bread and roses, a living wage
and fair working conditions in the workplace. From that day onwards, women
the world over have used this day to campaign for their rights, including
suffragettes who were fighting for the right of women to vote in Europe.
Today this day is celebrated by women's organisations in many countries and
is recognised as International Women's Day on all our continents, from east
to west, north to south.

In South Africa this day has been celebrated in all our provinces and
regions. In Cape Town various women's organisations marched to Parliament
today in support of the Firearms Control Bill and to recommit themselves to
supporting the campaign calling for no violence against women. We are
saying that these guns are being used to kill innocent women and children
and that enough is enough. Women handed memorandums to the Minister of
Safety and Security and the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, urging them to speed up the passing of this Bill.

Today we also want to highlight the situation of women with disabilities,
including mentally retarded women and children. We call for an end to their
abuse in all institutions, in their homes and in our communities. We
applaud the ANC Government for the policies and programmes that they have
introduced to empower people with disabilities, including women and
children.

The women of South Africa commend both our founding President, Nelson
Mandela, and President Thabo Mbeki for introducing progressive legislation
and programmes that have transformed the lives of women in the past five
years. To date the ANC Government has delivered free medical health care
for pregnant women and children under the age of six, feeding schemes for
our children, especially in rural areas, telephones, water and electricity,
and, through the rural public works programme, created a number of jobs for
people in the rural areas, the majority of whom are women. All these
programmes, including the equalisation and considerable increase of old age
pensions and grants for children of single parents, have had a positive
impact on the lives of the women and children of South Africa.

Yesterday we held a seminar here in Parliament which was historic because
it was the first International Women's Day on which women from outside and
inside Parliament came together to celebrate this day. Women from various
countries participated in the seminar, including women from the Sudan,
Malaysia, Germany and many other countries. [Applause.]

The message that we received from the women from Sudan was to request our
Government to continue to support the peace process in their country and in
all other African countries affected by conflict and war, and to continue
to work for unity and sustainable peace and development in a manner that
unites the people of our countries and does not further divide them.
[Applause.]

We wish to pledge solidarity on this important day with the women who live
in war-torn regions in Africa, including the women of the DRC, Angola,
Sudan, Burundi and Eritrea. We further pledge our support for the women of
Palestine and Kosovo.

In solidarity with the women of Cuba, we also call on President Bill
Clinton of the United States, that bastion of human rights and democracy,
to expedite the release and return of Elian Gonzalez to his grandparents
and father and to his motherland. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

In conclusion, I would like to call on African leaders to recommit
themselves to ending all wars that have ravished Africa for decades and
threatened the lives and safety of women and children, who are always the
greatest victims of war and conflicts, and call on them to work for peace
and democracy in Africa.

We salute our Government for the role that it has played in conflict
resolution in Africa. We salute, in particular, our Minister of Foreign
Affairs, who has led in this regard and who is a woman. [Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Madam Speaker, on this International Women's Day, I
would like to pay tribute to women in South Africa.

Ek wil dit graag doen in die kort tyd tot my beskikking aan die hand van 'n
stukkie poësie. [In the short time at my disposal I would like to do so by
way of a short poem.]


  As ek aan die vroue in my lewe dink
  dan dink ek dadelik aan iets sag
  ook iemand baie mooi
  met stille inherente krag
  wat almal om hul inspireer.

  Soveel goeie skuil in hul
  en deur hul eenvoud
  en hul onskuld
  is hul vir my amper 'n god
  godinne van temperament en grasie
  wat konstant bewondering ontlok.

  Sag soos sy is elke vrou
  trots hou hul dit in stand
  maar laat dit niemand ooit mislei
  oor beginsels is 'n rots
  nie eens so vas soos hul.
  Die manne om hul raas gereeld
  verstaan nie altyd alles reg
  met dowe oor word die teenpraat verdra
  maar in besluit se binnekring is hul die baas
  wys hul aanvoeling die regte weg.

  'n Eie kenmerk is elke vrou se huis
  warm knoesig modern oud en mooi
  alles saam in goeie smaak getooi
  in eie aard vermeng
  almal voel altyd tuis.

  Wie die vrou in die ware lewe - almal raai
  maar niemand weet ooit werklik wat die waarheid is
  Daar is musiek in elke vrou se praat
  en veel mistiek in elke glimlag se aard
  Ja, op elke vlak is elke vrou 'n eie mens.

  Hulle roem hulself op deeglik doen
  alles reg en met liefde
  'n klapsoen op die wang beloon 'n bossie blomme
  orals vriendskapsmelodieë uit die hart
  gee blinkoog om vir ander mens se smart
  is lojaal
  en boonop altyd baie mooi.

  Dit is die vroue in my lewe
  van wie ek praat
  my Ma
  my eggenoot
  my vriendin
  en elke ander vrou wat ek ken
  Dankbaar is ek vir al die veel van hul in my lewe kon leer.

[Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, may I at this point in time salute the
women who are sitting in the gallery?

Amandla! [Power!]

HON MEMBERS: Awethu! [Is ours!]

Miss RAJBALLY: Malibongwe! [Praise them!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of the women!]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Wathinta omama! [You strike the woman!]

HON MEMBERS: Wathinta imbokodo! [You strike the rock!]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Viva, amakhosikazi, viva! [Viva, women, Viva!]

HON MEMBERS: Viva! [Ihlombe.] [Viva! [Applause.]]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, all women, irrespective of race or sexual
orientation, have the right to pursue both material well-being and
spiritual development in conditions of liberation and dignity, economic
empowerment and equal opportunities. It is an indisputable fact that women
throughout the world are the pillars and sustainers of economic, social and
political systems, especially the women in South Africa, who championed the
cause of the freedom struggle.

The development of gender equality efforts must be constantly executed,
analysed and evaluated to ensure that private apartheid amongst and against
women is eliminated in society. Although South Africa has thousands of
intelligent and productive women, there are millions who are still
economically suppressed and who are victims of violence and patriarchal
systems.

Initiatives are in progress to eliminate violence and all forms of
discrimination against women. Sadly, these initiatives are not enough.
Women abuse must stop, stop, stop. [Applause.] It is therefore necessary
for us to work with community organisations, business, educational
institutions, religious groups and the legal, health care and social
services systems so that we can achieve our long-term goal, which is to
transform prejudiced attitudes against and norms for women.

Successful planning and progress in South Africa requires the input of
women's perspective in all areas, such as in energy and water resource
development, environmental protection, health, education, human rights,
peace institutions and capacity-building.

To all the women in South Africa and throughout the world, we wish them
well on this International Women's Day. They must know their rights, they
own these rights and they must exercise their rights. Malibongwe! [Praise
it.] [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, may I use the opportunity of this debate today
to pay tribute to a woman who has been, throughout her life, the
personification of the noblest of values associated with the pearl in the
crown of God's creation, women. I want this House to join me in this small
tribute to the late Mrs Betsie Verwoerd, who died a week ago at the blessed
age of 98 in Orania.

Betsie Schoombie was iemand wat in eie reg gepresteer het. Die MA-graad in
Afrikaans wat sy behaal het, was 'n uitsondering vir vroue in daardie tyd.
Tog het sy haar grootste vervulling gevind in die edel rol van eggenote van
wyle dr Verwoerd, in haar rol as moeder van haar sewe kinders en ouma van
haar kleinkinders.

Hoewel sy haar hart en siel gegee het vir die saak van haar mense, het sy
nooit self 'n politieke profiel van haar eie ontwikkel nie, maar het sy
haar rol vervul as stylvolle premiersvrou, en die ware hulp wat by hom pas.
In die teenwoordigheid van hoës en vernames was sy vriendelik,
selfversekerd en met stille grasie op haar pos. By die geringstes en die
kleinstes was sy tuis, ontspanne en simpatiek.

Sy was iemand wat intens moes ly op die lang pad van ons verlede toe sy
moes aanskou hoe haar eggenoot in die ou Volksraadsaal vermoor word. Tog
het sy nooit toegelaat dat haat en wrok haar lewe oorheers nie, en was sy
in eie persoon die toonbeeld van wat ons in Efesiërs 4 lees: ``Vergeef
mekaar soos God in Christus julle vergeef het''. Sy het regdeur haar lewe
'n besondere liefde vir haar eie geopenbaar, tog het sy dit op só 'n wyse
gedoen dat sy 'n simbool geword het van Afrikaners wat die openbare en
politieke wêreld met grasie, integriteit, waardigheid en respek vir ander
wil dien. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Betsie Schoombie was someone who excelled in her own right. The MA degree
in Afrikaans which she attained was an exception for women in those days.
Yet she found her greatest fulfilment in the noble role of spouse to the
late Dr Verwoerd, in her role as the mother of her seven children and
grandmother to her grand-children.

Although she gave her heart and soul for the cause of her people she never
developed a political profile of her own, but fulfilled her role as a
stylish first lady, and the true help that suited him. In the presence of
dignitaries and prominent people, she was friendly, self-assured and
quietly graceful at her post. Among the less fortunate and the poor she was
comfortable, relaxed and sympathetic.

She was someone who had to suffer intensely on the long road of our past
when she had to witness her spouse being murdered in the Old Assembly
Chamber. Yet she never allowed hatred and revenge to dominate her life, and
she was the epitome of what we read in Ephesians 4: ``Forgiving each other,
just as in Christ God forgave you''. Throughout her life she exhibited a
particular love for her own, yet she did it in such a manner that she
became a symbol of Afrikaners who want to serve the public and political
world with grace, integrity, dignity and respect for others.]

I ask this House today to honour with me not the politics, but the person,
the gentle nobility and the way of being a wife of a widely respected
person, who acquired in her personal way a place in the history of South
Africa throughout her life, a life that lasted for nearly the whole of the
20th century - Betsie Verwoerd. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! Could we have some order, please?

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, today marks another milestone in the world
effort to accord women the dignity and respect denied them for far too
long. It is an opportunity for us to ponder the issues and to rededicate
ourselves to putting right one of the greatest wrongs in history, the
systematic discrimination against women.

Today we want to pay some special attention to the issue of violence
against women. This debate in Parliament provides us with an opportunity to
reach consensus on taking immediate, effective and efficient steps to
ensure the continuing empowerment of women. There are, however, numerous
areas in which women still face extraordinary hardships. There is domestic
violence which disempowers and injures women in body and soul, there is
default in child support by men, there is insensitive handling of police
investigations into cases involving women victims, and there is a judicial
system that still remains insensitive to victims of rape.
Above all, we need to change the mindset which says that women are
powerless. Women are not powerless. It is in our interest that all of us
should be part of the struggle to help to empower women, so that they can
better survive the trauma of rape and violence.

The statistics for rape show worrying trends, but it is even more worrying
when they are exaggerated to such an extent that a debate moves from the
need to do something about rape, to whether one can rely on the figures.
For instance, the allegations that only one in 36 rapes was reported and
the associated figure of one rape taking place every 17 seconds, were so
grossly exaggerated that they led to a diversion of public time and energy
to get the record straight. It is incumbent on us all to ensure that there
is unanimity about statistics such as these, so that we can concentrate our
energies on ending scourges like this.

I may also add that it is only in the last few years that we have become
more open and transparent on these issues, and for the first time in the
history of this country, women and children are feeling more confident
about reporting violence against them.

The Government has introduced numerous measures to deal with the
disabilities and dangers encountered by women in society. The Constitution
is explicit about nonsexism and human rights. Government is now developing
a major communication strategy in conjunction with the GCIS on how to
address the problem of rape in an integrated way across the various
departments of Government. There has been legislation and policy
formulation, for instance, leading to the tightening of bail requirements
in cases, including gender-based violence; the setting up of the Gender
Commission; minimum sentences for murder and rape; special legislation on
domestic violence; arrangements for victim empowerment and support,
including pretrial services which offer counselling and legal advice; the
use of separate waiting rooms and closed-circuit television in courts; and
South Africa's enthusiastic association with SADC efforts to deal with
increasing levels of violence against women and children.

However, it must be emphasised that this is not a matter for Parliament and
Government alone. It is a matter for the whole of society to deal with. It
is a matter for the spiritual leaders, for business, for industry, for the
professions and most of all, for the communities. It is an all-round battle
that can be won only if we all stand united.

I would like to associate myself with what the hon member Adv De Lange said
earlier, and that is that the issue of rape and violence against women is
not a women's issue. It is fundamentally a men's issue. [Applause.]
Therefore, if we are to be serious in dealing with this issue, we have got
to deal with men. We have got to deal with that macho mindset which still
makes too many men believe that, somehow or the other, their gender gives
them some right over women. [Applause.]

Therefore my appeal today is that we should not ask the women to deal with
violence against them. Let the men deal with violence against women.
[Applause.] As we pause on this tough road to take stock, let us redouble
our efforts. Let us redouble our efforts, and let me end with what
President Mbeki said in the NCOP, and I think this is what should guide us:
``One rape is one rape too many.'' [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I would now like to recognise the many women who
are sitting in the public gallery. [Applause.]

Bomama, namkelekile. Nokuba sele iphelile ingxoxo engamakhosikazi, sicela
ukunikhumbuza ukuba le Palamente yeyenu, nayilwela. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Abaqalayo ukuza apha namhlanje ze bahlale bekhumbula ukuba ikhona indawo
enjengale. Namkelekile yonke imihla ukuba nize kumamela ukuba sithini na.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ladies, you are welcome here. Although the debate on women has been
completed, we would like to remind you that this Parliament belongs to you;
you fought for it. [Applause.]

Those who are coming here for the first time should always remember that
there is a place like this. You are welcome to come every day and listen to
our debates. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Sister B NCUBE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the announcement by the Commissioner of Police, Mr Jackie
       Selebi, of comprehensive plans aimed at -


       (a)  the restructuring of the SA Police Service;


       (b)  the redistribution of both human and material resources to
           police stations that are faced with the highest levels of crime
           in their areas; and


       (c)  the reduction of levels of crime within three years on the basis
           of a well-considered and effective crime combating strategy,
           targeting organised crime syndicates;


  (2) believes that these initiatives will accelerate the growing
       confidence in the ability of this Government to fight crime, as
       evidenced by the recent HSRC report; and

  (3) pledges its full support to Minister Tshwete, Commissioner Selebi and
       all members of the SAPS committed ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Adv P S SWART: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat die meerderheid Suid-Afrikaners, volgens die
       jongste opname van die Raad vir Geesteswetenskaplike Navorsing, in
       November 1999 van mening was dat die Regering wel 'n mate van beheer
       het oor die golf van misdaad wat Suid-Afrika teister;


  (2) die hoop uitspreek dat dit sal voortduur en geregverdig is; en


  (3) waarsku dat dit die publiek se vertroue onherstelbaar sal skaad
       indien ons strafregstelsel nie daarin slaag om 'n verbetering te toon
       nie en onsuksesvol is om die wetteloosheid te keer en te verminder
       wat daagliks as die spreekwoordelike swaard oor die hoofde van alle
       Suid-Afrikaners hang.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Adv P S SWART: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that, according to the most recent survey by the Human Sciences
       Research Council, in November 1999 the majority of South Africans
       were of the opinion that the Government did indeed have a degree of
       control over the wave of crime ravaging South Africa;

  (2) expresses the hope that this will continue and that it is justified;
       and

  (3) warns that the public's confidence will be irrevocably harmed if our
       penal system does not succeed in showing an improvement and is
       unsuccessful in preventing and reducing the lawlessness hanging like
       the proverbial sword over the heads of all South Africans.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Mr Chairman, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move:

That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  certain media allegations regarding a massive jobs-for-pals
           racket involving friends and family members, perpetrated by
           former Commissioner of Correctional Services Mr Sitole and an
           inner clique;


       (b)  that this racket subverted the normal procedures for appointment
           to the service and disregarded qualifications, experience and
           suitability; and


       (c)  that as a result thereof the personnel within Correctional
           Services were intimidated, discouraged and demoralised;


  (2) therefore congratulates and supports Minister Skosana for having
       taken the initiative to call for the investigations that have already
       taken place to date; and


  (3) fully supports the Minister of Correctional Services, Mr Ben Skosana,
       and the Minister for the Public Service and Administration, Mrs
       Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, in respect of their intention to
       thoroughly and immediately investigate these most alarming
       allegations in order take the necessary and appropriate measures.

Ms N M TWALA: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today women across all the divides of race, class and
       faith march in support of more stringent control of firearms in our
       country;


  (2) further notes that firearm victims are often women and that women, in
       most instances, end up having to care for most victims of firearm
       violence;
  (3) urges the Minister of Safety and Security and the National
       Commissioner of the SA Police Service to pull out all the stops to
       rid our society and communities of the perpetrators of this evil; and


  (4) expresses its appreciation to all policewomen and policemen who daily
       put their lives on the line to protect all South Africans.

[Applause.]
Mev A VAN WYK: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) die Nuwe NP-taalombudsman se inisiatief steun om veeltaligheid 'n
       prioriteit van die Parlement te maak;


  (2) met goedkeuring die Minister van Kuns, Kultuur, Wetenskap en
       Tegnologie se positiewe reaksie op die voorstel van die Nuwe NP
       waarneem en waardering uitspreek dat na taalwetgewing beweeg sal word
       en dat hy 'n taaltaakspan aangestel het; en
  (3) 'n beroep op alle partye en belanghebbendes doen om vasberade mede-
       eienaarskap te neem van die poging om veeltaligheid te bevorder ter
       opheffing van die ganse Suid-Afrika.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mrs A VAN WYK: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) supports the initiative by the New NP's linguistic ombudsman to make
       multilingualism a priority of Parliament;

  (2) notes with approval the positive reaction by the Minister of Arts,
       Culture, Science and Technology to the proposal of the New NP, and
       expresses appreciation for the fact that there will be a move towards
       legislation on languages and that he has appointed a linguistic task
       team; and

  (3) appeals to all parties and interested persons to accept determined co-
       ownership of the attempt to promote multilingualism so as to uplift
       the whole of South Africa.]

Mrs B M NTULI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the majority of women in South Africa still live in the
       poverty-stricken rural areas;


  (2) further notes that Government has embarked on an integrated rural
       development programme;


  (3) commits itself to ensuring that women take part in these economic
       empowerment programmes; and


  (4) calls on Government to ensure that more information regarding these
       programmes is made available to women.

[Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses concern at the appalling condition of the roads in
       Malebitsa village in Mpumalanga, a fairly large village with a
       substantial number of houses;


  (2) finds it difficult to imagine driving to this village or in this
       village, as the condition of its roads is clearly a form of torture
       or oppression, which our fledgling democracy must reject outright;


  (3) notes that residents of Malebitsa village have no water and are
       forced to buy water from neighbouring white farmers at a cost of R12
       a drum; and


  (4) further notes that this community needs potable water, as is their
       democratic right, but should this not be possible at present, the
       Government should supply water to this community free of charge or at
       an affordable cost.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House notes -


  (1) with appreciation the efforts mounted by the Minister of
       Environmental Affairs and Tourism to plead for the downlisting of the
       African elephant in the Kruger National Park;


  (2) that the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species,
       Cites, appreciates the concerns of the South African Government in
       this matter;


  (3) that the International Fund for Animal Welfare appreciates that the
       proceeds of the sale will be ploughed back into the antipoaching
       programme, which is suffering from a lack of funds at present; and


  (4) that this exercise will boost tourism and ensure that the big five
       are conserved in the Kruger National Park.

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay that the HIV/Aids directorate in the Department of
       Health was unable to spend 40% of its budget allocation and that at a
       time when the Government was telling us that it had too little money
       to administer AZT treatment to pregnant mothers with HIV/Aids; and


  (2) therefore requests the Minister of Health to accept responsibility
       for the incapacity of her department and to undertake to rectify the
       situation immediately.

[Interjections.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:
  That the House -


  (1) takes note of a young Mozambican women who gave birth to her baby
       while clinging to a tree above the swirling and rising waters, alone,
       without a doctor or a nurse, hungry and thirsty, cold and in imminent
       danger of death, showing how the human spirit triumphs in adversity;


  (2) pays tribute to this mother and to all other mothers who, in spite of
       all trials and tribulations, show courage, strength and hope when
       bringing a child into this world; and


  (3) calls on all South Africans to remember Mother's Day and to honour
       and cherish our mothers.

[Applause.]

Ms P K MOTHOAGAE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the announcement that domestic workers and seasonal workers
       will, in future, be able to join the Unemployment Insurance Fund;


  (2) further notes that most domestic workers and many seasonal workers
       are women;


  (3) recognises that until this country was governed by the ANC, the
       rights of domestic and seasonal workers were without protection; and


  (4) commends the ANC Government for its protection of those who have
       always been marginalised and exploited and for reaffirming its
       commitment to governing for the many, not just the few.

[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the report drawn up by David Solomon, an economist at Wits
       University, and published yesterday by the American Chamber of
       Commerce;


  (2) notes that it warned that South Africa has yet to attract serious
       levels of investment from the US or any other country;


  (3) notes that it refers to an overregulation of the labour market, a
       competition policy that is too all-inclusive and generates automatic
       internal inconsistencies and that according to Solomon this leads
       international investors to view the Government as a net source of
       uncertainty rather than a mechanism to reduce it;


  (4) notes that a major requirement of an effective foreign direct
       investment policy is a degree of clarity and simplicity pervading all
       government policies, which indicates that the Government does not
       have a deep-seated understanding of the process of international
       business;


  (5) calls on the Government to attract and encourage new foreign direct
       investment, a prerequisite for sustainable future economic growth.
Mna M N RAMODIKE: Modulesetulo, ke rata go tsebiša legatong la UDM gore ke
tla tliša tšhišinyo tulong yeo e tlago ya Ngwako wo o hlomphegago:


  Ya gore Ngwako wo -


  (1) o ele hloko manyofonyofo a tshepedišo ya ditšhelete kua Probenseng ya
       Leboa;

     2) go a hlobaetša gore tshepedišo ye e mpe ya taolo ya ditšhelete e tla
        leboelela go thoma selemong sa 1995 go fihla lehono; gape ...
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House:


  (1) notes a damning report on the accounts of the Northern Province
       Government;


  (2) notes with dismay that there has been ongoing mismanagement of funds
       from 1995 up to now; and


  (3) calls on the Government to take appropriate steps to normalise the
       situation.]

Mrs Z A KOTA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the recent floods in Mozambique have had very adverse
       effects, especially on women and children, as is evident in the
       reported cases of malaria, diarrhoea and eye infections;


  (2) also notes the serious problems arising from the shortage of fresh
       water;


  (3) expresses its appreciation and gratitude to those countries that have
       been helping the people of Mozambique and calls on more countries to
       become involved in the flood relief programmes; and


  (4) applauds the SANDF for its sterling work and the selfless heroism of
       members of the Air Force, who saved Ms Pedro and her new-born baby
       from a tree in a rescue moment that brought tears to the eyes of the
       world.

[Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the annual Argus/Pick 'n Pay Cycle Tour will take place in
       Cape Town on Sunday, 12 March 2000;


  (2) welcomes cyclists from around South Africa and abroad to this fairest
       Cape;


  (3) expresses the hope that Mother Nature will bring perfect cycling
       weather for the event;


  (4) wishes all competitors happy cycling; and
  (5) gives its full support to the DP parliamentary team and wishes them
       success.

[Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that interracial relationships are cemented where there is
       mutual respect;


  (2) further notes that the decorum of the House will be maintained if
       there is respect for our executive; and


  (3) therefore calls on all members to desist from being deliberately
       disrespectful.

Mr M A MAPHALALA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that HIV/Aids is a deadly reality that kills South Africans and
       people across the globe on a daily basis;


  (2) also notes that Aids is an indiscriminate disease that affects
       everybody in our society - young and old, black and white, men and
       women;


  (3) echoes the call today, 8 March 2000, which is International Women's
       Day, to our young people to abstain from unprotected sex, to be
       faithful or to condomise in order to help combat the spread of this
       dreaded disease;


  (4) also calls on all sectors of our society to put more emphasis, energy
       and effort into Aids public awareness programmes; and


  (5) appeals to all South Africans to volunteer to undergo the HIV/Aids
       test, which is free of charge, to curb the rapid spread of the
       disease.

[Applause.]

                            GENDER DISCRIMINATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, in honour of
International Women's Day, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today, 8 March 2000, is International Women's Day;

  (2) recognises the age-old discrimination that faces women all over the
       world in all spheres of life;

  (3) acknowledges that violence against women and children is of
       particular concern in our country and continent;

  (4) endorses the values of gender equality enshrined in our Constitution;
       and

  (5) applauds the efforts of women all over the world to put an end to
       gender discrimination and pledges its support to this noble cause.

Agreed to.

    STANDING OVER OF ORDERS OF DAY AND REFERRAL OF REMUNERATION OF PUBLIC
            OFFICE BEARERS AMENDMENT BILL TO PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That -


  (1) Orders of the Day Nos 1 and 2 not be dealt with today; and

  (2) the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Amendment Bill [B 11B -
       2000] be referred back to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and
       Local Government to consider further the date on which the
       legislation is to come into operation.

Agreed to.

  CHIROPRACTORS, HOMEOPATHS AND ALLIED HEALTH SERVICE PROFESSIONS AMENDMENT
                                    BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, the old Chiropractors, Homeopaths and
Allied Health Science Professions Council was amended and replaced by the
Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Science Professions Interim
Council, which was established in February 1996. The main objective of the
interim council is to make recommendations to the Minister of Health on the
constitution of a new and permanent council which is still to be
established.

One of the main functions of the council is to protect the public by making
sure that health professionals registered with their council are safe
practitioners, and that they update their skills continually. In South
Africa it is mandatory that all health professionals be registered with the
relevant council. Our responsibility is to see to it that councils carry
out their functions effectively and efficiently.
The interim council consists of 16 members. As hon members are well aware,
our previous councils were established along racial divides, with the
characteristic total exclusion of blacks as members of those councils. The
interim council has pledged its commitment to transformation, and will do
everything in its power to ensure that the new and permanent council, when
it is ultimately established, is a transformed council.

I indicated earlier that the main objective of the interim council is to
make recommendations to the Minister of Health on the constitution of a
new, permanent council still to be established. The draft Bill seeks to
extend the term of office of the interim council retrospectively, with
effect from 13 February 1999, so that the interim council can finalise the
discharge of its mandate and prepare for the elections of the permanent
council.

Clause 1 amends the timeframe within which the interim council has to
decide its mandate referred to above. The current framework within which
the mandate has to be discharged is 36 months. Clause 1 seeks to amend the
timeframe from 36 to 60 months.

Clause 2 seeks to amend the term of office of the interim council from 36
to 60 months. The current term of office of the interim council is 36
months. The rationale for extending the term of office of the interim
council from 36 to 60 months is to enable the interim council to finalise
its discharge of its mandate, including the electoral process for the
permanent council, and also to enable the department to finalise the
general amendments to the principal Act.

Clause 3 seeks to extend retrospectively the term of office of the interim
council from 36 to 60 months. The retrospective application of the Bill is
necessary because the term of office of the interim council expired in
February 1999. The delay in extending the term of office of the interim
council, before the term of office expired, was occasioned by an oversight
on the part of the department. The department omitted to amend the
principal Act before the expiry of the term of office of the interim
council; and, since the beginning of 1999, immediately after receiving the
report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the proposed permanent
council structure, the department has been busy drafting a general
amendment to the principal Act on the basis of the recommendations
submitted. It was not envisaged that the process would take such a long
time to finalise.

In conclusion, I hope the hon members will support this Bill in order for
the council to carry out its functions. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I want to say that what the hon the Minister has
had to say this afternoon is absolutely accurate, and I also want to say
that I am sorry for her because she is having to clear up the mess that was
probably left by the previous Minister of Health. [Interjections.] I also
want to say that the DP has little option but to support this Bill and we
will be doing so because this piece of legislation is clearly very urgently
required. It is also for this reason that we agreed to have it fast-
tracked.

However, I do want to say that our support for this Bill in no way means
that we condone in any way the shocking fact that what we are really doing
today is passing legislation that should have been passed more than a year
ago. We must know and accept that by not having this legislation before
Parliament at the beginning of last year, we have allowed a statutory body
- a council that exists as a result of an Act of Parliament - to continue
functioning despite the fact that its lifespan ended on 12 February 1999.
We are today having to pass retrospective legislation in an attempt to blow
new life into a body that died a year ago. It is rather ironic that it is
the Ministry of Health that is trying to raise this corpse.

But the truth of the matter is that this corpse, in some way or another,
has continued to live for the past 12 months, despite its death. It has
continued to make decisions and register new members despite the fact that
it is, as I say, legally dead. So what Parliament has to do now, is to
declare that it did not die on 12 February last year, and that all its
actions carried out while it was dead are binding and taken as though it
had not died. Now, really and truly, this is most confusing indeed. It is
really and truly a huge mess.

However, I want to say that I can well recall the urgent debate in this
House in 1995 to establish a series of interim councils because of the
apartheid nature of the then existing health-related councils. We all
agreed that this was very important. We also agreed that it was time that
the chiropractors, homeopaths and other allied health service professions
had a new deal. An interim council with a lifespan of 36 months was
established in order to advise the Minister on the appointment of a new
council. Not only was this not achieved in 36 months, but neither has it
been achieved in 48 months. We are now asked to give this body life for a
further 12 months in the hope that it will now be done. We have to wonder
whether, in actual fact, this will be achieved.

However, the point is that this is just not good enough. The Ministry and
the department must accept the criticism due to them for not having done
their job. In fact, they deserve to be severely reprimanded by Parliament
for allowing the time of the interim council to run up by one year before
even bringing this matter to Parliament. It is no way whatsoever to run a
Health department, and certainly no way to run the country. [Time expired.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Mr Chairperson, we all want better health at a lower cost
and in a way that treats us as people, not as machines.

The Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Professions Interim Council
was established in February 1996. In three years it was meant to make
recommendations to the Minister on establishing a new council. Not only has
it failed to do so, but it has continued to operate illegally for one year
beyond its statutory lifespan. This in itself is a sign of an ailing
council. It should have applied its mind to regulating, monitoring and
upgrading the recognised allied health professions, of which there are,
registered with the council, about 600 homeopaths, 200 chiropractors, 12
osteopaths, 7 herbalists, 14 naturopaths and 20 Ayurvedic practitioners.

It should have provided scopes of practice, educational criteria and codes
of ethical practice. Instead, it has been crusading to incorporate
complementary therapists like those for aromatherapy, reflexology and
massage onto the council. There is a place for such therapies, but clearly
differentiated from health professionals.

Prospective scientists are highlighting dangers with the direction that
medicine is taking by creating super bugs which are resistant to
antibiotics. They attribute the dramatic rise in allergies and asthma to
the overuse of antibiotics and immunisation.
The modern world must find alternatives, and is turning to more natural
methods of healing that stimulates the body's own immunity, rather than
suppressing the immune system. Aids is an extreme form of such suppression.
Homeopathy is the kind of alternative that we are looking for. In fact, it
has moved from alternative to mainstream. There are two technical colleges
offering five-year courses, and a new faculty is to be established.

The window of opportunity has now opened to us to regulate the practice of
this and other recognised health paradigms, but criteria for registration
are not standardised. In fact, they have been virtually arbitrary. They
have been inadequate in disciplining bogus practitioners and those
registered on condition that they did training, which they had not done.
There is inadequate progress in the mechanism for regulating alternative
health products.

In view of the media attention afforded to holistic therapy and the huge
appetite of the public for alternatives to conventional medicine, there
must be a clear distinction in the public's mind between the various kinds
of health professionals and complementary therapists - who can order X-rays
or send one for blood test, who knows about diseases and diagnostics, who
can undress and examine one, and who will be held responsible if one's
treatment goes horribly wrong.

We must support, retrospectively, the legalisation of the interim council.
Not to do so would create issues so complex that they could never be
resolved, but we do so with misgivings, and with the proviso that the
Minister, the department and the portfolio committee keep a watchful eye on
the interim council's proceedings in future, and that we ensure a
transparent process that will get us a sound alternative health professions
council operational by 2001. It must advance the health of the nation, and
not cater for personal agendas.

Dr S J GOUS: Mnr die Voorsitter, hierdie Wysigingswetsontwerp op
Chiropraktisyns, Homeopate en Verwante Gesondsheidsdiensberoepe het ten
doel om die ampstermyn van die lede van die interimraad terugwerkend te
verleng. Die ampstermyn van die vorige raad het reeds op 12 Februarie 1999
verstryk, wat beteken dat enige besluite en optrede sedert 12 Februarie
1999 deur genoemde interimraad onwettig en ongeldig was.

Die eerste vraag wat ontstaan is hoe dit kon gebeur dat so 'n situasie
ontstaan het? Die Departement van Gesondheid het verduidelik dat dit 'n
fout aan hulle kant is, waarvoor hulle volle verantwoordelikheid aanvaar,
en hulle het ook onvoorwaardelik verskoning aangebied. Nou, ons is maar
almal net mense, en daarom aanvaar die Nuwe NP die verduideliking en
verskoning van die Departement van Gesondheid in die lig waarin dit
aangebied is.

Die tweede vraag wat ontstaan, is of die wetgewing wel terugwerkend van
krag kan wees. Die staatsregsadviseur, mnr Daniels, het 'n skriftelike
versekering tot dien effek gelewer, maar tog toegegee dat dit uiteindelik
die hof sal wees wat so 'n besluit sal moet takseer. Alhoewel die Nuwe NP
aanvaar dat die interimraad in goeder trou opgetree het en hulle bona fides
bo verdenking behoort te wees, kan ons maar net hoop en glo dat geen van
hul besluite in 'n hof getoets gaan word nie.

Die laaste vraag wat ontstaan, is hoekom die interimraad nie in die drie
jaar sedert 1996 daarin kon slaag om 'n permanente raad ingestel te kry
nie. Die antwoord en verskoning op hierdie vraag was nie baie bevredigend
nie, en ons kan ook maar weer net hoop dat 'n permanente raad voor
Februarie 2001 aangestel kan word, anders gaan die aangeleentheid weer in
'n verleentheid ontaard.

Die Nuwe NP steun hierdie wetgewing met die hoop dat 'n onhoudbare situasie
daarmee so spoedig moontlik reggestel sal word. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Dr S J GOUS: Mr Chairman, the aim of the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and
Allied Health Professions Amendment Bill is to extend the term of office of
the members of the interim council with retrospective effect. The term of
office of the members of the previous council expired as long ago as 12
February 1999, which means that any decisions and actions taken by the
aforementioned interim council since 12 February 1999 were illegal and
invalid.

The first question that arises is how such a situation could have arisen.
The Department of Health has explained that it was a mistake on their part,
for which they accepted full responsibility, and they also apologised
unconditionally. Now, we are all merely people, and that is why the New NP
accepts the explanation and apology of the Department of Health in the
spirit in which it was made.

The second question that arises is whether the legislation can in fact be
of retrospective effect. The state legal adviser, Mr Daniels, has given a
written assurance to this effect, but nevertheless conceded that it would
eventually be the court that would have to evaluate such a decision.
Although the New NP accepts that the interim council acted in good faith
and that their bona fides should be above suspicion, we can only hope and
believe that none of their decisions are going to be tested in a court of
law.

The last question that arises is why the interim council, in the three
years since 1996, has been unable to succeed in establishing a permanent
council. The reply to and excuse for this question was not very
satisfactory, and we can only hope that a permanent council can be
appointed before February 2001, otherwise the matter will once again turn
into an embarrassment.

The New NP supports this legislation in the hope that an untenable
situation will in this way be rectified as soon as possible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the next member will be
delivering his maiden speech.
Mr S NAIDOO: Mr Chairperson, hon members, this Bill seeks to correct an
anomaly. There have been problems in the chiropractors, homeopaths and
allied health services professions which failed to resolve many issues over
a lengthy period of time. The interim council has been hard at work trying
to resolve many of the problems, and make recommendations to the Minister
to pave the way for constituting a new council.

However, the term of office of the current council expired in February
1999. Recommendations made by the council since then, therefore, lack a
statutory basis, and hence the enabling legislation to rectify this
anomaly.

The amendments are merely technical and noncontroversial. The main Act to
regulate the chiropractors and homeopaths was enacted in 1974. The Act was
improved in the 1980s, and provided for regulation of allied health
services professions, as well.

In our society there is a growing support for the services provided by the
practitioners of these professions. Along with scientific medicine, there
is a place in society for these professions, and it is necessary to have
order. The recommendations of the interim council in achieving this are
therefore paramount.

The interim council needs to have a strong statutory basis, and the UDM, in
keeping with its policy of a healthy and a world-class nation, supports
this measure. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson, it is regrettable that the interim council
that was established in February 1996 was unable to make recommendations to
the Minister of Health, as was expected. In the three years in which it
should have done this, it was unable to do so, with the result that the
whole thing expired.

But, having said that, the UCDP supports the Bill, whose intention is to
extend the term of office of the interim council. We hope that this time it
will live up to expectations.

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, the PAC supports this amendment which will help
to regularise a situation which developed because of an oversight in the
legislative programme. In our view it is necessary to have an interim
council so that there is some administrative authority in place before the
permanent council is established.

Matters of health are of importance to the nation, and the maintenance of
standards and constant supervision are necessary at all times, particularly
in the unusual spheres of medicine involving chiropractors, homeopaths and
allied professions.

The standard of health in our nation must be raised at all times. Our
nation is First and Third World all in one. Some parts of our country are
quite primitive, with no facilities whatsoever. It is urgent that we extend
facilities to people in all areas, particularly in the rural areas. Of
particular concern is the plight of children, women and the aged.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time has
expired.

Dr M S MOGOBA: Thank you, I did well in one minute.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, health is always a sensitive issue which must
receive priority every single day. We have advanced tremendously in medical
science, and consequently we have made intelligent discoveries to cure or
relieve many illnesses. However, in order to ensure the development and
successful implementation of these plans, legislation must be put in place
in order to guide and co-ordinate the various medical science disciplines,
such as chiropractice and homeopathy.

Furthermore, the promotion of effective service delivery must be regulated.
Therefore the MF supports the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health
Service Professions Amendment Bill, which extends the term of office of the
interim council so that a recommendation to the Minister on the
constitution of a new council can be made. Simultaneously, the interim
council will have sufficient time to prepare for the election of members to
the new council. [Applause.]

Dkt S C CWELE: Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo, siyabonga nathi ukuthola ithuba
lokuthi siphefumule ngalo mThethosivivinywa. Ngizoqala ngokuzama
ukuphendula uzakwethu ohloniphekile uMike Ellis. Ukhulume ngokuthi
uNgqongqoshe nomnyango wakhe abawenzanga umsebenzi. (Translation of Zulu
paragraph follows.)

[Dr S C CWELE: Hon Chairperson, we are grateful for the opportunity to
speak on this Bill. I will start by answering my hon colleague Mike Ellis.
He has spoken about the fact that the Minister and his department did not
do the work.]

He actually said they left a mess.

Ngicabanga ukuthi kuye kusize ukuthi ngaphambi kokuba umuntu ajikijele
amatshe, azibheke yena. [I think that at times it helps to check on oneself
before one throws stones at others.]

Mike Ellis should remember very well that it is not only the responsibility
of the department or Ministry, but also that of members of Parliament to
monitor these institutions and ensure that they function appropriately and
within a legal mandate. If Mr Ellis had attended the committee meetings he
would not be wasting our time saying all the things he is saying, because
those matters were raised at committee level.

Uma sengidlula-ke ngiya kozakwethu laba be-New NP, bona bayawugxeka lo
mkhandlu wesikhashana ngokuthi yini ungawuqedanga umsebenzi wawo njengoba
wawunikezwe iminyaka emithathu. Ngizoke ngithi qaphu-qaphu nje ukuze
sicacisele iNdlu ukuthi yini ngempela eyenzekile. [I want to go on to what
my colleagues in the New NP say. They criticise this interim council,
asking why it did not finish its work within the three years which it was
given. I will mention a few points to clarify to the House as to what
exactly had happened.]

In 1995 our Government and this Parliament recognised the problems which
were faced by the alternative health practitioners in our country. These
professionals included chiropractors, homeopaths and allied health service
professionals. The core of the problem lay in the way the previous
apartheid government regulated these practitioners.

Historically speaking, there was no training of these professionals within
the Republic. Most of them were trained in America, Europe and, in other
instances, Asia. The problem was further complicated by the fact that the
first group of those who came back into the country lobbied the NP
government, which led to the compilation of the list which was kept in the
department and subsequently the legislation which was passed in 1982.

Those who were registered complicated the matter by closing the doors on
those who were still outside. They refused them registration, and this
forced a large number of these professionals to go underground in order to
practise their profession. In line with the grand apartheid policy, some
people were discriminated against because of the shape of their noses or
the colour of their skins.

In short, we had a profession which was immensely divided and very poorly
regulated in 1995. When we passed the law in 1995 we were fully aware of
the challenges which we were going to face in the interim council. It was
for this reason that, in addition to these professionals, we also adopted
measures to bring other people referred to in the Bill as community
representatives into the council.

The functions of the council are also mentioned. To us there is absolutely
no doubt that the interim council has gone a long way in meeting these
tasks, despite the difficulties they were facing. In line with our policy
of accelerating transformation, we in the ANC were also concerned about the
delays in the finalisation of the work of the council.

The DP has asked whether the council will be able to finalise its work
within the next 12 months. I repeat, if Mr Ellis had attended the committee
meetings he would have been aware that the committee was assured that the
work of the council would be finalised, and we are hoping that the new Bill
which establishes the democratic council will be tabled before the end of
this year.

The ANC was under no illusion that we were going to eliminate all the evil
institutional effects of apartheid within just two or three years, but we
shall spare no effort in accelerating the democratic transformation of our
institutions and statutory bodies.

NjengoKhongolose, siyawuxhasa lo mThetho-sivivinywa. [Ihlombe.] [We, as the
ANC, support this Bill. [Applause.]]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Sihlalo, ngicela ukubonga uDkt Cwele ngokusinikeza
umlando esingeke sisabuye siwuphinde futhi - umlando wokubandlulula
ngokubeka abanye ozakwethu abaphatha amakhambi ngokusemthethweni.
Ngiyabonga kuDkt Cwele.
Ngifuna ukusho ukuthi lo mkhandlu unezincomo ezibalulekile esethembayo
ukuthi zizosisiza ukuthi singabuye siphinde sibe sesimweni esasikusona
ngaphambi kokhetho luka-1994. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank Dr Cwele for giving us the history, which we cannot repeat, the
history of discriminating through legally appointing some of our colleagues
who are herbalists. Thank you very much, Dr Cwele.

I want to say that this interim council has important recommendations. We
hope they will help us not to return to the situation in which we found
ourselves before the 1994 elections.]

The interim council, indeed, has done a sterling job and I have no doubt in
my mind that this council, whose term of office will be respectively
extended, will conclude its job on time. Indeed, it has stacks and stacks
of good recommendations. If Mr Mike Ellis says it is dead, all we will need
to do will be to resuscitate those recommendations. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                    (Resumption of First Reading debate)

Mr N M NENE: Mr Chairperson, hon members, today we continue with the debate
on the Budget of 2000-01. I am going to deal with rural development and the
impact of this Budget thereon.

High levels of rural dependence and marginalisation can be attributed to
the well-documented legacy of rural and economic subjugation, which has
created one of the greatest challenges of the postapartheid era. It is
little wonder that 68% of people living in rural households live in
poverty, and that more than 75% of South Africa's poor can be found in
rural areas. It has been argued that there is therefore a greater case for
a policy that improves rural employment opportunities. Economic progress in
rural areas is necessary and urgent if South Africa is to obtain lasting
social stability.
Economically, poverty is perceived in terms of lack of resources such as
land, infrastructure and productive resources. The rural poor are deprived
of most of the basic resources such as housing, employment, health
facilities and recreational facilities.

Research shows that during 1995 the situation was as follows. Forty-five
per cent of the rural poor lived in mud houses. That is the reason why
these areas are the hardest hit when the floods actually strike. Only 55%
of the families possessed toilet facilities of some kind at that time,
hence the diseases. Most residents used paraffin and candles for lighting.
There was no electricity or running water in most villages. Levels of
unemployment were very high. There was no reliable transport between a
village and the nearest town, and the nearest clinic was approximately 7,5
km away.

Communication infrastructure never existed or was very poor. More than 60%
of the African population in rural areas were women who were undermined by
the gendered nature of the migrant labour system. In some provinces the
picture was even gloomier than the national one. In KwaZulu-Natal
approximately 50% of Africans had not received education by that time. Only
one third of the population was within 10 km of the permanent health
clinic, and many rural communities were essentially and economically
isolated owing to poor roads. So that was the plight of the people.

Now I want to look at what this Budget does to try to address the
situation. The impact of this Budget on rural development is as follows.
The Budget places great emphasis on poverty alleviation. There are
increases in social security allocations, there is a lowering of the tax
burden on the lower-income groups, and the poor receive special attention.

The ANC Government, through this Budget, is meeting the challenge of access
to land in financial terms. There are large increases in the provision for
land transfers, land reform and restitution costs which will almost double
in the next three years from R149,5 million in the current financial year
to R287,8 million for the period 2000 to 2003. For the period 2000 to 2003
land transfer payments for land reform and restitution will cost Government
R549,9 million, compared to R333,2 million last year. Land reform received
a total allocation of R837,4 million, which will rise to R952,2 million
over the three years in anticipation of accelerated land transfers to
beneficiaries.

The Budget shifts the focus in Government spending away from personnel
towards infrastructural spending, with the latter set to increase by no
less than 16%. There is a dire need for infrastructural development in the
rural areas. The increase will therefore definitely lead to adequate
infrastructure which will serve as entrepreneurial support. Moreover, the
infrastructural development through Public Works programmes will result in
the improvement of wage income opportunities. This is in line with the
International Labour Organisation's call for job creation programmes that
benefit the poorest group in South Africa.

Gaining access to the primary wage market appears to be a critical factor
in improving household living standards and per capita income, as well as
growing a vibrant and flexible economy that is able to take advantage of
the resources of South Africa's people and the opportunities offered by the
global economy in a sustainable way. Expenditures grow markedly in real
terms and remain strongly distributive in favour of the poor. This
indicates the extension of social services to the poor and most vulnerable
which will reduce inequality and overcome poverty.

The Budget has done this through the following. It has done it through the
increase in the Health budget, which moves away from the Health department
to clinic-based primary health care, and by the increase in the Education
budget. The rural poor consistently see education as their highest priority
and as the most effective way out of poverty. Spending on programmes
targeted at the poor such as housing subsidies, poverty relief and child
support grants will ensure a broad social security net for the rural poor.
It also does that by promoting the SMMEs and rewarding the development
efforts of the nonprofit sector.

Given the magnitude of the poverty challenge, policy emphasis directed
towards SMMEs is more than welcome as these provide the best opportunity
for economic and income growth. It also does that by inflation targeting
which will ensure the protection of the weak in the economy and lift the
heavy burden that is always placed by hyperinflation on poor families and
small businesses. We must remember that hyperinflation erodes the income of
the low-earners and the most vulnerable in a society. The Budget focuses on
increases in training and skills development. Rural South African citizens
are in desperate need of, and deserve, training if they are to succeed in
highly productive and profitable SMMEs. Well-trained and highly skilled new
job seekers will definitely be absorbed into the labour market as well.

I also want to touch slightly on the integrated rural development strategy
which seeks to address the lack of co-ordination which resulted in
nonsustainable development. It essentially means that, firstly, Government
departments emerge with an integrated approach to delivery of services, and
also that pilot projects are being put together in identified areas in
provinces which were targeted in the President's state of the nation
address. It also means ensuring that we deliver sustainable development in
rural areas and that we also give effect to the Development Facilitation
Act of 1995.

The fact that two out of five South Africans still live in poverty is
morally repugnant and a profoundly destabilising force in society. This
staggering 2,4 million figure of rural people, which is based on the 1995
statistics, deserves to have a special attention through progressive budget
allocations like the Budget we have here in 2000-2001.

Amaqembu aphikisayo, ikakhulukazi i-DP, anomkhuba wokugiya ngethambo
labantu abamnyama abahluphekayo. Ngonyaka odlule umholi we-DP, umhlonishwa
uTony Leon, wavakashela eKeate's Drift ngaseMsinga lapho kunefemu
yezicathulo eyavalwayo. Wayephelezelwa ngabezindaba ukuze ahlekise ngabantu
bakithi labo asebaxhashazwa bekhanda izicathulo beholelwa utiki
ngesicathulo sisinye. Kwathi uma sebedelile, babalahla okwenyongo yenyathi.
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Opposition parties, especially the DP, tend to mock the situation of poor
black people. Last year the DP leader, the hon Tony Leon, visited Keate's
Drift near Msinga where there was a factory making shoes, which then closed
down. He was accompanied by the media in his campaign to mock our people,
who were exploited in the factory where they made shoes and just received a
meagre salary. When their employers were satisfied, they dumped them as if
they were rubbish.]

He conveniently did not proceed to Muden where people have been awarded
thousands of acres of land through the land reform process, just 10 km away
from where he was. Further, he could have gone to Msinga where more than 14
clinics were built by this ANC Government in the period between 1994 and
1999. [Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Mr Chairman, I would like to start off by quoting the hon
the Minister for Welfare and Population Development in a recent advert
called: Mobilising for a caring society. He said in that advert:


  Let me begin by saying that I have one overriding impression after six
  months in the Ministry which is that the welfare system in this country
  is failing those people who most need support.

As far as the DP is concerned, we agree with the Minister. He then went on
to say that South Africa has been and is experiencing a deep social crisis,
the nature of which is persistent, and increasing levels of poverty and low
economic growth. Here, once again, the DP agrees with the Minister.

It is primarily against these criteria that the Budget has to be judged -
judged from a perspective of whether a systematic framework for poverty
reduction exists in our country. Now, we know that to achieve real poverty
reduction, we have to achieve real rapid economic growth. Yet, we budget
for real growth of only 3,4% over the next three years instead of the
required 6%. What does that mean? It means more unemployment. That is the
primary aspect in which this Budget fails.

Out there is an important secondary aspect. This Budget witnesses, I
believe, the ANC's final spectacular desertion of the poor, the pensioners
and the unemployed. [Interjections.] Well, hon members can say that, but
let us go through a laundry list of exactly how they have deserted these
people.

In respect of grants, let us look at old age pensions. Since the ANC took
power, pension increases have not kept pace with inflation. In fact, the
real value of pensions has declined 11% over the past six years. An
increase of R87,50 should have been given by the Minister in order for
pensions just to have kept pace with inflation over the past six years.
Indeed, the Minister seems to have earned himself the very dubious title of
the ``Lapa Munnik of the new millennium''.
Child support grants have not changed since their introduction in 1998,
effectively a real decrease of 10%. The integrated nutritional programme is
set to decrease in real terms by 10% over the MTEF period. The real tragedy
though is that even money that is voted in the form of grants is often not
spent. The Auditor-General's report that has recently been reported on,
said that R1,4 million of the R204 million set aside for poverty relief was
actually not spent, and that has to be put on the table and debated. It is
a scandal - 78,5% or R353 million of the Welfare department's R415 million
budget was not spent.

In the light of the Minister's own assessment of poverty in South Africa,
it is a national disgrace. It is bordering on the criminal and speaks
volumes about the ANC's priorities and its capacity to govern. What is also
interesting is the 40% of money allocated on the Aids' budget which was
also not spent. What about the unemployed? Once again, the unemployed seem
to have been ignored. Even the national public works programme is set to
decline by 14% in real terms over the MTEF period.

Now, I am reminded of our members' wise observation that about a quarter of
our population, honest-to-goodness South Africans, have not had a meal in
the past 48 hours. A society which is going to prosper needs to be
compassionate to those who suffer hardships through no fault of their own.
We cannot and should not turn our backs on these people. Yes, we have
limited resources, but we must do something; and it is in that context that
the DP puts on the table a basic subsistence grant of up to a maximum of
R400 per month payable to any one family.

The grant of R100 per person, we believe, should be payable to every person
with an annual income of R7 000. An income tax system should be used to
make it uneconomic for people who do not qualify to apply. This is not a
big handout. It is essentially survival assistance, but it will help people
on the poverty datum line. All these indeed are palliatives giving but
faint hope to the poor. To give real hope, we need to have real growth, we
need to achieve 6% growth. If we unshackle the economy, we believe that we
can do it and give real hope. [Applause.]

Chief M W HLENGWA: Mr Chairperson, may I invite members to take heed of the
words by Wendell L Wilkie when he said:


  Whenever we take away the liberty of those whom we hate, we are opening
  the way to loss of liberty for those we love.

I rise again to participate in this debate knowing pretty well that there
are hon members in this Chamber who feel the same way as I do on the
question of indigenous rulers of our country. On the contrary, there are
those who are hellbent against them and who tend to scream and shout
whenever a question of traditional leaders is raised. I can only say that
if they are real Africans, God help them; and if they are not, they must
know where the African leadership's roots are.

For the benefit of those who were brought up in urban areas, I have this to
say: If a hunter goes to hunt, he takes his dogs with him. Together with
his dogs, he looks for the game, and if found, it is chased. In most cases
the dogs catch the buck, and it is taken home for skinning. When the whole
thing is done the buck is taken into the house, and the skin put safely out
to dry. Then the poor dogs are given the intestines as their share,
irrespective of their contribution towards catching the buck.

This is the sixth year of freedom for many in South Africa, but traditional
leaders are still not part of those who are enjoying freedom. The game that
was chased, together with traditional leaders, is in fact freedom.
Traditional leaders were present in Bloemfontein. They fought the invaders
long before the launch of the liberation movement in Bloemfontein. They did
not wait for the formation of liberation movements and political parties in
order to start defending the rights of their people and their land.
Traditional leaders have a history of leading liberation movements, but
today they are left with the intestines of that buck, which is freedom. I
am sure they are forced to regard themselves as the victims of liberation.

Today we are debating how the cake is sliced for the different departments
of Government. The hon the Minister of Finance could not allocate a slice
to that which is nonexistent. The Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa bars the Minister of Finance from allocating directly to the
Department of Traditional Affairs, because it does not exist.

When Parliament officially opens here in Cape Town, heads of state
institutions are announced as they enter this Chamber. I am waiting for the
day when I will hear the chairpersons of houses of traditional leaders also
being announced when Parliament officially opens. If this has been an
oversight, may I plead with the powers that be that it be remedied.

Traditional communities, no matter who says what, are facing the biggest
challenge and the burden of having to pay rates, instead of being
reimbursed for having suffered after being pushed into the deep rural areas
when towns were established. In The Natal Mercury of 28 February 2000, the
following is reported:


  Responding to concerns raised by some amakhosi that their people were too
  poor to pay rates, Dr Sutcliffe said the national Government had made
  financial provision for municipalities to cover the cost of rates for
  people who could not afford to pay.


True or misleading? That is the question. I really wonder what is going to
happen to these communities. The Government must intervene and stop the
demarcation process so as to allow negotiations until amicable solutions
are found.

Traditional leaders have never regarded themselves as decorations. Why
should they be marginalised and disregarded when it comes to matters of
development affecting their communities? Traditional leaders have nowhere
to go. They cannot even emigrate to Europe, because if they should attempt
that, Europe will send them where they belong. So, let us restore their
status by addressing the flaws of Chapter 12 of the Constitution.

I end with the words of Jean-Paul Marat:


  Of what use is political liberty to those who have no bread? It is of
  value only to ambitious theorists and policitians.

Mnr F BEUKMAN: Mnr die Voorsitter, die agb Minister het sy toespraak begin
met 'n aanhaling van Ben Okri. Ek wil graag my toespraak begin met 'n
aanhaling van nog 'n groot Afrikaan, C J Langenhoven. Hy het gesê:

  Met spaarsaamheid sal jy uit die kleinste inkomste iets oorhou, met
  verkwisting sal die grootste vir jou te min wees.

Met hierdie Begroting is dit ook die les wat na vore kom uit die finansiële
prestasies van die provinsies.

Provinsies kry R106 miljard in die volgende boekjaar. Hiervan word R94,4
miljard versprei tussen provinsies, gegrond op die gelyke-aandeelformule.
Wat ons sê, is dat provinsies wat bespaar, wat hulle rande die verste rek
met goeie dienslewering en wat goeie bestuur toepas, beloon moet word.
Onteenseglik is die Wes-Kaap, wat die boekjaar 'n tweede agtereenvolgende
keer met 'n surplus afgesluit het, 'n goeie voorbeeld. Die besnoeiing van
ongeveer 20 000 poste in die openbare sektor die afgelope paar jaar het ook
tot die besparing bygedra. Ander provinsies wat wil presteer en die waarde
vir hulle belastingrand aan die belastingbetalers wil deurgee, sal móét sny
aan personeelkoste. Dit is die realiteit as ons Gear op koers wil hou.

Die Nuwe NP is van mening dat die bepaling van die formule in die toedeling
van fondse aan provinsies opnuut bekyk moet word. Die horisontale verdeling
van nasionale inkomste, wat hoofsaaklik op bevolkingsgetalle as deel van
die formule gegrond is, moet op geloofwaardig en wetenskaplik gefundeerde
data berus. Die 1996-sensusbevinding wat aandui dat die Wes-Kaap se
bevolking gekrimp het en die ander provinsies meer inwoners bygekry het, is
`n goeie voorbeeld van bevindings wat nie vertroue inboesem nie. Goeie
beplanning is slegs moontlik as betroubare data beskikbaar is, en daarom
moet die metodiek van instansies soos Statistiek SA deurlopend aan
monitering, internasionale evaluering en prestasieoudit onderhewig wees.

`n Provinsie soos die Wes-Kaap ontvang ongeveer 4,6% van sy inkomste op
grond van die gelyke-aandeelformule van nasionale inkomste. Die oplossing
om provinsies finansieel meer selfstandig te maak is om na nuwe bronne van
inkomste binne die nasionale raamwerk van wetgewing te kyk.
Motorvoertuiglisensies, hospitaaltariewe en perdewedrenne is nie `n
realistiese vertrekpunt om provinsies finansieel meer selfstandig te maak
nie. Ook het die nuwe bron van dobbelinkomste nie die finale antwoord nie.
`n Voorbeeld sou wees om as mikpunt eerder die heffing van
lughawevertrekbelasting `n inkomstestroom van provinsies te maak. Dit sal
provinsies aanmoedig om meer toeristevriendelik te wees en sal as
aanmoediging dien om proaktiewe beleggersinisiatief aan die dag te lê.

Die debat oor die identifisering van nuwe inkomstebronne vir provinsies
moet op die tafel geplaas word. Ons stem saam met die Minister dat dit in
samewerking en in konsultasie met die Minister se departement moet geskied.
Daar is nie `n plaasvervanger vir samewerkende regering, oftewel ``co-
operative governance'' wanneer die funksies oor die drie vlakke van
regering loop nie. Die mediumtermyn-uitgaweraamwerk, wat `n driejaarsiklus
het, noodsaak dat daar nou reeds gekyk word na die moontlike opsies om
provinsies minder afhanklik van die sentrale Regering te maak.

Die post-begrotingsdebat wat die Nuwe NP bepleit, moet inklusief wees en
die volgende vyf agendapunte insluit: eerstens, die doelgerigte
ontwikkeling van `n nasionale konsensus dat provinsies wel nuwe
inkomstebronne moet kry; tweedens, die herevaluering van meetinstrumente
soos toegepas deur die Finansiële en Fiskale Kommissie in die toedeling van
die gelyke-aandeelkonsep; derdens, die ondersoek van wyses waarop bestaande
bronne van inkomste verbeter kan word; vierdens - en dit is baie belangrik
- die versnelling of ``fast-tracking'' van Gear ten einde die
implementering daarvan suksesvol te maak; en vyfdens, die onderneem van
verdere navorsing om die hele konsep van fiskale federalisme te bevorder en
toegepas te kry op die drie regeringsvlakke.

Ons moet nou reeds na 2006 en 2008 kyk. Die Nuwe NP wil graag nou die
nasionale debat hieroor open. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN: Mr Chairperson, the hon the Minister started his speech with
a quote from Ben Okri. I would like to start my speech with a quote from
another great African, C J Langenhoven. He said:


  Met spaarsaamheid sal jy uit die kleinste inkomste iets oorhou, met
  verkwisting sal die grootste vir jou te min wees.

In this Budget this is also the lesson to be learnt from the financial
achievements of the provinces.

Provinces will be getting R106 billion in the next financial year. Of this
amount R94,4 billion will be allocated to the provinces according to the
equal share formula. We submit that provinces that save, that stretch their
rand the furthest with good service delivery and that practise good
management, should be rewarded. Undoubtedly the Western Cape, which for the
second time running has finished the financial year with a surplus, is a
good example. The reduction of approximately 20 000 posts in the public
sector during the past few years has also contributed to the saving. Other
provinces which want to do well and pass on value for their tax rand to
taxpayers will have to cut down on staff costs. This is the reality if we
want to keep Gear on track.

The New NP is of the opinion that the determining of the formula for the
allocation of funds to provinces should be re-examined. The horizontal
division of national revenue, which has been based mainly on population
numbers as part of the formula, must be based on data which is credible and
scientifically sound. The 1996 census finding that the population of the
Western Cape has declined while the other provinces have more inhabitants,
is a good example of findings which do not inspire confidence. Good
planning is only possible if reliable date is available, and for that
reason the modus operandi of organisations such as Statistics South Africa
must be subjected on an ongoing basis to monitoring, international
evaluation and performance auditing.
A province such as the Western Cape receives approximately 4,6% of its
revenue on the basis of the equal share formula of national revenue. The
solution to make provinces financially more independent is to examine new
sources of revenue within the national framework of legislation. Motor
vehicle licences, hospital tariffs and horse racing are not realistic
points of departure to make provinces financially more independent. The new
source of revenue, gambling, is not the ultimate solution either. An
example would be to aim rather to make the levying of airport departure tax
a source of revenue for provinces. This would encourage provinces to be
more tourist friendly and would serve as an incentive to display proactive
investor initiative.

The debate on the identification of new sources of revenue for provinces
must take place. We agree with the Minister that this must be in co-
operation and in consultation with the Minister's department. There is no
substitute for co-operative governance, when the functions pertain to all
three tiers of government. The medium-term expenditure framework, which has
a three-year cycle, necessitates our already examining the possible options
to make provinces less dependent on central Government.

The post Budget debate which the New NP is advocating, must be inclusive
and must include the following five points: Firstly, the purposeful
development of a national consensus that provinces must get new sources of
revenue; secondly, the re-evaluation of measuring instruments as utilised
by the Financial and Fiscal Commission in the allocation of the equal share
concept; thirdly, the investigation of ways in which existing sources of
revenue can be improved; fourthly - and this is very important - the fast-
tracking of Gear in order to implement it successfully; and, fifthly, the
undertaking of further research to promote the entire concept of fiscal
federalism and get it implemented at the three tiers of government.

We must already start looking at 2006 and 2008. The New NP would like to
open the national debate on this now.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Minister and members, the budget is
aggressive in its policy initiatives and confident in its outlook that
South Africa will sustain its growth potential. South Africa weathered the
storm of the global financial crisis just over a year ago, and for the
nations' resilience, the Budget rewards it with tax benefits.
The budgetary governance is good, as it makes predictions and projections
more certain and manageable. However, what is more advantageous about the
Budget is that it attempts to make South Africa an attractive investment
destination. Our Budget deficit has steadied to 2,4% of GDP instead of the
predicted 3,4%. There is greater commitment to fiscal discipline and
delivery objectives.

However, if we can manage to get our nation to work, the prospect for the
future will be much brighter. The Minister said in his speech that the
nation, especially the less privileged, must be patient as this country is
on the road to a more humane, more caring society. If the rhetoric is good,
the reality speaks of a different set of expectations. People want jobs and
they want these jobs soon. Their basic needs in respect of security, food
and shelter are expectations that cannot wait.

If we say that the Budget is good, we say it is good because those who are
employed are the major beneficiaries. It is, of course, right that those
who work, save and make a contribution to the nation's economy, must reap
certain benefits. It is also true that social spending has increased and,
as the Budget Review states, an estimated 57% now goes to the poorest 40%
of our nation. This is commendable.

The ACDP welcomes the increase of R20 per month for pensioners and the
disabled. However, if Government can succeed in reducing the ghost
pensioners and other forms of corruption in this department, there would be
more money available to give to pensioners and the disabled.

With regard to capital gains tax, I think that the Department of Finance
has thrown a curve ball at Sars through the introduction of capital gains
tax. The reason why I am saying this, is that I question whether Sars can
afford the cost and time to administer the complexity of this new tax
system, which may prove a burden to an already overstressed institution.
Should capital gains tax prove to generate the tax benefit Government hopes
to reap, and investment and capital formation show positive signs, then the
country must become a competent global competitor to be reckoned with. We
hope that Sars will continue to run its business efficiently and especially
improve its capability in the field of customer relations and effective
service delivery.

If we should look at the Budget from another angle, however, the
uncomfortable question is whether the Budget is good enough to stem job
losses affecting the lives of thousands, nay, millions of South Africans.
It is true that R1,2 billion is earmarked for a jobs summit and poverty
relief initiatives and this we also commend.

The real politics we are faced with at grass-roots level, however, is that
nearly a million people have lost their jobs since 1994. In this respect
the Budget is not positively balanced to ensure the sustaining and creation
of jobs. Although small business will benefit as a result of the graduated
company tax structure, with the aim that it will encourage those
entrepreneurs to flourish, the role of SMMEs as job creation parties
remains ill defined.

Access to jobs must become South Africa's number one priority. Tax reform
and economic growth are great testimonies of a country's management skills.
The GDP is expected to grow at about 3,5% for the next few years. It is
estimated that at this rate, South Africa should be able to create an
additional 75 000 jobs annually. It is therefore ironic that South Africa
sheds more jobs than what it creates, in spite of the growth in GDP.
It is therefore not the number of policy initiatives we can develop, nor
the amount of money we pump into our jobs summit machines, but the number
of jobs we have successfully created that determines real economic growth.
Economic growth is worthless if it cannot provide employment for our
nation. The ACDP believes, however, that South Africa is well poised to
attract greater international attention. In this regard we do not mean only
the ability to compete on a global scale.

We believe that a greater resurgence of pride to be a South African is
possible, and is probably on the rise. As we continue to manage the affairs
of the nation with accountability and integrity, wipe out corruption and
stamp out crime, as well as encourage respect for civil liberties and
diversity, South Africans both at home and abroad will become determined to
invest their resources in the development and growth of this country. To
achieve this end, we must not be hasty to isolate ourselves from South
Africans abroad. Let us establish partnerships with them so that they can
share their knowledge and expertise with their country of origin. In other
words, since the Budget paints a picture of a growing and successful future
South Africa, we believe that great acceleration of our goals will be
achieved if we can encourage those abroad with positive incentives to bring
their skills back home to our country.

In conclusion, allow me to commend the Minister, the director-general, Ms
Maria Ramos, and the department on a job well done. Although we may not
support all the Budget Votes, we think that this is a good Budget, and it
therefore deserves our support.

Mr C AUCAMP: Chair, may I, in the first instance, congratulate Minister
Manuel, not on his Budget - I am supposed to criticise that - but on the
excellent Afrikaans he spoke on about one half of the programme Fokus on
SABC the day after the Budget Speech. I can assure him that in doing that,
he has done more to improve good relations between people than what 100
subpoenas from the HRC can achieve. [Laughter.]

In the press I called this Budget a Robin Hood Budget - taking from the
haves to give to the have-nots. In a sense, this can also be called a
William Tell Budget. The Minister will have to shoot very accurately to hit
the apple and not the head of the South African economy.
Belasting op inkomste is wel oor die hele spektrum verlig, maar steeds met
die klem op die laer inkomstegroepe. Die verlaging by die hoër en
middelinkomstegroepe is eintlik maar net 'n klein duikie daar bo in 'n
grafiek wat al lank reeds te hoog is.

Ten spyte van die toenemende aanwending van die Begroting as instrument om
rykdom te versprei, toon selfstandige studies dat die armste 30% van die
bevolking in reële terme steeds armer is as byvoorbeeld in 1992. Waarom?
Omdat ekonomiese groei en werkskepping die enigste werklike oplossing is om
armoede te verlig. Dit help nie om die koek alewig anders te sny nie. Die
koek moet groter gemaak word. Dít kan alleen deur ekonomiese groei gebeur.

Is hierdie Begroting werklik in staat om ekonomiese groei te stimuleer? Dit
is 'n geval van te min, te laat. Besparing, 'n voorvereiste vir ekonomiese
groei, sal nie oor die langtermyn bevorder word nie, aangesien die laer
inkomstegroepe wat meestal bevoordeel word 'n veel groter
bestedingsgeneigdheid het.

Ook die aanwending van staatsinkomste is nie positief vir ekonomiese groei
nie. Relatief min word geoormerk vir die verbetering van infrastruktuur.
Kapitale besteding as persentasie van die bruto binnelandse produk het van
1,6% in 1995 na 0,8% vanjaar afgeneem.

Die instelling van belasting op kapitaalwins mag algemene praktyk in ander
lande wees. Die vraag is of dit raadsaam is in 'n ontwikkelende land waar
groei die prioriteit moet wees. In dié verband doen ek 'n ernstige beroep
op die Minister - ek hoop hy luister - dat die toegewing wat op 'n private
woonhuis van toepassing is, uitgebrei sal word na plaaseiendom. Die
belasting op kapitaalwins sal gewoon toegevoeg word tot die prys van
plaaseiendom, met 'n gevolglike verhoging in die koste van
voedselproduksie, wat weer die armste deel van die bevolking negatief sal
raak.

Die dieselkorting vir 'n man wat sy lewe uit visse maak maar nie vir 'n man
wat sy lewe uit beeste of mielies maak nie, kan ek nie verstaan nie. Dit is
op die minste diskriminerend. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Income tax has been alleviated across the entire spectrum, but with the
emphasis still on the lower income groups. The reduction for the higher and
middle income groups is actually only but a small dent up there in a graph
which has been too high for far too long.

Despite the increasing application of the Budget as an instrument for
distributing wealth, independent studies indicate that the poorest 30% of
the population are, in real terms, still poorer than they were, for
example, in 1992. Why? Because economic growth and job creation are the
only real solution to alleviate poverty. It does not help to cut the cake
differently every time. The cake should be made bigger. This can only
happen through economic growth.

Is this Budget really able to stimulate economic growth? It is a question
of too little too late. Saving, a prerequisite for economic growth, will
not be promoted over the long term, because the lower income groups, that
are benefiting most, have a greater tendency towards spending.

The application of state income is also not positive for economic growth.
Relatively little is being earmarked for the improvement of infrastructure.
Capital expenditure as a percentage of the gross domestic product has
decreased from 1,6% in 1995 to 0,8% this year.

The introduction of tax on capital gain might be common practice in other
countries. The question is whether this is advisable in a developing
country where growth should be the priority. In this regard I am making an
earnest appeal on the Minister - I hope that he is listening - that the
concession which is applicable on a private dwelling, should be extended to
farming property. The tax on capital gain will simply be added to the price
of farm property, with a consequent increase in the cost of food
production, which in turn will again negatively affect the poorest part of
the population.

The diesel rebate for a man who makes his living from fishes, but not for a
man who makes his living from cattle or mealies, I cannot understand. This
is discrimination in the least.]

May I conclude with an important remark by the Union Bank of Switzerland on
the role of government expenditure. I quote:


  As a political and bureaucratic decision-making mechanism is less
  efficient than that of the market, each shift in economic activity should
  be to the private sector.
[Time expired.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The next hon member is going to make
her maiden speech. [Applause.]

Mrs R R JOEMAT: Chairperson and hon members, I am going to speak about what
the Budget means to women. I am honoured to give this input on the day on
which we had a debate on International Women's Day.

The hon the Minister, Trevor Manuel, started his speech by quoting from a
book by Ben Okri, A Way of Being Free. He referred to the theory of the
scientist Darwin, namely the survival of the fittest. He also referred to
various animal species. I was not sure where to place the woman. Are we the
gold fishes or are we the sharks? Are we the birds that have mastered the
art of flying without perching? I must proclaim that women have mastered
the art of survival, because we are wise, the most adaptive and the most
aware. We are the rock of the nation.

A budget is commonly known as an estimate or plan of expenditure in
relation to income. Many women tell me that they do not need to put their
budget on paper, because they know exactly where the income will go to,
that is to feed and clothe the family. Our grandmothers and mothers used an
innovative money purse. My mother would tie the money in a handkerchief and
keep it safely in the brassier. From that knot of the handkerchief the
family would be managed financially. She would know exactly how much
unspent funds there were left.

Now that the economy is left in the hands of our ANC-led Government, the
poorest of the poor must benefit. In a Business Report article of the Cape
Times of Tuesday, 22 February, Zurinah Maharaj speculated before the Budget
was made known. She raised the concern that the Budget must tackle the
gender inequality, and mentioned various areas that had to be addressed.
Let me tell Zurinah that we are on course, as the President said.

As our Minister stated, and I quote:


  This House has had many a member emphasise that our success as a nation
  depends on our ability to reduce inequality and overcome poverty.

Changes impacting on the poorest of those who are mostly bearing the brunt
of caring - that is the women, who care for their children, the young, the
old, the disabled, the ill and those who are themselves at the bottom of
each of these groups - have been favoured and targeted by the Minister.

The Budget Review and the expenditure survey in different areas of
Government are diverse. We are under no illusion as to how far we have yet
to go, but the foundation has been laid. In my constituency - which is in
the area of Athlone in the Western Cape, including Surrey Estate, Manenberg
and Heideveld - we as a group of women, went through the Budget and this is
what we say: We should not just look at this Budget, but must also look at
the changes effected by the Bills passed by this House since 1994, and how
this has improved the lives of women.

This Budget makes the most far-reaching tax reform. Previously, married
women were unfairly discriminated against. We had to pay more tax than men.
Thanks to our ANC-led Government, equality is restored in our tax
structure. Research has shown that the majority of women fall within the
earning band of middle income and lower income, and more women are over the
age of 65. We do outlive the men, generally. [Interjections.]

The tax relief will be a benefit to these women. It is common knowledge
that small to medium enterprises hold great potential for employment, and
that large numbers of women can realise income-generating activities in
such businesses. Now, qualifying small corporates will only pay 15% on the
first R100 000 of taxable income, and 30% thereafter. This is surely an
incentive for more women to enter and stay in this area of employment,
especially rural women.

The access to financial support must not be divorced from the tax relief
that has been given to small businesses. Women should not only aspire to
SMEs. The significant absence of women in big corporate worlds must be
addressed. Women's wages have grown and the economic gender gaps seem to be
closing, yet women's wages in both developed and developing countries lag
behind, at about two thirds of those of men. The challenge is to determine
how to facilitate, encourage and support young women in early participation
on the positive track in the workforce. Women must support each other and
form a network linked to other substructures globally.
Nonprofit organisations play an important role in our society. It is here
where large numbers of women are employed. They assist development by
extending social services to our communities. Now that tax deductability
for donations has been extended, we want to make a call on individuals in
this House and others, especially businesses, to donate generously to the
institutions as outlined by the Minister.

Significant amounts of funds have been allocated to upgrading systems and
to improving performance within the integrated justice sector, and must
contribute to a safer and crime-free society. Criminals continue to prey on
our communities, raping women, amongst other things, and abusing the aged
and children. Our communities are constantly living in fear. These
criminals are no role models for our children and they must be dealt with
by our justice system.

Spending on social services such as Education, Health and Welfare takes up
the bulk of the Budget. The social safety net has been widened with more
relief to the elderly, the disabled, the unemployed, as well as to poor
families with children. The increase in the number of child support grants
is an encouraging sign. This proves that we are a caring nation, especially
for the poorest children and the aged in our country.

A special allocation of R1,2 billion has been made for poverty relief,
infrastructure investment and Jobs Summit projects. As women we must assert
ourselves to ensure that women benefit.  The fact that there is now more
money in the pockets of women, mothers, single mothers and grandmothers
means that the children will benefit, and therefore the nation will
benefit. If the income is left in women's hands, the children tend to
benefit more than when it is in the hands of men. [Interjections.] I say
again: We are under no illusion as to how far we have yet to go, but we are
on course.

I would like to conclude with a quote from one of our greatest leaders,
Comrade Oliver Tambo:


  A nation can never be completely free unless the women are free.

Malibongwe! [Let us praise the power of women!] [Interjections.]
[Applause.]
Mr J DURAND: Chairperson, hon members, the Budget deals with revenue and
expenditure. Our income is derived from taxes that we take from those who
earn and loans that we must pay back at a price. Expenditure is the cost to
run the country. The Budget is thus the structure through which Government
implements its vision for the country.

The President has promised South Africans a better life for all. To some a
better life might mean a second car, an overseas holiday, investments
hedged against inflation and a comfortable retirement. To the people where
I live, a better life means a job, affordable housing, access to clean
water, basic education and health care. The latter is very basic and should
be possible for a country such as ours to achieve, but the facts and their
implications are startling. Fifty per cent of African women between the
ages of 18 and 24 are unemployed. A small number of school-leavers will
find jobs this year.

Now, governments have tried to take from those who have, and give to those
who need, in the hope that some force would create sustainable equity.
Experiences in the past century have indicated that this route leads to
economic collapse and social disorder. What do we need to do?
Suid-Afrika het nou 'n geleentheid wat net een keer in 'n leeftyd voorkom.
Ons sal uit hierdie nou band van ekonomiese groei moet beweeg na die vlakke
van 5% en 6% ekonomiese groei. Sekere ekonome voel dat hierdie vlakke van
groei nie volgehou sal kan word nie as gevolg van strukturele probleme in
die ekonomie, soos die swak vaardighede van werkers, die skoolkrisis en
misdaad. Die Regering sal dus hierdie probleme so gou as moontlik moet
oplos.

Sedert 1994 het die Regering net die minimum gedoen om 'n klimaat te skep
wat bevorderlik is vir beleggings. Die Regering sal moed en dapperheid aan
die dag moet lê. Buitelandse beleggings en versnelde ekonomiese groei sal
nou hoog op die Regering se agenda moet wees. Die G7-lande het wegbeweeg
van hulp aan ontwikkelende lande, en die klem na handel en belegging
verskuif. Internasionale ondervinding het getoon dat buitelandse belegging
'n kragtige stimulus is vir 'n land se ekonomiese mededingendheid en dat
dit tot hoër en meer volhoubare ekonomiese groei lei. Sonder buitelandse
beleggings sal dit onmoontlik wees om sukses in die internasionale wêreld
te behaal. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[South Africa now has an opportunity which only comes around once in a
lifetime. We will have to move out of this narrow band of economic growth
to economic growth rates of 5% and 6%. Certain economists are of the
opinion that these rates of growth cannot be sustained because of
structural problems in the economy, such as the poor skills of workers, the
school crisis and crime. Therefore, the Government will have to solve these
problems as soon as possible.

Since 1994 the Government has done the bare minimum to create a climate
which is conducive to investment. The Government will have to display
courage and fortitude. Foreign investments and accelerated economic growth
will now have to be high on the agenda of the Government. The G7 countries
have moved away from providing aid to developing countries, and have
shifted the emphasis to trade and investment. International experience has
shown that foreign investment is a powerful stimulus to a country's
economic competitiveness and that this leads to higher and more sustainable
economic growth. Without foreign investment it will be impossible to attain
success in the international world.]

A very important role-player for growth in world trade is multinational
companies. MNCs have the capacity to generate funding from own resources or
from commercial banks; they can contribute to job creation and the transfer
of important technological and managerial skills; they bring with them
foreign exchange, high levels of economic growth and access for the host
country to international markets, BMW and Volkswagen being good examples of
this; they are a very stable form of investment; and they invest in
infrastructure, which creates economic confidence.

We must publicly, as Government. acknowledge the importance of the private
sector in economic growth. Our labour legislation and tax laws must support
such sentiments. The privatisation of state assets has already attracted
British and Malaysian investors. State assets become more productive and
profitable once they are managed by the private sector. This will increase
revenue for social services, create jobs and decrease Government spending.

We need to look at investment incentives to improve the investment climate,
such as tax holidays, subsidised loans, loan guarantees and lower import
and export duties. The world markets are very competitive, and we must use
this window of opportunity to promote international trade and investment.
We should act with speed. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 18:03.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    On 2 March 2000 the National Council of Provinces agreed to the
         Land Affairs General Amendment Bill [B 64B - 99] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), subject to proposed amendments. (See also
         Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 140.) The Bill
         and proposed amendments were thereupon, in terms of Rule 270 of
         the National Assembly, referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report.

     (2)    The following paper was tabled on 6 March 2000 and is now
         referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Life
         and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons:


         Youth Manifesto for the Twenty-First Century adopted by the World
         Parliament of Children on 24 October 1999.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Bills:

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Besoldiging van Openbare Ampsbekleërs [W 11
     - 2000]

     The Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Bill [B 11 - 2000] (National
     Assembly - sec 76(1)) was introduced by the Minister for Provincial and
     Local Government on 6 March 2000 and referred to the Portfolio
     Committee on Provincial and Local Government.

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Reports of the Board of Tariffs and Trade on the -


         (a)     Reinstatement of the duty on engine valves, Report No
              3866;

         (b)     Reduction in the rate of duty on vitamins used in animal
              feed, Report No 3868;


         (c)     Withdrawal of provisions under rebate items
              313.01.39.16/01.00, 313.01/39.17/01.00 and
              313.01/5906.99/01.01.06, Report No 3869;

         (d)     Reduction in the rate of duty on various rubber chemicals,
              Report No 3871;

         (e)     Withdrawal of the provisions under certain rebate items,
              Report No 3872.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the
     Select Committee on Economic Affairs.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Proclamation No R.2 published in the Government Gazette No 20826 dated
     21 January 2000, Commencement of sections 1,2,3,4,5,6 and 7 of the Debt
     Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Welfare and Population
     Development on the Nonprofit Organisations Amendment Bill [B 9 - 2000]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 8 March 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Welfare and Population Development,
         having considered the subject of the Nonprofit Organisations
         Amendment Bill [B 9 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred
         to it and classified by the JTM as a section 75 Bill, reports the
         Bill without amendment.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     Lotteries Amendment Bill [B 13 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 8 March 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the subject of the Lotteries Amendment Bill [B 13 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         JTM as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 13A
         - 2000].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
     on the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Amendment Bill [B 11B -
     2000] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 8 March 2000:
         The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
         considered the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Amendment
         Bill [B 11B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76), recommitted to
         it, reports the Bill with amendments [B 11C - 2000].


     Report to be considered.


