---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 June 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-06-08
---

                            THURSDAY, 8 JUNE 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes statements by the Danish Prime Minister, the hon Poul Nyrup
       Rasmussen, that Denmark is ready, in principle, to offer economic aid
       to help to end the violence in Zimbabwe;

  (2) believes that this statement reflects growing international support
       for President Mbeki's approach to the Zimbabwean crisis;

  (3) welcomes this statement and awaits translation of this commitment
       into action; and

  (4) calls on the DP and the New NP to come to terms with the realities of
       the land question in Zimbabwe.

[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay the ANC's unseemly haste in attempting to rush
       through the proposed Firearms Control Bill before public hearings
       have been concluded;

  (2) recognises that the public has a right to give its views on such an
       important piece of legislation and that opposition political parties
       have a right to hear such views before deciding on the Bill; and

  (3) calls on the Minister of Safety and Security to abandon his efforts
       to steamroller the legislation through Parliament before proper
       consideration has been given to both the legislation and its
       consequences for the fight against crime.

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the IFP wishes to take this opportunity to welcome the
       announcement of the Government's policy aimed at achieving
       sustainable coastal development in South Africa;

  (2) further notes that the IFP is particularly pleased that coastal
       dwellers, previously marginalised and denied access to the coast and
       its resources, will henceforth constitute coastal settlements, which
       will be managed to promote the socioeconomic benefit deriving from
       the coastal setting without upsetting the diversity, health and
       productivity of the coastal ecosystem they inhabit; and

  (3) endorses the above principle and looks forward to a better life for
       all who live along our beautiful coast through the sustainable use of
       the resources found there.

Mr M S GININDA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the breakthrough made by former President Nelson Mandela and
       President Pierre Buyoyo of Burundi in respect of the peace process in
       Burundi;

  (2) further notes that the agreements reached on the release of the Hutus
       and the integration of Hutus into the armed forces of that country
       represent a significant breakthrough in paving the way for a peaceful
       resolution of the conflict in Burundi;

  (3) commends both leaders for arriving at this most important decision;
       and

  (4) praises the efforts by our former President to build a better Africa
       and a better world.

Halala Madiba! [Applause.]

Mnr J J DOWRY: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van -


       (a)  die Nuwe NP se volgehoue poging om veelparty-demokrasie in Suid-
           Afrika deur middel van samewerking en alliansie-vorming te
           bevorder; en

       (b)  die Nuwe NP se verbintenis tot sterk opposisie, gegrond op
           beginsels, saam met partye van integriteit;


  (2) dit betreur dat sommige opposisiepartye eerder die opposisie aanval
       en probeer verswak as om die ANC, die SAKP en Cosatu aan te durf; en

  (3) kennis neem dat -


       (a)  die Nuwe NP kiesers wil verseker dat hulle mense met
           integriteite en 'n bewese diensrekord in hul gemeenskap as
           kandidate in die verkiesing sal benoem; en

       (b)  die Nuwe NP sal voortgaan om in die Wes-Kaap en in die metro- en
           plaaslike regerings wat hy deur goeie regering beheer,
           gehaltediens aan inwoners te lewer ten einde hul lewenskwaliteit
           te verbeter.

[Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion
follows.)

[Mr J J DOWRY: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the ongoing attempt by the New NP to promote multiparty
           democracy in South Africa by way of co-operation and the
           formation of alliances; and

       (b)  the commitment of the New NP to strong opposition, based on
           principles, in conjunction with parties of integrity;


  (2) deplores the fact that some opposition parties would rather attack
       and try to weaken the opposition than to take on the ANC, the SACP
       and Cosatu; and

  (3) notes that -


       (a)  the New NP wishes to assure voters that they will nominate as
           candidates in the election people of integrity with a proven
           track record in their community; and

       (b)  in the Western Cape and in the metro and local governments under
           its control the New NP will continue, through good governance,
           to render a quality service to residents in order to improve
           their quality of life.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay and trepidation that six ANC councillors of the
       Greater Haenertsburg transitional council in the Northern Province
       have sold a portion of state land which was under the jurisdiction of
       Kgoshigadi B M Maake of the Bakqaqa tribe;

  (2) is alarmed that these councillors have shared the money accruing from
       the sale of the land among themselves;

  (3) is appalled that the tribe and Kgoshigadi Maake and tribal
       councillors were never consulted when this illegal transaction took
       place;

  (4) finds it of particular concern and perturbing that these councillors
       are allowed to continue to hold public office in spite of these
       revelations and condemns the MEC for local government in the Northern
       Province for condoning these illegal actions; and

  (5) calls on the Minister for Provincial and Local Government to
       intervene and bring these councillors to book, and further to ask the
       police and/or the Heath Investigating Unit to conduct an in-depth
       investigation into this matter.

[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Ms S D MOTUBATSE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the conviction and sentencing to life imprisonment of the three
       men who raped two tourists near Storms River in April;

  (2) recognises that this House has passed legislation imposing minimum
       sentences for crimes of this nature;

  (3) believes that the life sentences imposed on the three perpetrators
       are a reflection of the seriousness with which this House and our
       Government regard crimes of violence, particularly those against
       women; and

  (4) commends the Government for the steps it is taking to rid our country
       of violence, crime and lawlessness.

[Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Beijing +5 conference in New York is unable to agree
       on resolutions that endorse certain rights, including homosexuality
       and abortion, among others;

  (2) expresses concern that the South African delegation, including the
       Deputy Speaker and the Minister for the Public Service and
       Administration, are in support of these rights; and

  (3) notes that these rights do not advance, but are harmful to, women's
       rights.

Gen C L VILJOEN: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with sadness the passing away of a former Chief of the SA Air
           Force, Lt Gen Bob Rogers; and

       (b)  that the late Gen Rogers had a distinguished career as a young
           air force pilot and squadron commander in the Second World War
           and performed operational service in the Korean War;


  (2) acknowledges the contribution of the late Gen Rogers in developing
       and commanding the SA Air Force to its current state of excellence
       that was again demonstrated in the flood relief operations in
       Mozambique earlier this year; and

  (3) resolves to honour the memory of an outstanding airman who dedicated
       his life to serving our country.

Miss T E LISHIVHA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the arrest of a Durban clothing factory proprietor yesterday
       for failing to register with the bargaining council in terms of the
       Labour Relations Act;
  (2) recognises that this is an important milestone in the protection of
       the rights of workers in terms of legislation passed by this House;

  (3) believes that -


       (a)  the protection of the rights of workers is a fundamental feature
           of our process of democratic transformation; and

       (b)  the rights of workers should not be sacrificed on the altar of
           quick profits; and


  (4) calls on all employers to honour the spirit and letter of the Labour
       Relations Act or risk prosecution.

[Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the decision by the Constitutional Court to declare
       unconstitutional sections of the Aliens Control Act which make it
       difficult for foreign spouses of South Africans to live in South
       Africa with their partners;

  (2) affirms its commitment to the right of couples to live together; and

  (3) calls on the Minister of Home Affairs to take urgent action to -


       (a)  give effect to the rights of these people; and

       (b)  submit amending legislation to Parliament to bring the Aliens
           Control Act into line with the Constitution.

[Applause.]

Chief M W HLENGWA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I will move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that many people remain in gaol in South Africa for committing
       criminal acts which they mistakenly believed were in the interests of
       the liberation struggle;

  (2) recognises that whilst such criminal acts cannot be condoned, they
       arose from a desire to participate in a just cause;

  (3) further recognises the suffering of many of the families of these
       prisoners as a result of the principal breadwinner of the family
       being in prison; and

  (4) calls on Government to provide assistance to the families of these
       prisoners to alleviate their plight through training programmes and
       other such initiatives, which would help them to find employment and
       earn a living for themselves.

Ms E GANDHI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the hon Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the National League for
           Democracy, remains incarcerated by the Burmese military;

       (b)  the military authorities in Rangoon stand accused of having
           denied the NLD access to state power after its overwhelming
           electoral victory in the 1990 election; and

       (c)  the hon Aung San Suu Kyi is a Nobel Peace laureate and has
           appealed to the international community, as she fears the
           possibility of life imprisonment or the death sentence;


  (2) believes that the continued detention of the hon Aung San Suu Kyi is
       a reflection of the determination of the military to violate the
       human rights of the Burmese people ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]
Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I will move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House, further to a motion proposed by the New NP on 9 May 2000,
  condemning the kidnapping of 21 hostages being held in the Philippines,
  including two South Africans, viz Monique and Callie Strydom, appeals to
  President Thabo Mbeki or, in his absence, Deputy President Jacob Zuma, to
  -


  (1) speak personally to the President of the Philippines to impress on
       him the concern of all South Africans and to urge him to ensure that
       his government steps up efforts to make progress;

  (2) approach all other presidents who have citizens amongst the hostages,
       requesting them to do the same; and

  (3) calls on all South Africans to pray for and give moral support to the
       families of the hostages.

Mr S ABRAM: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the House
I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the human rights violations in Burundi;

       (b)  the incarceration of Burundians, including innocent women and
           children, in concentration-style camps; and

       (c)  the involvement of former President Nelson Mandela of South
           Africa in a mediatory role;


  (2) congratulates and salutes our former President on brokering the
       possible release of the incarcerated persons by 31 July;

  (3) trusts that the Burundi government will not renege on its commitment;
       and

  (4) calls upon the international community to support our former
       President's efforts and to assist in monitoring compliance.

[Applause.]

         ADMISSION OF MRS EPAINNETTE MBEKI TO GROOTE SCHUUR HOSPITAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, on behalf of the National Assembly, I move
without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the mother of President Thabo Mbeki, Mrs Epainnette Mbeki,
       has been admitted to Groote Schuur Hospital;

  (2) assures Mrs Mbeki that the thoughts of the nation are with her as she
       undergoes treatment and care; and

  (3) wishes her a speedy recovery and recuperation and keeps her in its
       prayers.

Agreed to.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 22 - Provincial and Local Government:

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson ...
[Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Welcome back, Sydney! All is forgiven.

The MINISTER: I know! [Laughter.] Chairperson, hon members, the issue of
governance continues to engage the minds of practitioners and scholars all
over the world. The first five years of democratic governance in our
country has given us a basis to test the viability of theories, systems and
structures which are germane to this issue. There is no terminus where, as
practitioners, we can sit back and proclaim that our democracy is finally
developed to perfection. In human affairs, there are always new issues to
confront, new methods to apply and new insights to discover.

We are, yet again, at an exciting moment in the history of our country. The
continuing mutation of our structures of governance and some of the
initiatives which Government is undertaking may bring about a profound
change of course in the life of our nation. Some of the elements which
define this exciting moment are the fact that a team of experts has just
submitted to Cabinet an audit report based on a reality check of our
intergovernmental structures, systems and processes.

The other element is the fact that the Department of Provincial and Local
Government has released a discussion document on the role, place, powers
and functions of the institution of traditional leadership. The department
is also finalising a report on challenges facing the Khoisan community. The
third element is the fact that the process of redesigning municipal
boundaries and transforming local governments is nearing completion.

Fourthly, the road to local government elections is now open. The necessary
enabling legislation is either in place or nearing completion. We are
confident that these elections will be held within the constitutionally
projected timeframes. Fifthly, the technical committee which was appointed
to oversee the process of finalising the Draft Bill on the Promotion and
Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities
has completed its mandate and submitted its report on 5 June. I would like
to express our deep gratitude for a job well done by the committee under
the able chairpersonship of Prof Cynthia Marivate. [Applause.]

In all these undertakings, we are driven by the conviction that the pathway
to sustainable stability and prosperity is firmly anchored on the
foundation we have built since 1994. The year 1999 saw an increase in the
tempo of local government transformation. Consequently, we are now coming
to the end of the negotiated phase of local government transition. Our post-
election vision of local democracy is that of a system of municipal
governance, which will have the following features: Firstly, we shall have
six metropolitan cities. These cities must be consolidated into a citadel
of hope, with a distinct role to play on the world stage.

Given our country's painful reality of the physical duality of extreme
poverty and extreme wealth, there are specific problems in the metropolitan
areas which must be understood as constituting challenges of governance.
These are problems such as the intolerable levels of crime, the scourge of
contagious diseases, including the HIV/Aids pandemic, overcrowding and
unemployment. Those whom the electorate will entrust with the task of
governing these metropolitan areas, must see these cities as sites of
innovation. It goes without saying that our success in these metropolitan
areas will immensely enhance the productive base of our country.

The second feature will find expression in the 46 district municipalities.
These will function as strategic catalysts for integrated development
throughout the nonmetropolitan parts of our country. The challenge for
Government, the private sector and civil society in its various dimensions
shall be to ensure that our developmental goals for these areas are
attainable and sustainable. Meeting this challenge will mean that no place,
not even a village whose name is not known to a single parliamentarian,
will exist beyond the frontiers of our developmental endeavours.

The third feature is represented by local municipalities. There shall be
232 of these. They constitute the bedrock upon which governance outside the
metropolitan areas will be built. The goal of creating financially viable,
economically sustainable and socially integrated municipal government in
South Africa will not materialise, unless we invest in a programme of
capacitating these municipal entities.

The Municipal Demarcation Board has played a major part in the
restructuring programme, and it will continue to fine-tune the municipal
boundaries. Now that the building blocks of the new system are in place,
the Department of Provincial and Local Government will increasingly move to
the forefront to lead the charge in ensuring that we enhance and deploy the
requisite financial and administrative capacity.

An important part of this process is to bring into the main stream of
governance for development, elements of what is good from our past. Finding
a meaningful role for the institution of traditional leadership in our
democratic dispensation is an indispensable element for stabilising
governance in the rural areas.

We are not raising this issue because we just want to look into our past
with warm nostalgia. Rather, we are raising it because, looking into the
future, we see a definite role for traditional leaders in helping solve
problems of poverty and landlessness. Working together with elected public
representatives, traditional leaders can help create conditions for local
economic development.

Decades of neglect for rural areas have left these areas without much-
needed infrastructure, resources and management capacity to generate and
sustain development. Since its inception, the Consolidated Municipal
Infrastructure Programme has helped, not only to redress this imbalance,
but also to reduce the backlogs generally. Through this programme the
department has, with the assistance of provincial and local government,
completed over 1 700 projects, benefiting well over 12 million people.
[Applause.]

Originally, the programme was skewed and biased in favour of urban areas.
The change in this bias has resulted in a situation where today 43% of
programmes dedicated to this fund are utilised in the rural areas. The
programme also had the positive impact of enhancing the quality of service
delivery. To date, out of a total of R2,3 billion that has been made
available to subsidise the delivery of services, an amount of R2,O5 billion
has already been committed to actual projects. About 318 projects are
currently under construction and 759 projects have already been completed.
We must also ensure that this new infrastructure is secured against natural
disasters such as Cyclones Eline and Gloria.

Another mechanism which we created in order to implement Government's
overall poverty alleviation programme is the Local Economic Development
Fund. Through this, we want local communities to exercise a significant
measure of control over their own economic life. They have to do so by
designing and managing projects which have a potential to contribute
meaningfully towards growth. [Applause.]

The previously neglected areas are increasingly becoming the target of our
development focus, as a significant number of our local economic
development projects are located in the rural areas, as well as on the
peripheries of affluent cities and towns. These activities are having the
effect of tilting the balance further to the advantage of the poor. This
will further add to the effort of creating sustainable communities, for it
is the absence of local businesses that provide employment to local people
which denies rural councils the fiscal base necessary for the maintenance
of local infrastructure and social services.
Ours are more than just delivery programmes. They also have the objective
of strengthening the local government sphere. In the drive to deliver
municipal infrastructure and implement LED projects, certain management and
technical deficiencies have come into conspicuous view. In addition, there
are policy and institutional weaknesses which have been detected, and are
being attended to.

At present, the most optimistic figure suggests that 50% of municipalities
in the country have integrated development plans of varying qualities. The
President's Co-ordinating Council, which brings together the President, the
Ministry for Provincial and Local Government and the premiers, will
facilitate the preliminary work of putting together the Integrated
Development Plans on behalf of Categories A and C municipalities that are
to emerge after the forthcoming local government elections. In this we
shall work together with the SA Local Government Association. The Ministry
and the department will also be looking at ways of ensuring minimum
requisite capacity for municipalities, so that these municipal entities are
placed in a position that will make it possible for them to fulfil their
constitutional mandate.

As I said earlier, we have received a report from the committee which is
overseeing the work of drafting the Bill on the promotion and protection of
the rights of cultural, religious and linguistic communities. I will soon
be seeking Cabinet approval for the principles contained in the draft Bill,
as well as making recommendations on the handling of the Volkstaat Council
report. I intend to table this Bill in Parliament in July. I hope that the
outcome of this process will help us to approach future challenges with
mutual caring and tolerance for diversity, for these are essential
foundations of the healthy societies we hope to create.

The rising importance of paying attention to the task of improving the
quality of our governance system cannot be overemphasised. As
parliamentarians, members are called upon to contribute their insights into
the process. The Department of Provincial and Local Government has had to
restructure itself in order to be better prepared to respond to the needs
of the times. The director-general, Mr Zam Titus, and all members of staff
deserve my expression of gratitude for co-operating with the Ministry in
this regard. [Applause.] I welcome to the cause the chairperson of the
portfolio committee, Mr Yunus Carrim, and all the other members of the
committee. I thank them for their understanding and for always being
available to act in pursuit of our shared agenda. I look forward to seeing
all hon members at the cocktail party this evening. [Applause.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Mr Chairperson, comrades and friends, six years ago the ANC
came to power on the basis of the RDP. Not long after that all the parties
in this House endorsed the RDP. Of course, not all of us gave the same
meaning to the RDP, but there was one key aspect on which we all agreed:
the need for integrated and co-ordinated government. It was in good part
this brought concensus that helped us to negotiate the new Constitution and
break out of the mould of the unitary state versus federal state debate.
Instead, we forged a highly innovative and original system of co-operative
governance.

Essentially we have one system of governance in this country, with three
interrelated and interdependent, if distinct, spheres of government - not
levels of government, but spheres. And the more each sphere co-operates
with the other two, the stronger, in fact, it becomes. At the heart of this
system is the notion of co-operation, not just across the spheres, not just
within the spheres, but also between the spheres and civil society, hence
we speak not of government, but of governance.

So much for the theory: what about the practice? Inevitably, in a new
emerging democracy, there would be a gap between theory and practice, but
our gap is perhaps more than it should be. It is certainly more than we can
afford it to be. We are a country with limited resources and huge
responsibilities. Planning, co-ordination, and integration between the
spheres of government and civil society is, in our case, even more crucial.
In short, as much as we have come a long way since 1994, we have not come
far enough, and so it is that we welcome the new approach set up by the
Minister and the Department of Provincial and Local Government.

The department defines its vision as follows:


  To become the leading department in promoting co-operative governance and
  supporting an effective system of provincial and local government for
  accelerated service delivery.

Its key priority is -
  ... building an integrated, performance orientated, people centred and
  accountable system of government, free of corruption and committed to
  serving the people.

These are nice words, a good approach and laudable goals, but what about
the practice? This is where the portfolio committee comes in. Our task
should be to more concertedly monitor the department and what is happening
in the country as a whole. We need to more effectively play our oversight
role. The core policies and legislation establishing the new democracy have
been largely adopted over the past six years. The key considerations now
are the proper implementation of the policies and legislation, and
improvements in service delivery and development.

However, it is not as if we can just fold our arms and monitor. Effective
monitoring is not possible without active engagement. As MPs, we need to be
actively involved in our constituencies and society as a whole. We need to
persistently foster greater co-operation between the spheres of government
and between Government and civil society. But for the system of co-
operative governance to work properly, vision, strategy, programme and
activity are not all: it is also about money. It is not just about money,
but also about money, which is why we have this Vote debate for that
matter. It is about how and what we share among the spheres of government,
and as a portfolio committee we have difficulties about this. Our
particular concern, especially with the major transformation of local
government underway, is with local government finances.

About R1,867 billion is allocated to local government as its equitable
share of the national revenue. This may present no more than 1% of the
national fiscus. This amount is based in good part on the notion that local
government raises about 95% of its revenue, but this is 95% of what it
spends, not what it needs. Moreover, this is an aggregate figure and does
not take into account the disparities in capacities of municipalities to
raise revenue. The portfolio committee is, certainly, very interested to
see what the Financial and Fiscal Commission comes up with in respect of
applying a costed-norms approach to local government.

Ours, we must stress, is not an empty, crude call for more money for local
government. The committee is excruciatingly aware that most municipalities
are not raising the full revenue they should, have financial management
weaknesses and are not engaging in local economic development service
partnerships, municipal service strategies and other strategies to ensure
that they are more economically and financially viable.

The committee also understands well that flinging more money at local
government is not the answer and may even exacerbate the problems. But we
believe there is room for national and provincial governments to contribute
more in helping municipalities to develop the strategies for raising more
revenue, building their local economies and improving their financial
management capacity.

The committee welcomes the department's local economic development,
municipal service partnerships and other work and the allocation of grants
to municipalities experiencing financial difficulties to restructure their
financial management capacity. In this regard, we fully support the Local
Government Support Grant of R150 million, the Restructuring Grant of R300
million and the Financial Management Grant of R50 million.

However, while all this is welcome, is it enough? Also, should this not be
complemented by national Government allocating more funds to local
government? Of course, the committee is acutely aware of the financial and
fiscal constraints of national Government, but clearly, the majority in the
committee feel that if local government is going to effectively fulfil the
powers and functions allocated to it and the increasing responsibilities
heaped on it, and if it is to be the major site of service delivery and
development it is identified to be, it has to be allocated more funding.

Together with other major stakeholders, the portfolio committee is also
concerned that money has not yet been allocated for the once off costs of
the transition to the new local government system. We understand that
costing could not be done until the Municipal Demarcation Board had
finalised the municipal boundaries and had a clear sense of the nature and
number of municpalities to be established. Now that this has happened, we
are pleased to learn that the Departments of Provincial and Local
Government and of Finance, the Demarcation Board and other stakeholders are
working on the cost of the transition, and are to approach the Cabinet
shortly for funding. We would urge that this be attended to expeditiously.

Of course, we understand that any funding for the transitional costs will
not absolve municipalities from their responsibility to fully raise the
revenue due to them from their own sources. Let me assure hon members that
this does mean drastically increasing rates. The rates scaremongering will
be dealt with by my comrade, Isaiah Ntshangase, shortly. But we would like
to say, quite simply, that section 229 of the Constitution requires
legislation on property rates. Before that, the department and Ministry
will also have a process of exhaustive consultation with all stakeholders
concerned.

Other key issues related to the budget, not least the provincial system,
which the portfolio committee will more keenly giving attention to
following the local government elections later this year, will be dealt
with by other comrades from the ANC, and presumably the other parties. For
now, I must end with warmest thanks to the Minister, Director-General Zam
Titus, Parliamentary Liaison Officer Freddie Pelusa, Acting Deputy Director-
General Jackie Mantswe, others who are here and the full staff of the
department and the Ministry for their co-operation.

My heartfelt thanks also go to all members of the portfolio committee, not
least those from the opposition parties, for their co-operation, though I
might add that the Minister is too shy to say this, but, in fact, while he
has invited all of us to the cocktail party tonight - and I think he means
that the budget only allows for portfolio committee members - I want to
stress that the amount of drinks and food we get this evening, and the
length of the party, I am told by him, depends on how well the opposition
parties behave in today's Vote debate. [Laughter.] So, I urge members not
to spoil our fun and be highly co-operative.

Finally, on a less facetious note - before the DP says I am stifling their
criticisms of the governing party - I want to say that it is an honour to
serve in this committee and a pleasure too. I thank all for their co-
operation. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Mr Chairperson, I am afraid the speech of the hon the
chairperson of the committee implies that the cocktail party this evening
is going to be very short.

The process of restructuring local government has probably provoked more
debate, controversy, policy and activity than any other aspect of the
transformation of our society. We have produce a Green and a White Paper.
We have debated and passed the demarcation Act and the structures Act. We
are currently processing the systems and the electoral Bills. The property
rating Bill and the municipal financial management Bill are still in the
pipeline.

Since 1994, local government has undergone one major restructuring process
and is about to undergo another. This has been a trying time for many
councillors and officials. A great deal of unproductive money has been
spent simply on restructuring, and still more will have to be spent. I
would venture to suggest that all of us in this House, across party lines,
are probably agreed on the end goals for local government. We want it to be
efficient, effective and responsive. But where we differ is how to achieve
this and, critically, how to fund it.

The DP rejects the one-size-fits-all approach of the ANC to municipal
restructuring for the very simple reason that we are a vast country with
vastly varying capacities, stages of development, economic bases and
infrastructure. If local government is to be efficient, effective and
responsive, it must also be viable. It is estimated that one in every six
municipalities is currently technically bankrupt, and only one in four can
raise credit at a commercial bank. Many municipalities are owed vast
amounts of money, and in turn owe more to banks and public utilities.

The truth is that most municipalities are spending more than they get in
revenue and bad debts are the order of the day. Reserve funds are being
plundered simply to balance the books. In some cases, this situation
arises, because municipalities are spending in a genuine attempt to redress
the glaring inequalities of the past. But much more often, it is because
municipalities have spent recklessly, and lacked the will or the means to
collect the money owed to them. It is because they have unrealistic ideas
about what they can deliver, and other spheres of government have done
functions for them without supplying them the funds to perform them. In
some cases, it is because of the lack of skills and capacity or inability
and corruption.

It is against this background that there is so much concern about the
proposed property rating Bill. Property owners look at the powerless state
of municipal finances and draw the conclusion that their property rates
will be increased dramatically to balance the books. The result has been a
predictable panic-flood of e-mails and a spate of people trying to sell
their properties. Whether this concern is justified or not, must await the
final version of the Bill.

However, the fault for this unease lies firmly at the door of the Minister
and his department. It is another case of formulating legislation in
secret. On a matter of this nature and sensitivity, one would have expected
the Minister to have consulted fully and widely. Yet this Bill is in at
least its tenth draft without serious public consultation. Not only has
public consultation been lacking, it appears that no consultation has yet
taken place between the drafters of this Bill and the Katz Commission. I
want to ask very specifically: Has such consultation taken place and if
not, when is it expected that such consultation will occur?

This is a very serious matter, and the Minister must use the opportunity to
reassure the public that rates will not be set at the levels people
believe. What we need in this country is a system of fair rates. We need to
devise a system of rates that will protect the rights of those that have
property and extend property rights to those who currently do not have it.
This must be our aim, and what we in the DP will be fighting for.
[Interjections.]
Mfu K M ZONDI: Sihlalo, ngisukumela ukubamba iqhaza kule nkulumo-mpikiswano
yeSabiwo-mali somNyango weziFundazwe noHulumeni baseKhaya, ngenxa yobumqoka
nokujiya kwezindaba ezisezithebeni zawo okumele sizwakalise ilaka ngazo.
Ngisukumela ukuba ngenze umsebenzi ongemnandi nokho, kepha thina be-IFP
esibona ukuthi simelwe ukuwenza kulesi sikhathi ukuze leli zwe lakithi
esilithanda sonke kangaka, likwazi ukugwema izingozi zokungqubuzana
ezingase zibe nomphumela omubi, ngisho nalowo wokuchitheka kwegazi uma
singaqaphele.

Ngiyazi ukuthi umphrofethi akaze angathandeka kubantu ngoba usuke exwayisa
ngezinto abantu abangathandiyo ukwexwayiswa nokukhuzwa kuzo. Uma udaba
lohulumeni basekhaya ezindaweni eziphethwe ngabaholi bomdabu lungezuphathwa
kahle ngobunono futhi kubhekelwe nobucayi balo, ngithi kumhlonishwa
uNgqongqoshe: Ngiyesaba ukuthi lungase lusisusele umlilo wequbula ongase
ushise lonke izwe lakithi.

Sonke sifuna ukuba udaba lohulumeni basekhaya luye ngasesiphethweni futhi
luphethwe kahle ukuze kwenzeke lokhu umhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe abekusho
lapha. Uthe kufuneka manje singene esigabeni sokugcina sohulumeni basekhaya
abahleleke kahle njengoba kulawula isakhiwo sezwe lakithi. Kepha siya siba
nokwesaba ngokubona ukungacaci kahle kokuthi qhaza lini elizobanjwa
ngabaholi bomdabu kulabo hulumeni. Sibona uHulumeni engaphumeli obala
kwizimfuno zabaholi bomdabu.

Sibona uhlelo oluhlongozwayo lufuna ukubuyisela eceleni indlela yabomdabu
yokuphatha, bese kuphoqelelwa uhlelo lwaseNtshonalanga. Ngithi kumhlonishwa
uNgqongqoshe: Sibona izimfuno zabaholi bomdabu, nakho konke ukukhathazeka
kwabantu abaphila ezindaweni zasemakhaya, kungabekeki kahle etafuleni ukuze
kuxoxeke ngendlela ezokwenza ukuthi ekugcineni kube nomphumela omuhle
wokufinyelela esiphethweni sokuba kube nokuhlangabezana ngokubambisana
ngalezi zinto.

Kunokukhathazeka-ke okuqubukayo kokuthi nxa uHulumeni engasheshi aphumele
obala ngezinto ezifana nalena akade ekhuluma ngayo lo mfowethu osuka lapha,
maqondana nentela ethize emayelana nobunikazi bomhlaba nakho konke, kungaba
nezinkinga. Umbuzo-ke uthi: Akuzukwenzeka yini lokhu kuhambe kuhambe kuze
kufike ezindaweni zasemakhaya, njengoba izwe lakithi likhungethwe ubuphofu
obungaka nje? Ngeke yini kufike ekutheni bese kuphoqelelwa ukuthi nabo
abantu basemakhaya bakhokhiswe intela ngezindawo abahlezi kuzo na? Siyazi
ukuthi emakhaya akufani nasemadolobheni lapho izindawo abantu abanazo
bezikhokhela inkece ngoba kukhona imisebenzi ethile eyenziwa nguHulumeni
ayisondeze ezindaweni zabo. Ngikhuluma ngemisebenzi enjengokubalethela
amanzi nakho konke okunye. Lezo yizinto ezisayothatha isikhathi eside kabi
ukuba zifike ezindaweni zakithi emakhaya.

Ngithi-ke, siyacela lapha kumhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe. Siyazi ukuthi
unezindlebe uzosizwa. Sicela ukuthi lolu daba angaluvumeli ukuba luphatheke
ngesandla esiyisinxele ngoba siyesaba thina. Uma ngilinganisa nje laphayana
KwaZulu-Natali, lapho ngiqhamuka khona, lolu daba lwenza ukuthi imimoya
ishise kakhulu. Indlela esibona ukuthi luphatheke ngayo yenza kungakhanyi
ukuthi kuzoma kanjani.

Kukhona udaba olukhulu lapha oluvama ukungacaci kahle uma luphakanyiswa.
Baye bangezwakali abaholi bendabuko bese kuphendula abakhulumela uHulumeni
bathi awekho amandla amakhosi azoncipha nxa kungena lolu hlobo olusha
lomasipala ezindaweni ezisemakhaya. Ngithi kumhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe:
Siyamangala-ke, nxa sazi ukuthi omasipala banegunya lokuphatha indawo,
ukuthi kungashiwo kanjani ukuthi lokho nje kukodwa akuyukudla emandleni
amakhosi.
Emakhaya, siyazi ukuthi inhlabathi ingaphansi kwesandla samakhosi. Siyazi
ukuthi amakhosi, ebambisene nezinduna nemikhandlu yawo, aba nesandla
ekwabiweni kwamasimu okulima, nasekubekweni kwabantu amanxiwa lapho
bezokwakha khona, bahlale khona futhi babe nenhlalo enhle. Aba nesandla
ezinqumweni eziningi ikakhulukazi eziphathelene nentuthuko ezokwenziwa
endaweni ephethwe ngohlelo lomdabu. Aye abe nesandla nasezinqumweni
ezininginingi lapho kuzokwakhiwa khona imitholampilo nezikole kanye nakho
konke okunye.

Ngakho-ke, sibona sengathi akuphenduleki kahle uma kubekeka kanjena.
Kuthatha bese kwenza sengathi kukhona umacashelana okudlalwa wona
kwezombusazwe. Yiwona-ke lona obangela ngithi kumhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe
angize lapha ngizoxwayisa ngokuthi siyacela kuye ukuba kube khona ukukhanya
kulolu daba, kuphumeleke obala. Siyazi ukuthi sekuze kwakhona isinyathelo
esisemqoka esisukunyelwe ngabaholi bomdabu, ikakhulukazi laphaya KwaZulu-
Natali, ngokubona njalo ukujula kwalolu daba. Leso sinyathelo ngesokuthi
bahambe baye ehhovisi likaMongameli ukuyocela ukuba alungenele lolu daba
ngoba abaholi bomdabu bebona ukuthi makwenziwe noma yini manje ukugwema
ingozi esiyibona iza.

Ngishilo-ke kumhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe ngathi ngikhuluma izinto ezingase
zizwakale zizimbi, zibhimba. Kodwa thina sikholwa ngukuthi kuhle kuthi
kusekuhle manje nje, kusahlekwa, futhi sisenethuba lokulungisa izinto,
siziphakamise lezi zinto, sixwayise ngazo. Siyabona ukuthi kuyoba kuhle
kuzwakale ukuthi sasho yase igwemeka ingozi, kunokuba kuthiwe: Nathulelani
nangasho ingozi niyibona iza na?

Ngithi kumhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe sithemba ukuthi izincwadi, umhlonishwa
uMongameli wezwe lethu azibhalele abaholi bomdabu eqinisekisa ukuthi ngeke
kube khona ukufinyelela esiphethweni salolu daba kungaboniswananga nabo
kuze kuvunyelwane, zinikeza ithemba nesiqiniseko sokuthi akuyobe sekwenzeka
izinto ezithile eziyothi phecelezi bese zithatha lokho zikubeka eceleni.
Uma kunjalo, siyabona ukuthi kuyodaleka enkulu ingozi nokungethembani bese
kwenza ukuthi yonke inqubekela-phambili enhle kangaka esiyincomayo
nomnyango womhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe ophezu kwayo, ibuyele emuva, ibonakale
njengento engekho. Siyacela-ke kumhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe ukuthi lolu daba
luphathwe ngesandla sobunono. (Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Rev K M ZONDI: Chairperson, I rise to take part in the budget debate of
the Department of Provincial Affairs and Local Government. The issues on
the table are serious, and I would like to offer my opinion on them. I rise
to do an unpopular job, the job that we in the IFP think that we should do
so that the country that we greatly cherish, will be saved from the dangers
of conflict. If we are not careful, these dangers will produce bad results,
including the shedding of blood.

I know that a prophet is not liked by people, because he always forewarns
them of the things against which they do not want to be warned. I would
like to warn the hon the Minister that if the issues pertaining to local
governments in the areas of the amakhosi (chiefs) are not handled with care
and their concerns are not taken seriously, they might start a fire that
will engulf the whole of our country.

We all want these issues to be resolved conclusively. In order that we may
be able to fulfil what the hon the Minister has just said here, these
issues must be concluded in a satisfactory manner. The hon the Minister has
said that we should now enter the last phase of local governments which are
planned according to the structure of our country. However, we are
increasingly afraid that we have no idea of the role that is going to be
played by traditional leaders. We are worried that the Government is not
coming out clearly as far as the demands of traditional leaders are
concerned.

We regard the proposed plan as an attempt to sideline the traditional way
of governing in order to enforce the Western way. I would like to inform
the hon the Minister that our feeling is that the demands made by
traditional leaders, and the concerns of the rural people, are being
ignored. In fact, they must be discussed in a way that will produce good
results in the end. A compromise should be reached as it will spark co-
operation which will bring about a satisfactory conclusion.

There is a continuing worry which might cause problems if the Government
does not come out clearly as soon as possible. For instance, people are
worried about what the previous speaker has just mentioned, for example,
that people will be taxed for owning land. The question is, are these
things not going to continue until they happen in the rural areas, the
extremely poor parts of the country? Will the rural people not be expected
to pay taxes for the land on which they are living? We know that the rural
areas are unlike the urban areas, where people spend a lot of money because
they also have to pay for the services that the Government is providing for
them. I am talking about services like the supply of water and many other
things. It will take time for these services to be enjoyed by the rural
people.

Therefore, we appeal to the hon the Minister to listen because he has ears.
We appeal to him not to allow this issue to be mishandled because we are
afraid of the result that such carelessness might produce. To take an
example, in KwaZulu-Natal where I come from, this issue has created serious
tension. The way we think this issue has been dealt with makes it
impossible to know what is going to happen.

There is a big issue that does not come out clearly whenever it is
discussed. Traditional leaders are not heeded. Government representatives
respond by saying that the powers of the amakhosi will be streamlined when
the municipal system is implemented in the rural areas. I would like to
inform the hon the Minister that we are surprised. If we know that
municipalities have the right to govern in the rural areas, how can we say
that the powers of the amakhosi will not be tampered with?
We know that in the rural areas, land is governed by the amakhosi. We know
that the amakhosi, together with their headmen and their councils, play a
role in the fencing in of fields to be ploughed. They play a role in giving
land to people so that they can prosper. They are key role-players in
taking decisions, including those pertaining to the development of their
areas. They also play a role in taking tough decisions so as to enable the
building of clinics, schools and many other things.

Therefore, we think that these issues are not being properly addressed if
the Government representatives respond in this way. It seems as if some
people are playing political games here. I have been impelled by this
feeling to stand up and issue a warning as I am asking the hon the Minister
to clarify this issue. People must come out clearly about it.

We know that an important step has been taken by traditional leaders,
especially in KwaZulu-Natal, because they are worried about the seriousness
of this issue. They have taken a decision to go to the President's office
to ask the President to intervene because they feel that all possible means
should be used to avoid the looming danger as they see it.

At the beginning I pointed out to the hon the Minister that I might say
unfavourable things which could sound absurd. We believe that it is good to
warn against the danger while there is still a chance to avoid it. It will
be good if people heed these warnings. The danger will be avoided and
people will not say why did you not warn us because you were already aware
that there might be a danger in this process.

I would like to say to the hon the Minister that we hope that the letters
that our President wrote to the amakhosi give hope and assurance that
nothing will prevent him from fulfilling his promise. In his letters he
assures the traditional leaders that no conclusion will be reached on this
issue without consulting with them until a unanimous decision is taken.
Failing to keep this promise will cause great danger. It will mean that the
trust that the traditional leaders have in the President, has been
betrayed. It will mark the end of the good progress that the Department of
Provincial Affairs and Local Government and the hon the Minister are making
and which we all appreciate. We appeal to the hon the Minister to handle
this matter with great care and attention.]

Ms M VERWOERD: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, comrades and colleagues, I was
honestly hoping to have a rigorous debate with the hon Selfe. But really
this one-size-fits-all ... [Interjections.] Wait until I speak, then you
echo ... not-transparent-enough debate has been responded to so many times
that it is really becoming boring. Let us hope that all these councillors
who so very ungraciously deserted the New NP Titanic yesterday will
actually bring some new thinking into our Official Opposition. But I
somehow doubt that. [Interjections.]

Local government has a crucial role to play in rebuilding our local
communities and their environments. This forms the basis for a democratic,
integrated, prosperous and truly nonracial society - a society where people
have a future with a better life. The legacy of apartheid is all too
present in every town, village and neighbourhood. Apartheid has
fundamentally damaged the spatial, social and economic environment that
people live in. It has also fundamentally damaged the environment that they
raise their families in and in which they seek to find fulfilment. It is
this legacy that the Constitution urges and compels us to address in
Chapter 7. We are told that local government should not only provide for
democratic and accountable government, but also has to promote social and
economic development as well as the provision of services in a sustainable
manner.

During the transitional period, municipalities were merged, but it was
almost immediately apparent that these structures would not meet the
developmental needs of our societies. For example, most municipalities did
not succeed in integrating our communities, and railway lines still almost
inevitably form the boundaries and often the borders between citizens of
the same town.

Yes, it is true that many municipalities are not financially viable and
will not become financially viable in the foreseeable future. But that is
exactly why we need a completely new system, why we need new structures
and, not least of all, a new mindset, which I sometimes doubt that our
opposition has.

It was against this background that the massive task of transforming local
government started. The first and very important leg of this process is
that of demarcating new boundaries. It is well known by now that the
Demarcation Board was set up in terms of the Constitution and started its
work just over a year ago. The board comprises only one full-time member,
namely Dr Michael Sutcliffe, and eight part-time members.

What was clear from the start and inevitably became clear as the months
went by was that the daunting task that they faced was a very difficult
one. It was required of them to demarcate the whole country in a way that
would integrate communities and seek to make municipalities financially
viable. But this also had to be done in a transparent and open way without
favour and prejudice.

During their work, the Demarcation Board was always available to the
portfolio committee, and also gave it very impressive submissions and an
overview of their work during our budget hearings. Information was freely
available not only to politicians but also to the general public. An
Internet site was set up and, remarkably, it has received almost a million
visits since its inception. Apparently, it is now being visited 400 000
times per month. [Interjections.]

A toll-free course centre was also established for those who could not make
use of the Internet facilities, like some people here on my left. Following
the publication of the draft boundaries, the board had 148 public hearings
attended by almost seven and a half thousand people and received almost two
and a half thousand submissions.

Meetings were also held with all the political parties, and I believe the
fact that all the political parties at some stage, including the ANC, were
not happy with some of the boundaries is an indication of the board's
objectivity despite all the howling on the left. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, allow this
speaker to have a say. What her grandfather did in his time was his
business. What she will have to do now is her business. So allow her to
just carry on. [Applause.]

Ms M VERWOERD: After this exhausting process, the board has demarcated the
outer boundaries of six metros, 232 category V municipalities, 47 category
C municipalities and 26 district management areas. A further addition is
the proposed 15 cross-boundary municipalities. The cross-boundary
municipality Bill will be before the committee, hopefully, within the next
few days.

The ward dermacation will, hopefully, also be completed by the end of this
month. Simultaneous to all of this the board has been investigating the
financial and institutional capacity of the proposed municipalities, in
order to be able to advise the MEC of local government in every province as
to the division of powers and functions between the local and district
municipalities.

The MEC in each province will now have the very difficult task of setting
up these municipalities through what is called a section 12 notice. What is
clear is that there will be a significant reduction in the number of
municipalities, and this will also result in a significant reduction in the
number of councillors, almost 3 000. It will ensure a leaner and meaner
local government system, focusing on delivery.

Now some of the parties in this House that have been complaining about this
reduction should be reminded that there was widespread consensus when the
formula determining the number of councillors was published by the
Minister. It is also important to remember that we will have, for the first
time, full-time councillors who will be able to spend all their time
focusing on the needs of those who elected them.

Some criticism has been expressed, also by members in this House, saying
that not enough financial modelling was done in order to make sure that
these municipalities will be financially viable, and many gloomy
predictions have already been made. One of my colleagues will also address
this later, but it is completely premature to make such a judgment.

We must remember that demarcation, although playing an important role in
the financial viability of municipalities, does not solely determine this
issue. The financial viability of municipalities must be seen in the
context of the ongoing review of local government finance. What is
remarkable, though, is that the board has been able to stick to such a
strict timeframe, despite the extensive consultation process that they have
been going through. Although the finer demarcation detail will still be
looked at for a long time, it is believed that the board will be able to
complete its work in time for the election to take place within a month of
our passing the cross-boundary municipality Bill, and I think they should
be congratulated on this.

The local government transformation process is, without doubt, one of the
most difficult and challenging phases that we have to face in our
transition. It is crucial that we do not have any passive spectators in the
process, or whining oppositional forces. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Chairperson, the most important responsibility of any
government is to execute its functions in such a way that it enhances trust
and security amongst the citizens, notwithstanding their social, financial
or cultural status within the national community. If a government fails to
achieve this goal, then, most certainly, it will sooner than later find
itself in a position in which crisis management and damage control will
take up most of its time.

The South African Government in general and especially the Department of
Provincial and Local Government are sliding faster and faster into this
mould. Surely local government is the most sensitive sphere of government,
ruling the lives of people on a very personal level? It is, thus, of
paramount importance that the people within the boundaries of a
municipality feel secure, safe, well serviced and well governed.
Unfortunately, this is not the case at this moment in time.

Uncertainty grows from day to day, not primarily from what people
experience every day, but because they are in the dark about what is
waiting for them in the emerging new local government system. This
uncertainty cannot be ignored any longer.

Dit is 'n gevaarlike speelveld vir onverantwoordelike ontleders en
raadgewers wat besig is om die proses van nasiebou aan die een kant en
finansiële verdraagsaamheid aan die ander kant erg te knou. [This is a
dangerous playing field for irresponsible analysts and advisers who are
seriously prejudicing the process of nation-building on the one hand, and
financial tolerance on the other.]

This unwanted situation originated in the demarcation process. I know that
the ANC will argue that the process was transparent. Many traditional
leaders do not think so. People and organisations outside the ANC-
orientated school of thought do not think so.
As far as ward boundaries are concerned, there is even more
dissatisfaction. Communities growing over a period of many decades, with
vested community interests which were built together, were cut to pieces
and merged with parts of other unfortunate communities with whom they
really have nothing in common. This kind of ignorance and heavy-handedness
is, most certainly, not a good start for effective local government.

Tweedens is daar steeds groot onrustigheid oor die finansiële vermoëns van
die nuwe munisipaliteite. Dit is eenvoudig onaanvaarbaar dat daar slegs vyf
en 'n half maande voor hierdie nuwe munisipaliteite moet begin funksioneer
nog geen planne in plek of inligting beskikbaar is oor wat finansieel
haalbaar en nie haalbaar is nie.

Al wat ons elke keer hoor, is dat die betrokke Minister met die Minister
van Finansies in gesprek is. Niemand weet waaroor hulle praat nie, niemand
weet wat die vertrekpunt is en op watter inligting dit gebaseer is wanneer
hulle praat nie. Hulle praat net, en hulle hou aan met praat. Vra 'n mens
vrae in die portefeuljekomitee, dan hoor jy hulle praat, maar sover dit die
verkryging van die relevante inligting betref, kan jy net sowel die vrae
aan 'n buikspreker se pop stel as sy hanteerder nie teenwoordig is nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Secondly, there is still a great deal of concern about the financial
abilities of the new municipalities. It is simply unacceptable that, only
five and a half months before these new municipalities have to start
functioning, there are still no plans in place or information available on
what is financially viable and what is not.

All we hear time and again, is that the Minister concerned is consulting
with the Minister of Finance. Nobody knows what they are discussing, nobody
knows what the point of departure is and on what information their
discussions are based. All they do is talk, and keep on talking. Should one
ask questions in the portfolio committee, one is told that they are
talking, but as far as acquiring the relevant information is concerned, one
might just as well put the questions to a ventriloquist's dummy when its
handler is not present.]

It is against this backround that I believe every responsible person will
understand the emotional upheaval caused by speculation about the secret
municipal property rates Bill. I believe that not a single member of this
House knows whether the latest draft of this Bill is the 10th, 12th or 13th
version. All that we know is that it is circulated amongst stakeholders for
their comment and input, whatever draft it may be.

Surely members of this Parliament - the so-called democratically elected
representatives of the people - are stakeholders too? If one does not trust
all of them, then, most certainly, the members of the portfolio committee,
especially the opposition members, can be trusted and therefore empowered
to consult those stakeholders who are not on the selected mailing list of
the ANC.

This would most certainly benefit the quality of debate around this Bill in
the portfolio committee, as well as in this House. When one studies the
municipal systems Bill and the 10th draft of the property rates Bill, it is
extremely disturbing to see the powers these two Bills give the Minister.
As they stand, these two Bills are nothing but Bills empowering the
Minister to legislate by way of regulation.

I want to put it very bluntly that if the Minister does not have enough
trust in the members of this National Assembly to execute their
constitutional responsibility as legislators, then something is seriously
wrong with the Minister's attitude towards democratically elected
parliamentary institutions. If that is not the case, then the Minister
really has no confidence in ANC members' ability to play their role as
legislators. They are the majority in this House, as well as in the
portfolio committee.

The third and most serious situation emerging from this is an effort by
officials to run the legislative process from behind the closed doors of
their offices. This can be seen as a motion of no confidence in the
Minister's ability to run the department for which he is responsible. That
is also a severe slap in the face of the parliamentary institutions of
South Africa.

I want to extend a word of thanks to the chairperson, Mr Yunus Carrim. He
is capable, hard-working and sometimes very time-consuming. [Laughter.]
Owing to the number of uncertainties on crucial local Government issues,
ranging from financial measures to administrative and legislative
procedures, the New NP cannot support this department's Vote.

Ek wil my ten slotte aan die vooraand van die munisipale verkiesings tot 'n
ander belangrike saak wend, en dit is die verpligting wat op politieke
partyleiers rus om ook in hierdie tyd die Grondwet van die Republiek van
Suid-Afrika in plek te hou. Ons roem ons met trots daarop dat ons 'n
regstaat is. In hierdie Huis en in sy komitees word groot klem gelê op die
grondwetlikheid al dan nie van wetgewing. Om verandering aan die Grondwet
voor te stel is byna heiligskennis.

'n Baie prominente eksponent hiervan is die agb leier van die DP en sy
party. [Tussenwerpsels.] Nou kom hierdie einste agb lid gister, wel wetend
wat die voorskrifte van die Grondwet is, en hy sê daar is nog baie
raadslede van ander partye wat by hulle ingeskryf het as lede, maar dat hy
nie hulle name kan bekend maak nie, omdat hulle op die proporsionele lyste
van hulle partye is, en dus hulle posisies as raadslede sal verloor.

Die agb leier van die DP moet vir ons sê, hy moet vir Suid-Afrika sê, of
die beginsels van sy party, waarop hy hom so roem, voorsiening maak vir
dubbele lidmaatskap. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hy wil nie saam met ander
opposisiepartye werk nie, maar hy laat ingeskrewe lede van daardie partye
toe om terselfdertyd ook lid van sy party te wees. [Tussenwerpsels.] Indien
wel, het hy stawende ooreenkomste met enige ander party? Hy het beslis nie
'n ooreenkoms in hierdie verband met die Nuwe NP nie. Ten opsigte van die
Nuwe NP is sy party dus besig met 'n politieke bedrogspel. Hy moet sê
watter partye nog slagoffers is van sy konkelry. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek wil dit vandag vir die Progleier sê - hulle is niks anders as die ou
Progge met 'n ander naam nie - daar is geen verskil tussen krieketspelers
wat betaal word om wedstryde te beknoei en politieke partyleiers wat die
Grondwet van die land ignoreer om die ekstase van egobevrediging te ervaar
nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die agb lid moet die integriteit van die Grondwet
van die Republiek van Suid-Afrika en sy eie en dié van sy eie party beskerm
en die name van hierdie politieke sluipers agter wie hy so aanloop,
bekendmaak.

Hy is dit aan Suid-Afrika verskuldig, hy wat elke dag opstaan en sê sy
party kan nie wetgewing steun as dit nie voldoen aan die grondwetlike
vereistes nie. Hulle sit vandag hier as die primêre verkragters van die
Grondwet van die Republiek van Suid-Afrika. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In conclusion, on the eve of the municipal elections, I want to touch on
another important issue, and that is the obligation of leaders of political
parties to keep the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa in place
at this time. We pride ourselves on being a constitutional state. In this
House and its committees great emphasis is placed on the constitutionality
or otherwise of legislation. Proposing amendments to the Constitution
almost amounts to sacrilege.

A very prominent exponent of this is the hon leader of the DP and his
party. [Interjections.] Now this very same hon member came yesterday,
knowing full well what the provisions of the Constitution are, and said
that there were many more councillors from other parties who had registered
with them as members, but that he could not disclose their names because
they were on the proportional lists of their parties and would therefore
lose their positions as councillors.

The hon leader of the DP must tell us, he must tell South Africa, whether
the principles of his party, of which he is so proud, provide for dual
membership. [Interjections.] He does not want to co-operate with other
opposition parties, but he allows registered members of those parties to be
members of his party at the same time. [Interjections.] If so, does he have
corroborative agreements with any other party? He definitely has no
agreement in this regard with the New NP. With regard to the New NP his
party is therefore engaged in a political swindle. He must tell us which
other parties are also victims of his plotting. [Interjections.]

I want to say to the Prog leader today - they are nothing but the old Progs
with another name - that there is no difference between cricket players who
get paid to rig matches and leaders of political parties who ignore the
Constitution of the country to experience the ecstasy of gratifying their
egos. [Interjections.] The hon member must protect the integrity of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, his own integrity and that of
his own party, and reveal the names of these political sneaks whom he is
patronising.

He owes this to South Africa, he who rises to his feet every day and says
that his party cannot support legislation if it does not meet the
constitutional requirements. They are sitting here today as the primary
violaters of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Mr I B NTSHANGASE: Chairperson ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before Mr Ntshangase begins
his speech, I have to say this. Hon members, please lessen the noise in
this House. ``Cowboys do not cry'', is a very good idiom for the prairies
of the United States and Canada. [Laughter.] If you are not a cowboy, you
will never know if they cry or not. [Laughter.] Please continue, sir.

Mr I B NTSHANGASE: Mr Chairperson, the local government funding has
improved remarkably since our new democratic dispensation. It differs from
the times when the NP were winning hearts and minds. This has provided
relative certainty and stability to this sphere of government.

All the funds flowing to local government like the Consolidated Municipal
Infrastructure Programme, agency grant payments, the municipal support
programme and financial restructuring grant programmes are all well
appreciated. But there is a recurring concern when it comes to the
equitable share. We welcome the department's investigation on the matter
and we are awaiting their report. The majority of us in the portfolio
committee do not understand on what precisely this formula is based, since
our municipalities have very different fiscal capacities. We urge that this
matter be addressed in the incoming Budget process with all the relevant
stakeholders.

As local government prepares for its final phase of transformation and
restructuring, it is faced with many challenges. Some of the demarcated
districts and local municipalities have very limited asset bases and very
limited administrative capacities to service and deliver to their
constituencies. It is for some of these reasons that our committee urges
the department and Municipal Demarcation Board to move with the necessary
speed, now that demarcations are complete, to investigate potential
revenues, expenditures, assets and liabilities, management capacities and
other efficiencies of the new municipalities.
The system of property rates is one of the main revenue sources for local
government. But the system is fragmented throughout the country. Many
municipalities have not updated it for many years. We therefore believe the
Minister and the department are correct in proposing national legislation
to correct the situation. We believe that this will provide clear
guidelines and guidance to local municipalities.

There are, however, people who want to use this proposed Bill for their
selfish and destructive politicking, especially as we go to local
government elections. Any legislation that this Government produces will be
based on and will be within the adopted macroeconomic framework of this
Government.

The suggestions, such as the ones on the Internet, that the Bill will
increase valuations by 7 to 8%, and therefore increase the rates, are
laughable. What it means is this. Let us take an ordinary house of about
R500 000. The rates that they are paying a month is about R400. But what is
being suggested on this Internet is that people will be paying R4 000 a
month. As a result, people are now putting their properties on the market.
We believe that people who are doing this are guilty of sabotaging the
property market, and they should be stopped. We also believe that the
legislation will not increase rates and the revenue, because that is the
function of the local council.

We are setting up the policies that will be of guidance to local
structures, not with the intention to increase the rates, as many people
are suggesting to the public. We expect that politicians will be very
patient, that they will wait and give the Minister and the department a
chance to formulate a policy and gazette it so that the public can
participate in it. We do not understand why especially the opposition
parties are jumping up and down about the policy that is being refined by
the department before it goes out to the public. We also believe that the
parliamentary process will give them enough chance to air whatever views
they have in public. There is nothing sinister in that.

We believe that a draft document on demarcation and the role of traditional
leaders seeks to address all kinds of concerns. We are aware of the
concerns and the overlaps that are there between local councils and
traditional leaders, but let us go through the process, all of us, and find
the answers. [Applause.]
Chief N Z MTIRARA: Mhlalingaphambili, izitatanyiswa zombuso namalungu,
ndiyakhahlela kubantwana begazi namakhosazana. [Chairperson, hon members, I
salute all the traditional leaders.]

The provincial and local government budget for the year 2000-01 has
adequate provision of funds to finance essential needs and basic
requirements of both the rural and urban communities whose needs it is
intended to address. The acute shortcomings and budgetary constraints in
the provincial local government finances have been noticeable during the
past six years, since 1994, and the cumulative effect of lack of provision
of adequate funds to meet the basic needs and essential requirements of the
local communities has resulted in the severe backlogs of service delivery
that continued to inconvenience the residents for a number of years.

A noticeable disparity in the provision for the provincial local government
budget is that a significantly larger portion of the budget allocation is
directed at addressing problems that are facing urban areas, whilst an
insignificant portion of the budget is earmarked to address problems that
are facing rural communities. This discrimination between rural and urban
societies is a legacy of apartheid allocation of resources and has, over
the years, increased polarisation between these two distinct societies, and
has also tended to increase income disparities as well as disparities in
the quality of life between the rural and urban residents.

It is a fundamental principle of democracy that benefits that are accruing
to the citizens of a country should be distributed in equal amounts to all
the inhabitants, irrespective of any perceived, or imagined, discriminatory
parameters that constrained compliance with internationally accepted
standards. The problem that faces South Africa is an economic one - the
equitable distribution of welfare in the light of scarce resources. This
process of equitable distribution of resources in the rural and urban areas
is one that needed to have been addressed during the budget proposals for
the administration of rural and urban areas. These will now be administered
as a single unit.

The question of sustainability of the provision of services in the rural
areas will be greatly constrained by the rural areas' inability to generate
income to finance development activities to sustain livelihood in rural
areas. In the light of the above, it would be prudent for the authorities
to provide a supplementary budget adjustment to meet this contingency in
their planned programme of effective integration of rural and urban
communities and for meaningful local government elections during the year
2000.

It is, indeed, a sorry sight to observe that the provincial and local
government budget for the year 2000-01 does not provide a mechanism for
meaningful transformation of rural communities and, in particular, capacity-
building and realistic empowerment of rural councils so that they can have
an administrative capacity to operate from offices and be provided with a
budget to finance their operational expenditure. At present, rural councils
are regarded as nothing better than the old advisory boards of the
apartheid era. We expected that these anomalies would be addressed in the
provincial and local government budget for the year 2000-01. It is
inconceivable that, in the 21st century, the Government is seen to be
propagating and supporting some of the policies of the past and maintaining
structural disequilibrium in the financing of communities.

South Africa is a product of apartheid and the ugly head of apartheid will
continue to rise from time to time for us all to see. This ugly head is the
vestige of the apartheid era and must at all costs be removed from the
present democratic scene of South Africa's landscape. It is therefore the
responsibility of all elected members of this House to ensure that the
people of South Africa are not reminded of their horrible past. The
economic structural design of South Africa is of a dual nature.

In spite of the anomalies above, we, however, wish to state that we accept
this carefully planned and workshopped budget which is good and does not
need too much hammer and chisel work as this might spoil the whole broth.
We wish to commend those who prepared it for provision of services to the
citizens of this country. [Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Chairperson, hon Minister, this is the year of the local
government elections. It is appropriate because of the growth in
globalisation and the challenges that such relations place upon local
government. In other words, the sphere of local government must, by its
very definition, become the most important hub around which service
delivery is designed.

The demarcation of municipalities looks fine on paper, but the process has
not as yet convinced communities that the system will offer them an
alternative. People will be far removed from the decision-making
mechanisms, thus making local government a misnomer. Furthermore, the costs
of establishing these municipalities have not been finalised and these
costs have not been budgeted for in this year's budget.

In 1994, the buzzword in Government circles was RDP. But what has
transpired is that it has been replaced by restructuring and redeployment.
Those who have been affected the worst are the poor and underresourced.
Government, for instance, demands from municipalities that they perform at
a given ratio against certain budgeting requirements, but does not provide
a sustainable framework to help local authorities overcome the
infrastructural weaknesses. A disturbing example, in this case, is the
unwanted use of the pension funds by municipalities to cover their running
costs and to balance their books.

What is the future of local government in this country? First of all, most
local authorities do not have the capacity to take along with them
Government's macroeconomic growth model in their jurisdiction. Secondly,
the demarcation of boundaries is a new and complex phenomenon and with the
relative inadequate finance to restructure the new system, local
governments will find it a strain to actually perform the service they are
meant to deliver.

Finance has to be generated by individual municipalities for service
delivery. It has been found that there is no uniformity in tax capacity of
municipalities. Rural areas are unable to raise revenue through property
rates. In the urban areas, people are fearful of exorbitant property rates.
Media, specifically a particular magazine, informed the public of the
apparent new rates statistics which are causing property owners to place
their property on the market for the fear of not being able to afford their
rates in the future.

I believe that the property rating Bill is in its 10th draft, but as a
member of the committee I have not received a copy of any draft.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: You must come to the meeting to get the real story!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!
Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: I do not know what the underlying principles are and
thus it has understandably given rise to a lot of speculation.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, do you understand
the meaning of a call to order? [Laughter.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: No, I want to continue and ask the Minister ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Please be seated.

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Chairperson, my time is running short.

The DEPUTY CHAIPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member over there, you are
not allowed to shout out from your seat at the member on the podium. Please
continue, hon member.

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Can the Minister assure this House today that this Bill
will not have the effect that people who have lived in their homes for more
than 30 or 40 years will be homeless as a result of the speculated rates? I
think the Minister needs to do that today.
Thirdly, there is no apparent progress or social upliftment programmes and
it will become the primary burden of local government to carry the plight
of the poor and destitute. In other words, unless there is a concerted
effort and will to strenghten the capacity of local government, the poor
will remain poor and the local government will remain ineffective.
[Applause.]

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I stand
here on behalf of the ANC to join this budget debate that is closest to the
hearts of the majority of those who voted the ANC into power.

The ANC made a pledge to accelerate delivery aimed at transforming our
local government and uplifting or bettering the lives of our people. The
implementation of this pledge will be guided by the Mafikeng resolutions,
the RDP, the Local Government White Paper, the Local Government Municipal
Demarcation Act, the Local Government Municipal Structures Act and the
Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill, as dictated by the Constitution.

Let us be mindful of the problems and challenges facing us. These include
the past land settlement patterns which ignored development in poorer
areas, lower and poor quality of service delivery to those who cannot
afford and are disadvantaged, poor or lack of democratic considerations for
community involvement in local economic development and service delivery,
insufficient resources to finance and manage transformation, and the lack
of capacity-building both in the municipality and of personnel that
compromise both our service delivery and democracy.

With the above realisation, the ANC reaffirms its commitment to speed up
delivery towards the provision of service through the following: Building
on what we have achieved in the last five years and making bigger impact
towards advancing the lives of our people, who are the majority. The
process of transformation shall be guided by the concepts like Mashakhane,
RDP, Batho Pele, the National Framework Agreement and the Labour Relations
Act. Therefore, for the Government to be more efficient and effective, it
must give priority to the basic needs of the people. It must promote the
social and economic development of its people. It must ensure that all
residents and communities in such municipalities have access to at least a
minimum level of basic services.

In terms of sections 152 and 153 of the Constitution, a municipality must
stay within its financial and administrative capacity. It must also give
services that are fair and equitable to all residents and communities. It
must ensure the highest quality service at the lowest cost and the most
economical use of allocation of available resources. It must also be
financially and environmentally sustainable. It must regularly be reviewed
with a view to upgrading, extension and improvement. It is therefore
opportune for me to further address the members on local government
restructuring, especially as it relates to municipal partnerships.

Restructuring must be understood to be the reorganisation of money, men,
women, machinery, systems and change in policy aimed at achieving a
specific objective. This objective can, amongst others, be aimed at
addressing economic, technological and structural problems or goals that
will benefit the Government, workers and all stakeholders. This process is
further guided by transparency, sound relationships, trust and best
agreements. Restructuring comes at a time when there is a dire need to
transform local government. Because of new challenges, we need ...
[Interjections.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member over there, you are
not allowed to have a conversation during debate time with members in the
cross benches. Please continue, sir.

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Because of new challenges, we need to adopt new approaches
that might include, amongst others, building on existing capacity,
corporatisation, public-public participation, partnership with community-
based organisations and nongovernmental organisations, contracting out,
leases and concessions, and transfer of ownership without compromising its
constitutional obligations.

Restructuring can only come when the IDP demands a change in the delivery
mechanism. It can also come after performance evaluation of councils, when
there is a need for institutional restructuring and reorganisation, as the
Local Government: Municipal Structures Act and the Local Government:
Municipal Systems Bill demand, when communities have an interest in service
partnership, or when the MEC for local government so decides.

The ANC believes strongly in capacity-building as the only way that our
communities and all other stakeholders can be empowered to deliver and
sustain quality services. It is for this reason that Government needs to
develop a system, such as service providers like Seta, in order to address
capacity needs assessment. It also needs to develop and implement targeted
capacity-building programmes and to evaluate the effectiveness, efficiency,
responsiveness and impact of capacity-building.

We need to monitor all training providers funded by Government in terms of
quality training, accountability, qualified trainers and accredited
courses. Lastly, the portfolio committee is committed to keeping a close
look at progress made in the coming six months.

Leyo yindlela ekuya kuthi kuguqulwe ngayo indlela yokusebenza engakhange
ibe luncedo kubantu bakuthi. [Laphela ixesha.] [Kwaghwatywa.] [That is how
we can change the manner of working which did not benefit our people. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman, I have listened to the ANC for the past six
years in this House. One thing is clear: If one wants to understand ANC
policies, one should not listen to what they say, but should look at what
they do. Beautiful statements were made in this House by the ANC, such as
the statements on the section 185 Commission pertaining to language and
cultural diversity in South Africa, and statements which the FF applauded.
But when it came to putting that into action, nothing happened.

Let us compare two sections in the Constitution to illustrate this point,
these are sections 6(2) and 9(2). Section 9(2) deals with affirmative
action, and states that in order to achieve this, measures ``may'' be
taken. This issue has been championed during the past four years by the ANC
in every Bill before this House. Several Bills were passed that dealt only
with affirmative action. Therefore it is clearly an ANC priority. And that
is their priority.

However, section 6(2) in the Constitution, which is the language section,
does not say ``may'' as in the affirmative action section. It says that the
state ``must'' take measures to elevate the status of all South African
languages. Section 6(3)(b), for example, says that municipalities ``must''
take language preferences of the residents into account. ANC city councils
ignore this. Section 6(5) states that PanSALB, the Pan South African
Language Board, ``must'' promote and protect all official languages.
Government departments ignore this.

Die vraag is: is dit die ware ANC en sy werklike houding teenoor
taalverskeidenheid en kultuurgroepe in Suid-Afrika of nie? Dit is duidelik
by hulle geen prioriteit nie. Daar is nou sprake van taalwetgewing voor
hierdie Raad. Ons verwelkom dit, en sal graag wil sien hoe lyk hierdie
wetsontwerp. Alle ander wette wat uit die Grondwet voortgespruit het, is
reeds in plek. Nou, vier jaar later, kom taal eers aan die orde.

Dieselfde geld die beoogde wetsontwerp wat uit artikel 185 van die Grondwet
voortspruit. Alle ander kommissies wat uit die Grondwet voortspruit, was
binne maande ná die aanvaarding van die Grondwet reeds in plek. Ek was die
nag teenwoordig toe die finale bewoording van artikel 185 in 'n klein
komiteetjie gefinaliseer is. Die VF het dit voorgestel in die
grondwetskrywende vergadering. Wat die VF tot nou van die nuwe wetsontwerp
gesien het, is egter nie vir ons aanvaarbaar nie. Dit gaan geensins die
probleme aanspreek nie, en die VF wil voorstel dat die hele wetsontwerp vir
verdere konsultasie terugverwys word. Ons het ons besware skriftelik
uiteengesit hoekom ons dink dit gaan nie werk nie. Dit gaan net nog 'n
liggaam word om mense te probeer troos en te probeer koudlei, sonder tande
of enige effektiewe magte.

Ons wil voorstel dat ons die erns van die ANC oor hierdie sake van kultuur-
en groepsbelange toets deur eers taalwetgewing deur die Parlement te voer.
Daarná sal ons kan agterkom of die ANC werklik ernstig is om die regte van
alle gemeenskappe in Suid-Afrika tot hulle reg te laat kom. Is die Regering
bereid om wetgewing oor tale te aanvaar wat werklik die taalverskeidenheid
gaan aanspreek? Kom ons praat dan daarná sinvol oor die artikel 185-
kommissie, want ek dink dié goed hou verband, en dan is daar ook 'n
duidelike werk en taak vir die artikel 185-kommissie.

In die wêreld is hierdie sake 'n hoofprioriteit om konflik te voorkom. As
die ANC dit nie gou besef nie, gaan hierdie sake hulle in Suid-Afrika op
die agenda forseer. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The question is: Is that the true ANC and its real stance regarding the
diversity of languages and cultural groups in South Africa, or not? It is
clearly not a priority with them. Now there is talk of legislation on
languages before this House. We welcome this and would like to see what
this Bill looks like. All the other Acts that have arisen from the
Constitution are already in place. Only now, four years later, does
language get a turn.

The same applies to the proposed Bill arising from section 185 of the
Constitution. All the other commissions that have arisen from the
Constitution were already in place within months after the Constitution had
been agreed to. I was present on the night when the final wording of
section 185 was agreed upon in a little committee. The FF had proposed it
in the constitutional assembly. What the FF has seen up to now of the new
Bill, however, is not acceptable to us. It will not address the problems at
all, and the FF wants to propose that the whole Bill be referred back for
further consultation. We have set out our objections in writing as to why
we think it will not work. It is going to be just another body which
attempts to comfort people and sidetrack them, without teeth or any
effective powers.

We want to propose that we test whether the ANC is in earnest about these
issues of cultural and group interests by first piloting legislation on
languages through Parliament. After that we will be able to ascertain
whether the ANC is really in earnest about allowing the rights of all
communities in South Africa to come into their own. Is the Government
prepared to agree to legislation on languages which will really address the
linguistic diversity? Let us then go ahead and talk about the section 185
commission, because I believe that these matters are related and then there
will also be a clear job and task for the section 185 commission.

Around the world these issues are a major priority in preventing conflict.
If the ANC does not realise this soon, these matters will force themselves
onto the agenda in South Africa. [Time expired.]]

Rev A D GOOSEN: Mr Chairperson, I just want to remind the hon Mr Mulder
that the NP was in power for 48 years and they did absolutely nothing. We
in the ANC, on the other hand, have been in power for six years, and we
have made great strides. If one goes to our constituencies, one will see
the difference. But if one goes to Sandton and Yeoville in Johannesburg,
one will not see anything, because they had everything and they have been
living off the fat of the land all these years.

Intergovenmental relations is an important pillar on which our system of
government is built. It is firmly entrenched in the Constitution, and we
need to reinforce it every so often for it to best serve its purpose.
Needless to say, the principles of intergovernmental relations, as set out
in the Constitution, must be adhered to by all levels of government.

One of the constitutional principles of intergovernmental relations is the
obligation of organs of state to co-operate with one another in mutual
trust and good faith. May I add that even if those organs of state are in
the hands of the opposition, co-operation and mutual trust must still be
forthcoming.

Having said that, it goes without saying that provinces must exercise
oversight over the municipalities in their areas of jurisdiction. They must
also allow local government to be represented in their legislatures and, by
so doing, serve the interests of the public at grassroots level, thus
effectively extending the basis of democracy.

A worrying aspect, though, is the fact that whereas intergovernmental
relations make provision for co-operation between organs of state, we find
that there is not enough provincial co-operation. I would like to see
provincial exchanges taking place on a regular basis, especially where
there are matters of common concern. I believe that a forum for such co-
operation is a necessity. The department must look into the feasibility of
setting up such a forum. I also want to add that such a forum could also be
helpful especially since the more prosperous provinces tend to perform very
well, whereas those which are performing poorly, are those which are still
suffering the effects of the homeland policy.

The capacity of the underachieving provinces could be greatly enhanced by
co-operation within a forum, with those provinces who have something to
offer in terms of advice, resourcefulness and ideas helping the less
advantaged provinces. I believe that those weaker provinces stand much to
gain from such co-operation, and that inter-provincial forums could well be
a stepping stone towards the enrichment of the provincial system.

There are strands which are saying that the provincial system must be
replaced because of bad performance during the past years. It is being
argued that corruption, mismanagement and wastage are running rife in some
provinces, and that an alternate system must be brought into being. This,
however, is not the view of the majority in the portfolio committee. We are
well aware of the faults and failures of some of the provinces, but may I
add that the strengths of the provinces outweigh their weaknesses by far.

Besides, if we want to talk about the weaknesses of a system then we need
to take cognisance of the fact that the best systems in the world took many
years to evolve. The Australian system of provincial government, for
instance, took some 300 years to develop, and they gradually refined their
system of government to what it is today. It must be borne in mind that
their system was not developed overnight. So it is to be expected with our
young democracy that there are going to be mistakes here and there.
Australia has developed one of the best public administration systems in
the world, but we are not in a position to compete with them. Our system
will best be developed through trial and error.

I know that the department is currently working on a policy document on
intergovernment relations. Even this document is not going to be the
ultimate in terms of our achievements. It is, though, going to be a step
towards a perfect system and therefore I say the provincial system must be
consolidated and reinforced so that provinces can come into their own
through growth and thus become everything to everyone.

I would like to see provinces taken on board when national policy is
determined, especially with regard to those competencies which the
Constitution confers on them in Schedules 4 and 5. By provinces being
brought on board at that early stage and not by the policies they confront
in the provinces, they could well facilitate implementation of those
policies.

We need to keep on fine-tuning our policies on intergovernmental relations.
We need to iron out all the rough edges and to make them more pliable so
that we may achieve the highest good this country has to offer all its
people and, by so doing, build a better future for the nation as a whole.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, hon Minister, the Department of
Provincial and Local Government aims to develop and promote a national
system of comparative governance. This is a tall order in a country that
has disparities ranging from the haves to the have-nots, from the high-
ranking to the people of the earth. Provinces themselves are a headache for
the central Government. The most immediate case in point is the Northern
Province which owes Telkom close to R40 million in telephone bills. That
this was allowed to accumulate to such an amount is a sign only of
ineptitude. The other provinces also have their inadequacies.

The development of so-called wall-to-wall municipal governance is another
headache. Much as it is argued that it is contained in the Constitution,
the fact is that this Government knows that illiteracy is very high.
Another issue is that South Africans are not avid readers, therefore kgosi
and their subjects cannot be blamed for not being aware that their areas
have to fall under municipal jurisdiction. The Government should have taken
the trouble to educate them on these issues long before they were affected.
The whole issue can simply be seen as small print by the consumer or as a
hidden curriculum in education circles.

The issue of municipalities across the length and breadth of this country
is compounded by the fact that the demarcation board still has to finalise
delimitations. The possible introduction of a land tax in rural areas is a
complicating factor. The affected illiterate person is ill-prepared for the
matter. The question of remuneration of traditional leaders has to be
finalised soon. We are aware that a White Paper on the matter is going
round and hope the matter will be resolved and laid to rest.

It is hoped that the council of the department, the presidency and the
provincial premiers will assist in ensuring that there is a measure of
stability in the provinces and the country. Being new in its present form,
the department has been adequately funded in the budget. If the councillors
took on their responsibilities by using their allocation well the
municipalities could be in a position to generate their own funds.

Mnr D A A OLIFANT: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil net vir die agb Frik van
Deventer sê dit is nie net die DP wat die Grondwet 'n groot onreg aandoen
nie. Selfs die Nuwe NP doen dit, en tussen daardie twee partye het hulle
die grootste verkragters geword van die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Die wil van die mense is nie verlede jaar met hulle
koalisie in ag geneem nie.

Waar op aarde het 'n mens al ooit gehoor dat die leier van 'n party in 'n
koalisie dag in en dag uit deur 'n ander maatjie in die koalisie verneder
word? [Tussenwerpsels.] Daardie agb lede se bedmaatjies werk nie uit nie.
Hulle moet saam met ons kom vry; ons het 'n beter plan vir hulle! [Gelag.]
Verder wil ek sê ek kan nie aanvaar dat die NP se leier so verneder word
nie. Tony Leon het verlede jaar in die tydskrif Leadership SA gesê daardie
agb lede se leier is niks anders as 'n grootmond nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D A A OLIFANT: Mr Chairperson, I just want to tell the hon Frik van
Deventer that it is not only the DP which is doing the Constitution a grave
injustice. Even the New NP is doing so, and between those two parties they
have become the biggest violators of the Constitution of South Africa.
[Interjections.] The will of the people was not taken into consideration
last year when they formed their coalition.

Where on earth has one ever heard of the leader of a party in a coalition
being humiliated day in and day out by another member of the coalition?
[Interjections.] Those hon members have the wrong bedfellows. They must
come courting with us; we have a better plan for them! [Laughter.]
Furthermore I want to say that I cannot accept the leader of the NP being
humiliated like this. Last year in the publication Leadership SA Tony Leon
said that those hon members' leader was nothing but a loud mouth.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Please come back to the topic
at hand, sir.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: It is the topic, sir.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! No, it is not. You are going
on to attack individuals and party members. The topic is provincial and
local government.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: I am there.

Dit is inderdaad nou die tyd dat ons vir mnr Marthinus van Schalkwyk wil sê
hy moet daardie koalisie ontbind, want hulle gaan net verdwyn. [Applous.]]
[The time has indeed now come for us to tell Mr Marthinus van Schalkwyk
that he must dissolve that coalition, because they are simply going to
disappear. [Applause.]]

I want to ask Mrs Rhoda Southgate to please come to our committee meetings.
She must stop flying around all over the world. If she is not used to the
committee meetings, I will tell her about them because she cannot afford to
have some simple PA come to our meetings and expect the PA to participate
in our deliberations. It is not on. The PA is not an elected member of this
committee and she is not an elected member of this Parliament. Mrs
Southgate must get her facts in order.

Die transformasie van plaaslike regering het nou hopelik sy finale stadium
bereik, en sodoende is meer mense in staat gestel om op 'n meer
doeltreffende manier by die vraagstukke van plaaslike regering betrokke te
raak. Ons hoop die plaaslike regeringsverkiesings later vanjaar, asook die
verwante beplanning en leweringsprosesse, sal uiteindelik die vrug baar van
die belofte wat ons jong demokrasie al sedert 1994 toon. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Daardie agb lede moet luister!

Natuurlik is daar 'n paar van die boustene wat nog kortkom. Wat veral
kommerwekkend is, is die vermoë van die nuutgetransformeerde
munisipaliteite om die doelwitte te bereik wat die Grondwet en ook hulself
aan hulle stel. Ons het in die Grondwet maatreëls verskans ingevolge
waarvan munisipaliteite 'n ontwikkelingstaak het. Ons het selfs ingestem
dat hierdie munisipaliteite geïntegreerde ontwikkelingsplanne moet opstel
wat aan hulle begrotings en dié van ander diensverskaffers gekoppel is,
sodat dit as gids kan dien vir die manier waarop hierdie taak verrig moet
word.

Dit is welbekend dat sommige van hierdie geïntegreerde ontwikkelingsplanne
nog verbeter kan word. Die hoof uitvoerende beampte van die
Ontwikkelingsbank van Suider-Afrika, dr Goldin, het onlangs gesê die meeste
van die ontwikkelingsplanne gaan mank aan minstens twee faktore, naamlik
die tegniese aspekte en ook dié wat gemeenskapsbetrokkenheid en -deelname
betref. Hy het beklemtoon dat gemeenskappe steeds nie ten volle deel is van
die beplanningsproses nie, ten spyte van al die beleidsrigtings en
strategieë wat opgestel en beplanning wat gedoen is.

Plaaslike ekonomiese ontwikkeling is steeds net 'n modewoord, en die
voormalig benadeelde groepe is nog grootliks daarvan uitgesluit. Die gebrek
aan 'n gestruktureerde verwantskap tussen die gemeenskap en die
munisipaliteite is onlangs weer gedurende die openbare verhore van die
portefeuljekomitee aangedui as 'n probleem. Om die kapasiteit van
instellings en mense op te bou, is die hoeksteen van multisektorale
ontwikkeling.

Verskeie kapasiteitsprobleme in die werksaamhede van bestaande
munisipaliteite het ook aan die lig gekom. 'n Mens hoop dat die toekomstige
implementering van die megastad en ander nuwe vorms van munisipaliteite in
'n groot mate dié probleme sal kan oplos, veral as dit genoegsame steun
ontvang van sowel die nasionale as provinsiale regerings.

Die erns van hierdie taak is onlangs beklemtoon deur die rampe wat in
verskeie dele van die land ervaar is. Dit is 'n verdere bron van kommer om
te lees dat die hulp wat as deel van die noodlenigingsprogram voorsien is,
nie altyd die rampslagoffers bereik het nie. Watter les vir die toekoms kan
ons hieruit leer? Ons hele benadering tot rampbestuur is weens hierdie
gebeure onder verdenking geplaas.

Ek het die opposisiepartye vroeër vanjaar gevra waarom hulle so 'n bohaai
opskop as veldbrande in die Wes-Kaap die huise van gegoedes bedreig, maar
wanneer gehuggies in plakkerskampe gereeld afbrand, word dit begroet met 'n
oorverdowende stilte van hulle kant. Die gebrek aan koördinering tussen die
munisipaliteite van die Kaapse Metropolitaanse gebied en die provinsiale
regering tydens dié rampe is toe wreed aan die kaak gestel. Weet ons egter
werklik hoe ernstig die probleem is wat die gereelde voorkoms van brande in
die plakkerskampe betref? Hierdie mense verloor die dak oor hul kop, al hul
besittings en dikwels ook hul lewe. Sodoende word onstabiele en
gefragmenteerde gemeenskappe ontwikkel.

Inligting kom nou vorendag wat meer lig sal kan werp op
voorkomingsmaatreëls ten opsigte van rampe in die Wes-Kaap. As hierdie
inligting ter tafel gelê word, behoort munisipaliteite oor die nodige
kapasiteit te beskik om die koördinering van rampbeheermaatreëls te
verbeter. Belangriker nog, dan kan hierdie rampe voorkom word, of die
uitwerking daarvan kan ten minste verminder word, deur gepaste en
volhoudende risikoverminderingsmaatreëls by hulle geïntegreerde
ontwikkelingsplanne in te sluit.

Is munisipaliteite bereid om verhoudings met gemeenskappe op te bou deur
middel van opvoedkundige ... [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The transformation of local government has now hopefully reached its final
stage, and in this way more people have been placed in a position to become
involved in a more effective way in the problems of local government. We
hope that the local government elections later this year, as well as the
associated planning and delivery processes, will eventually bring the
promise which our young democracy has shown since 1994 to fruition.
[Interjections.] Those hon members must listen!

Of course a few of the building-blocks are still missing. What is
particularly worrying, is the ability of the newly transformed
municipalities to achieve the objectives that the Constitution and they
have set themselves. We entrenched measures in the Constitution in terms of
which municipalities have a development task. We have even agreed that
these municipalities must set up integrated development plans linked to
their budgets and those of other service providers, so that this can serve
as a guide for the way in which this task must be performed.
It is well known that some of these integrated development plans can still
be improved. The chief executive officer of the Development Bank of
Southern Africa, Dr Goldin, said recently that most of the development
plans fall short as regards at least two factors, namely technical aspects
and community involvement and participation aspects. He emphasised that
communities are still not fully part of the planning process, in spite of
all the policy directions and strategies that have been drafted and the
planning that has been done.

Local economic development is still just a buzz word, and the formerly
disadvantaged groups are still largely excluded from it. The lack of a
structured relationship between the community and the municipalities was
again recently singled out as a problem during the public hearings of the
portfolio committee. To develop the capacity of institutions and people is
the cornerstone of multi-sectoral development.

Several capacity problems in the functioning of existing municipalities
have also come to light. One hopes that the future implementation of the
megacity and other new forms of municipalities will to a great extent be
able to solve these problems, particularly if they receive sufficient
support from both the national and the provincial governments.

The seriousness of this task was recently emphasised by the disasters which
were experienced in various parts of the country. It is a further cause for
concern to read that the assistance provided as part of the emergency
relief programme, did not always reach the disaster victims. What lesson
can we learn from this for the future? Our entire approach to disaster
management was placed under suspicion because of these events.

I asked the opposition parties earlier this year why they kick up such a
fuss when veld fires in the Western Cape threaten the houses of the
wealthy, but when shacks in squatter camps regularly burn down, this is
greeted with a deafening silence on their part. The lack of co-ordination
between the municipalities of the Cape Metropolitan area and the provincial
government during these disasters was rudely exposed.

However, do we really know how serious the problem is as regards the
regular occurrence of fires in the squatter camps? These people lose the
roof over their heads, all their possessions and frequently also their
lives. In this way unstable and fragmented communities develop.

Information is now emerging which will be able to throw more light on
preventative measures in respect of disasters in the Western Cape. When
this information is tabled, municipalities should have the necessary
capacity to improve the co-ordination of disaster control measures. More
importantly, these disasters can then be prevented, or at least the effects
can be reduced, by including suitable and sustainable risk reduction
measures in their integrated development plans.

Are municipalities prepared to develop relations with communities by means
of educational ... [Time expired.]]

Mrs G M BORMAN: Chair, Minister Mufamadi and hon members, at the outset I
wish to thank our chairperson, the hon Yunus Carrim, for the sensitive way
in which he includes all the political parties on our portfolio committee.

In its insatiable lust for power and its paranoid obsession with change,
the ANC is thrusting the country into another round of municipal
restructuring. This threatens to distance local government from the people,
sideline provincial structures and burden ratepayers with further
unnecessary increases. Whilst we sit in our commitees talking about
restructuring, developmental government, municipal systems, public
participation and all the rest, all that the people want is simple service
delivery.

Meanwhile, the morale amongst employees is also at a low ebb. Business Day
recently reported on a survey centred on work organisation, labour
relation, service delivery and municipal structuring, and I quote:


  Overall, the research findings present a workforce that is disappointed
  with local government's performance, extremely concerned about job
  security and, at best, sceptical of the prospects of improvements through
  the unicity process.

Local government is in a state of systems paralysis. Almost half of South
Africa's 843 municipalities are in financial crisis, as my colleague has
already said.

Municipalities owed a total of some R9 billion for rates and service
charges as at May 2000, according to Minister Mufamadi. Some of the reasons
given for this financial crisis - let the House just have a look at them
again - are the costs of amalgamating formerly independent municipal
structures into transitional municipalities, lack of human capacity,
training of staff, lack of skills, low productivity, lack of budgetary
discipline, unaffordable levels of service provision, lack of political
will and systematic structure in collection of debts, corruption,
misappropriation of funds, mismanagement of resources, lack of competition
for jobs, overstaffing, affirmative action, retirement of skilled staff
through retrenchments, and so on. If we had to set out to create a goon
show, we could hardly have done it better. Let me focus on one tiny aspect
which serves as a microcosm of the whole. I refer to the report of the
local government training board presented to our portfolio committee.

The lack of skills and training I referred to earlier, and the bankrupt
state of municipalities, say something about the desperate need for
training. Now here we have a department set up to do just that and
allocated R12 million. Actually in the presentation, they did not seem to
know if it was R12 million or R9 million. But only R3 million gets spent,
and municipalities do not have the capacity to do their work. Now we are
going to take 843 municipalities and reduce them to some 284, and we
approve of consolidating.

But do we have the capacity to manage much larger municipalities when we
have failed so abysmally with smaller ones? Are we not about to make the
same mistakes again, only on a bigger scale, as we overburden our
municipalities with this prescriptive legislation that puts them all into
some straitjacket? We are now at last moving to outsourcing and
partnerships. The DP fully supports these initiatives provided they are
conducted in a proper businesslike way.

Peter Dickson, in the Mail & Guardian, dated 26 May, writing about crooked
councillors, revealed that in Port Elizabeth several long-serving
councillors stood accused of failing to disclose their interests in
companies doing business with the municipality. In the same article,
Cosatu's regional chair, expressing his concern about councillors backing
outsourcing in order to profit, said that some councillors were encouraging
outsourcing so that they got contracts through the back door. This is the
calibre of public representative that ratepayers are paying to run our
municipalities, at least the few who do the paying.

The new municipal systems Bill will address some of the problems, but, I
fear, will create others. Municipalities will have to measure performance,
involve the public in full paticipation, deliver services, prepare
integrated development plans, prepare budgets in relation to integrated
development plans, and so on. All this will require skills and training
which we have already signally failed to manifest.

On a recent study tour to Australia with our portfolio committee ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, section 139 of the Constitution requires that
provinces build capacity at local government level. Does the department
have a list of municipalities which still require capacity-building? How
much of the budget allocation has actually gone to capacity-building at
local level? Recent floods have shown that the country must not be caught
unprepared. The provinces and local councils must be equipped for disaster
management. Has the department budgeted sufficiently for this?

Since the 1995 local government elections some provinces have invoked
section 139 of the Constitution. Has the department taken measures to
prevent similar cases happening again? The new local system will have to
create strong and stable local political systems from the present chaos.
Large-scale programmes are needed for the urgent provision of clean water,
sanitation, sewerage, electricity, and refuse collection and disposal. The
present inefficiency and corruption in municipal councils must be
eradicated by employing qualified people, not people with mere political
affiliation to the ruling party.

Demarcation in the rural areas may cause serious problems if traditional
leaders are ignored. Demarcation of boundaries must be carefully handled in
the areas which are under traditional leaders. Their authority must be
clearly defined. The PAC supports the budget.

Chief M NONKONYANA: Chairperson and hon members, when we, the ANC, sought
re-election through the second democratic election, we committed ourselves
to working tirelessly to accelerate delivery in all areas, particularly in
rural areas, amongst other things.

In line with our policy of reconstructing and developing this country, our
President, Comrade Thabo Mbeki, in his first speech as the President of
this country, said


  The Government is now in a position to implement a rural development
  programme for the integrated development of the rural areas. This will
  bring together all Government departments and all spheres of government,
  including the traditional leaders.

In the past years, having inherited a system of local government which
unfairly discriminated against the majority, particularly the rural masses,
we committed ourselves to transforming local government to create and
sustain humane, equitable and viable settlement. In doing so, we adopted a
developmental local government committed to working with all citizens and
groups within the community to find sustainable ways to meet their sound
economic and material needs and to improve the quality of their lives.

Since this Government took over power from the violent apartheid
government, it has demonstrated its commitment to improving the quality of
life of the people living in rural areas by delivering in these areas as
well. In all the annual reports of the relevant departments, one will see
that there has been delivery in the rural areas as well, and the Department
of Provincial and Local Government has played a key and critical role.

One will notice that the budget for this department has increased slightly
this financial year. This is so because over and above the specific task
mentioned by the hon the Minister and all my fellow comrades who have
spoken before me, we are committed to accelerating service delivery to the
people living in the rural areas, who more often than not are still living
in squalid conditions.

Many rural areas in our country are not accessible by road at all, and even
in those which are accessible the roads are in a poor state and the
majority of the motor vehicles that are being used there are not
roadworthy. For instance, as I speak the municipal road between Flagstaff
and Mount Ayliff is in a very bad state, and the Umbandana River bridge can
collapse at any moment, with disastrous consequences for our people. The
road between Matatiele and Marie Zell High School was bad before the recent
floods in the Eastern Cape, and is now worse. The road between Mount Frere
and Sidwell is equally bad and the Tunxe River bridge has collapse and a
step ladder is being used. We are committed to addressing these problems.
The same position is prevailing in all the other provinces where there are
rural areas.

In addition to the mammoth task, in drawing up a budget for this department
we will need the business community, nationally and internationally, to
assist the Government. The other area that this department will have to
focus on during this financial year is, of course, the co-ordination and
monitoring of service delivery in rural areas. For instance, where there is
no electricity, it is very expensive for Telkom to install a telephone
service. Clearly, both Telkom and Eskom must plan the delivery of their
services jointly.

We, the members of the ANC, are of the view that it is now time for this
department to facilitate an indaba to co-ordinate delivery in rural areas.
Such and indaba, we believe, will produce a common vision and mission to
deliver services in rural areas in a more co-ordinated and sustainable
manner. The public representatives from the national, provincial and local
spheres of government should take part in such a forum, so that all of us
can form a united front sharing a common vision and a mission.

We believe that the development in the rural areas must be people driven.
The people themselves must take part in the development of their own areas.
The people must not only get jobs when there is delivery in their areas:
they must also share in business ventures. We are aware that in the past
some business enterprises have taken advantage of our rural communities.
Some provide them with a poor and inferior quality of service, and some
consultants frustrate us by enriching the rich, instead of assisting us in
delivering to the poorest of the poor. Once bitten, twice shy.

The rural communities must work hand in glove with the Government. Together
with them we must, and will, make sure that the ANC wins the envisaged
local government elections and deploy councillors who will represent their
interests.

Last but not least, the existing tension between our traditional leaders
and our communities at local-government level must come to an end. Let us
all be a nation at work, for a better life for all. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Minister, the MF hails the completion of the
demarcation, so that the first truly nonracial, democratic election at
local government level can take place on 1 November 2000. With the
Masakhane campaign embracing the youths and the series of legislation
designed to rectify the rates imbalances, together with the Local
Government: Municipal Structures Act, South Africa is set for its next
miracle, ie creating local government in every square metre in South
Africa. However, care must be taken that the demarcation of boundaries does
not fragment communities, especially in the areas where the NGOs are set up
to serve the people.

Nevertheless, the flexible transformation process at local government level
advocates a development of an adequate network of accessible and service-
orientated departments that meet the diverse and intimate needs of our
people. The action plan is to promote capacity-building and readdress the
distribution of resources, using equitable criteria, to our citizens in the
urban and rural areas.
The participation of the community at local government will improve the
channel of communication and maintain a good partnership or relationship,
which will assist in removing constraints that hinders access to service
delivery. Therefore, those who have opposed the new look embraced by local
government are not for change. They want the retention of the status quo.

The MF finds it rather strange that the DP is placing adverts in the
newspapers that are circulating in the former Indian areas, about Zimbabwe.
In this local government election, the Indian community is not going to be
hoodwinked by any ``swart gevaar'' tactics. The MF supports the Minister
for taking bold initiatives to restructure the local government to uplift
South Africans at grass-roots level.

Mr Rajbansi, the MF leader, has pointed out repeatedly how the DP and the
New NP competed with each other in Durban to trample the so-called non-
whites, especially the Indian people, at the local government level. Our
advice to the Minister is that in considering legislation, one has to
acknowledge the effect of the evil Group Areas Act, which still remains to
haunt us and has a negative effect on the market value of our properties.

The MF fully supports the Minister and his department in all the efforts to
improve the quality of life of South Africans. We support the Vote.
[Applause.]

Mr J M NGUBENI: Chairperson, hon members, the fundamental transformation of
local government into a democratic, developmental and accountable component
of the state is a major challenge to Government and South Africans at
large. To achieve equal municipal service provision, local economic
development and infrastructure development - especially in the rural
communities - demands a commitment, to eradicate the imbalances created by
colonial and apartheid forces.

The process of demarcation aims to reduce the number of municipalities.
This will lead to the restructuring of municipalities into sustainable and
economically viable entities. For us the demarcation process is an integral
part of democratising primary rural local government. And it enables the
rural and traditional communities to enjoy their right to freedom and
development. Processes for transformation are often decontextualised and
politicised for narrow political ambition, and this perpetuates suffering
and unbearable conditions for the rural and traditional communities.

The ANC-led government is committed to ensuring the hastening of the
delivery of basic services to all people, irrespective of race, gender,
class or location. The apartheid regime created reserves for African people
in mountains and barren land, to enforce ethnic divisions. It will,
therefore, be suicidal and counter-revolutionary to oppose the process
which is a lifeline to restoring the dignity and improving the social
economic conditions of traditional leaders and rural communities.

Despite the magnitude and legacy of colonialism and apartheid, the
department has embarked on a remarkable programme to ensure co-operative
governance between traditional leadership and elected public
representatives at local level. The fulfilment of the provision of section
212 of the Constitution and subsequent legislation bears testimony to the
commitment by the Government to accommodate traditional institutions within
the new democratic dispensation. The budget for traditional affairs has
been increased by 42% in nominal terms. This will enable the department to
create a conducive atmosphere to meet the challenges facing the traditional
leadership and its institution.

The department must also be commended for the implementation of a programme
with respect to the constitutional recognition of the Khoisan community as
vulnerable indigenous people. The National Khoisan Forum was established
for a proper consultation process, among other things. The new coat of arms
bears testimony that the ANC-led Government genuinely responds to and
recognises all communities.

The National House of Traditional Leaders, despite their understandable
teething problems, is now geared towards being a respectful institution
capacitated to engage in processes of policy formulation, influencing the
legislative processes and co-ordinating provincial activities. All these
processes are genuine attempts at restoring the dignity and pride of
traditional leaders. The President is also currently dealing with all the
contentious issues raised by traditional leaders. This is a clear
demonstration, and it serves as a commitment to accommodate and allay fears
and suspicions around these complex issues.

We are approaching local government elections. Some apartheid agents, who
abused, neglected and divided the traditional leaders, will be seen posing
for TV cameras in royal kraals, with the sole intention of buying votes,
since they are locked in the past practices that African traditional
institutions are there to be exploited. Such agents owe their allegiance
and respect only to the queen or other European traditional leaders.

On the nature of the institution of traditional leadership and its
compatibility with democracy, particularly regarding the role of women and
the youth within the traditional institution, it is inconceivable that
women and the youth should be disadvantaged by the current cultural biases
of the institutions. Customs are not carved in stone. Societies all over
the world adapt their customs as dictated by social circumstances.

Secondly, the relation between traditional leaders and democratically
elected representatives is central to the debate of transforming
institutions. Minister Mufamadi sums it up correctly when he says that it
would be irresponsible to allow a situation in which traditional and rural
communities have to choose between councillors and traditional leaders.

Co-operative governance and properly defined functions and roles will
enable the co-existence of both primary and local government structures and
the institution of traditional leadership. In that way, war on poverty can
be declared. The fight to deal with backlogs in the infrastructure
development can be accelerated and the rest will be a better life for rural
and traditional communities.

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson and Mr Minister, the hon the Minister informed
this House today that the draft Bill on the establishment of the Commission
for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
Linguistic Communities, as stipulated in section 185, has been presented to
Cabinet. I want to devote my speech today mainly to this aspect of the
department's work.

As a whole, I can be positive on this matter. The process of the drafting
of the Bill was given a character of inclusiveness, with a workshop in
September last year attended by 40 role-players from, inter alia, parties
represented in this House, and by the decision of the conference the next
day to establish a technical committee to finalise the Bill, originally
drafted by the CSIR. Reports received from members of this committee stated
that it performed its duties with enthusiasm and dignity, with no ulterior
political influence on its work.

In his speech today, the hon the Minister said something very important. He
said that, with the adoption of this Bill, ``the pathway to stability will
be firmly built''. In saying this, this ever-smiling Minister gave me
reason to smile as well. The Minister acknowledged that stability in South
Africa is directly connected with the way in which the aspirations of
minorities are met. The AEB regards the section 185 commission as one of
the ways to reach this important goal.

The other side of the coin is that, if this commission is a sort of dummy
commission, something merely symbolic and without teeth, it will serve as
an indicator that lip service is being paid to the rights of cultural,
linguistic and religious communities, and this will definitely be to the
detriment of stability in South Africa, as happened elsewhere in the world,
where this crucial issue was not adequately addressed in multi-cultural
societies.

Bearing this in mind, I want to make the following comments. This is a
commission of rights, not individual rights, but, as the Constitution so
clearly stipulates, the rights of communities. These are communities
defined by a specific cultural, linguistic and religious character. The
work of this commission will be impossible if the concept of rights of
communities or minorities, if you prefer, is not defined and established by
legislation. What South Africa urgently needs is a Bill of collective
rights, in addition to the Bill of individual rights. There are ample
examples throughout the world.

This must be borne in mind. My right to speak my own language and my right
to worship God according to my religious beliefs are individual rights, as
stipulated in section 30 of the Constitution. Section 31 and, of course,
section 185 which is built on section 31, goes one step further, especially
in subsection (b). It discusses the right ``to form, join and maintain
cultural, religious and linguistic associations and other organs of civil
society''. Therefore, we need further development in the definition of
these collective rights and accompanying legislation. The AEB welcomes the
section 185 commission as an instrument to develop exactly this.

Further, a welcome step forward in the draft Bill is the acknowledgement of
cultural councils for communities that desire them. I want to make a plea
today that the Bill must open the option for these cultural councils to
perform certain functions in the sphere of the relevant cultural community,
which are presently performed by Government.

Possible functions are, inter alia, some of those presently performed by
the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology, the Department of
Welfare, and even the Department of Education. To do this, in a sensible
way, it is of paramount importance that section 38(2) of the draft Bill
must be altered to make provision for a proportional cut of the state
Budget, to empower the councils to perform these relevant functions.

A further point is that we must make sure that this commission really
serves the purpose originally intended in the drafting of the Constitution.
In this regard, I want to quote from a statement of the President of the
Constitutional Court. I am not going to mention the case now, but he said:


  The SA Constitution was the product of the multiparty negotiations. It
  was permissible to take background information into account, as part of
  the context ... In countries where the Constitution was the supreme law,
  it was not unusual for courts to have the circumstances existing at the
  time of adoption of the Constitution in considering its provisions.

Remember that the inclusion of sections 31 and 185 in the Constitution was
part of a negotiated settlement between the ANC and, mainly, the FF in
1994, to get everyone on board. Special emphasis should be placed on the
aspirations of the communities they represented, now also represented by
the AEB and other parties in this House. This fact should be reflected in
the composition of the commission.

Daar moet so 'n paar goeie Boere ook in die kommisie dien. Dit is wat dit
beteken. [A few good Boere must also serve on the commission. That is what
this means.]

The draft Bill is by far not the final answer to the legitimate aspirations
of the people that other members and I represent in this House. The AEB,
however, regards it as a positive start and has been positively involved in
the process so far. It will, therefore, play a constructive role in the
process ahead.

In the last instance, as we are dealing here with the rights of religious
communities, I want to make a plea to members to be more sensitive in this
regard. Yesterday, a member referred to Calvinism and to the doctrine of
predestination as some kind of eternal doom on certain people,
predominantly on the basis of race. This is absolutely untrue. What
Calvinism really means is: Soli deo Gloria - The sovereignty of God over
all spheres of life. And what about the doctrine of predestination? Nobody
knows the names and addresses of the elect. Therefore, the last and final
command of Christ was: ``Preach the Gospel to all the nations.'' That is
what it means. [Time expired.]

Mr B M SOLO: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members of the House ...

... kuyabonakala ukuba siya kufa sifundisa. Ngamanye amaxesha kuthiwa,
``Benamehlo nje ababoni, beneendlebe nje abeva.'' Kodwa ezinye izinto
sizithabatha kubo. [... it is quite clear that some people will never
learn. Sometimes it is said: ``They have eyes, but they will not see, and
they have ears, but they will not hear.'' Yet we got some of these things
from them.]

A lot has already been said. I would not like to spoil the good statement
made by the progressive parties and those that see the need for
transformation. On the other hand, we need to correct distortions of facts
so as to save ourselves from confusion.

Basically my task here is to respond, probably to those who are really not
clued up or geared to be part of this change. I find my task to be very,
very difficult because there is very little that is new from what they have
been saying, and even less that is of substance. Really, my task is very,
very difficult. How does one respond to nothing? Because there is nothing
that they offered this House. Yet they know and they have agreed and said
yes, there are problems. Instead, when we address those problems, they play
around as if they were children dancing in some nightclub somewhere.
[Interjections.]

Mr G A J GROBLER: Is dit 'n grappie? [Is that a joke?]

Mr B M SOLO: That is correct. It is a grappie [joke], because that member
is a joke.

Therefore it has become necessary to deal with some of the issues that were
raised by some opposition parties. There is really no way anyone could deny
the fact that there is a need for change and a need for restructuring in
order to advance the democratic constitution. Hence, today we are
presenting a budget that attempts to achieve that.

The hon Mr Selfe of the DP has bitterly complained about viabilty,
capacity, resources and all these things. He is probably correct. But it is
precisely for that reason that we need to demarcate and change the existing
system of local government in this country. Of course, I thought he would
probably come with viable solutions, instead he reflected a scenario of
doom.

We are all human beings and we are all geared for a better life. We all
want to be secure. We all need basic necessities that a human being can
live on. The reason that we are demarcating boundaries in the manner we are
doing is precisely because we want to ensure that those communities and
institutions that have the relevant resources are able to pool them
together to ensure a better life for all.

I am not going to deal with all the other comments that were raised by
other parties. I do not think it will be necessary for me to do that. I
just want to look at this issue that has been raised repeatedly, and that
is the whole question of the property rates Bill. I do not know what is
funny about people acquiring information wherever they can get it. I think
that this is part of the new system we have introduced in this country.
There is no information that is hidden. No one would be arrested for
accessing information from wherever one gets it, including the Internet. I
think this is more advantageous to the DP because they have been provided
with these resources and skills long before the new democracy came into
being. I think they should appreciate the fact that this Government allows
everyone to get information, even, at some point, from dead people who are
six feet underground and, who probably, might have some information.

I think there is a lot of euphoria around the Bill which is in the process
of being drafted. We all know the procedures. It is the department that
starts the whole process. I do not know what could be wrong with the
department making that Bill available. The department makes that Bill
available because it wants hon members' participation and to make sure that
they are part and parcel of this process. In terms of the procedures - I do
not want to stand here and lecture as if I am a teacher, because we
ourselves know what they are - once the Bill has been submitted to Cabinet
- I think the Minister can substantiate this - it is surely submitted to
the portfolio committee, where most of the parties are represented. That is
the time when we can apply our minds correctly and raise all these issues
that are being raised here.

I see only one thing around this debate on the property rates Bill. Because
there are some form of elections that are coming in six months' time,
people are beginning to start electioneering here in Parliament, as we have
seen what has happened between the DP and the New NP. We now see a new
``swart gevaar'' coming in the form of the property rates Bill. We need to
understand that we are not in the game of robbing Peter to pay Paul. What
we are looking at in this country is to ensure that we pool all resources
together and that all communities are afforded the opportunity to live a
better life.

Finally, looking into the whole debate as presented here, it is my view
that this budget should not be viewed from a point of view of a narrow,
selfish interest. For any society to live a prosperous life, something has
to be done. This budget should be seen as a step in the right direction. It
is an enabling budget that seeks to establish normality, uniformity and a
resource base, all of which are an attempt to ensure a better life for all.

I am of the opinion that one of the major problems, that has created a
number of social problems, such as homelessness, landlessness and diseases,
is the way government has been run in the past, which is a fact we all
know. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, firstly I
would like to thank all those who participated in this debate, for their
insightful contributions. I think there is a lot that can be learned from
the contributions of many of the participants in this debate.

The hon Mr Selfe has accused us of drafting the property rates Bill in
secrecy. He is of the view that it is this secrecy which gives rise to what
he calls ``predictable panic''. He further directly asked the question
whether the Katz Commission was consulted.

In response to all these I want to say the following. On 5 November 1998, a
workshop was held with representatives from municipalities and other key
organisations. Approximately 250 delegates from municipalities all over the
country attended the workshop. The delegates from the municipalities were
mainly finance officers. In addition, the following organisations were
present: Salga, the South African Institute of Valuers, the South African
Property Owners Association, the SA Council for Valuers and the Institute
of Municipal Finance. Comments were received from all the major
participants, including the city of Cape Town, Durban Metro and the Eastern
Metropolitan Council: Johannesburg. The Department of Finance has also been
involved in a number of bilateral meetings, which included the
participation of a representative from the Katz Commission. If this is the
hon Mr Selfe's understanding of secrecy, we certainly do not have the same
understanding of the word.
The question that obviously arises is: Why this Bill? I think it will be
important to point out the following. Firstly, the Bill does not seek to
give local government powers that that sphere does not have. The power for
local government to source revenue in this way is an original power which
derives from section 229 of the Constitution. But what is the reality that
we have today?

We have, today, substantial diversity in property tax practice throughout
the country. There is a lack of national legislation on property tax and
this has resulted in a cumbersome system of property rating. As I said,
section 229(2) of the Constitution states that the power of the
municipality to impose rates on property may be regulated by national
legislation. I realise that the instinctive reaction of many parties is to
oppose that, when we want to introduce this legislation. But I do realise
also that some parties, over time, have achieved an element of a return to
sobriety and they are beginning to say that perhaps it is not as adverse as
they thought it was before.

I think we will agree that a situation such as the one that I have painted,
requires to be reformed. That is precisely what this Bill is seeking to
achieve. One cannot on one hand decry the fact that municipalities have a
weak fiscal base and, at the same time, when we make an attempt to
introduce a law which will improve municipalities' fiscal base, then one
says that that is also wrong. Where is local government going to get its
revenue from? I do not believe that it will get it from the sky. It has to
get it from somewhere. Of course, together, we will have to make sure that
we minimise the adverse effects of the final legislation which will be
passed by this House and not just by the ANC, as some people appear to be
trying to suggest.

Rev Zondi is worried about what he called ``dangerous fires'' that are
raging. Of course, as a reverend, he tried to cast himself in the role of a
prophet, and not just a prophet, but a prophet of doom. [Laughter.] He did
not seem to be aware of the discussions which have been taking place
between the traditional leaders and the president of this country. If he
was aware, I suggest that he has made no effort to discover what actually
happened at those meetings or, at worst, he exhibited no thirst for
precision. [Laughter.] I suppose that is the stuff that prophets of doom
are made of. [Interjections.] I want to say that everything that he said
about this issue is really based on unverified intelligence and nobody
should take action on the basis of what he said.

Regarding the hon Mr Van Deventer ... [Interjections] ... however he
pronounces his name. That hon member cannot expect me to be able to
pronounce it in that way. He used, firstly, this occasion to quarrel with
the DP. I do not want to enter that fray because I do not know why they are
quarrelling. [Laughter.] However, he complained about the current
restructuring of municipal boundaries. I perfectly understand why he is
complaining, because the outcome of that process will be a new world - a
world different from the world that his party forced us to live in for many
years. [Interjections.] We are committed to changing the legacy that his
party bequeathed to our country. I am not surprised that he boldly said
that his party would not support this budget. That does not alter the fact
that progress will be made out of these deliberations. [Applause.] If he
wants to remain standing on the banks of the Rubicon, let him stay there.

The hon Chief Mtirara said that the way in which our department is
allocating its budget is biased in favour of urban areas. He said this
notwithstanding what I had said earlier on in my speech. If it was not for
the fact that he is a traditional leader, I was going to make sure that he
does not remain immune to the hazards of this other occupation that he has
chosen. Perhaps, I must give him a dose of it. [Laughter.] I will come back
to him later. [Laughter.]

The hon Dr Mulder said to this esteemed House that the technical committee
which was established for purposes of overseeing the process of drafting
the Bill to do with section 185 of the Constitution has been moving at a
very slow pace. I want to inform this House that his party was represented.
[Interjections.] I am not saying that it was represented in the technical
committee, but I am saying that it was represented in the conference which
took a decision that this committee should be established. By contrast to
the posture he has taken, all members would have heard what Mr Aucamp said
and I want to commend him for his display of religious adherence to the
truth. [Laughter.]

The hon Mr Ditshetelo of the UCDP said that the electorate was so ignorant
that they would not be able to identify with the concept of wall-to-wall
municipal governance. If there was any truth in what he said about the
ignorance of the electorate, I think the majority of them would have voted
for his party. [Laughter.]

The hon Mrs Borman decried what she called the ANC's obsession with change.
I think our quest for change stands in stark contrast to the DP's
resistance to change. [Interjections.] She went on to suggest that the
municipal restructuring that is currently under way is an imposition by the
ANC. I think if she tries to understand the Constitution, which this House
wrote, she will then be able to realise that this restructuring is a
constitutional requirement. In her intervention, she made constant
reference to the Mail & Guardian and Business Day. My advice to the hon
member is that she must also try to look at the world outside the pages of
those newspapers. [Laughter.]

With regard to the transitional funding, I think, also, a few things have
been said which create a wrong impression - the impression being that we
started late with the process of determining the cost of transition. There
are a number of contingent factors which had to be taken into account and
they include the fact that we had to obtain greater clarity as to the
municipal entities that we are going to have arising out of the demarcation
process. So, had we made estimates which did not take this into account,
that would have been a thumbsuck. I think by now members would know that,
unlike the New NP which ruled this country for 48 years, we do not rule the
country on the basis of thumbsucks.

I must add that the current Division of Revenue Bill, already approved by
this House, provides for a restructuring of grants as follows: R300 million
in the first year, R350 million in the second year, and R400 million in the
third year. These amounts will be revised and increased. What we are now
working on is additional transitional funds which must be determined.
Otherwise, on the basis of what I have said, one can see that an initial
tranche has been set aside by way of provision for this transition.

Once more, I really want to thank all who participated in this debate for
the spirit in which they said what they had to say. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 12 - Government Communication and Information System:

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Mr Chairperson, this last Minister is going
to be impossible to follow. Maybe next time Sydney had better come after
me.

Our march to a better life requires that each and every South African
should put shoulders to the wheel - all of us as partners in transforming
ours into a society that cares. We must know our rights and exercise them,
in the same measure as we take on our collective responsibility to build
South Africa into a nation of our dreams.

A fundamental prerequisite for this is that South Africans, rich and poor,
black and white, should be able to access information necessary for them to
live their lives to the full in an increasingly complex world. From the
boardrooms to the coalface of production, from the leafy suburbs to the
dusty roads of ghettoes and villages, from the greenery under irrigation to
the bare earth washed raw by years of soil erosion, we all need information
that we can use.
Such is the task of communication in general and Government communication
in particular. We, therefore, celebrate this third Budget Vote of the
Government Communication and Information System, keenly aware of the
immense challenges facing us. We know that we cannot as yet claim that
information is a right fully exercised.

However, we dare celebrate because the difficult journey has started. As we
review the past year, and set out tasks for the coming one, we can say with
confidence that, steadily but surely, more and more members of the public
are being drawn into the information cycle. More and more people are
gaining direct access to information they deserve. More and more South
Africans are gaining an understanding of the social dynamics in the
country.

What gives us this confidence, and what is the environment in which we have
to conduct our work? Research carried out by GCIS on behalf of Cabinet, and
other surveys, during the financial year 1999-2000, consistently point to a
broadly optimistic outlook among South Africans. There is greater
appreciation of the Government's policies and activities, and a markedly
positive view of the general political situation in the country.
Included in the key feedback of such research is the deeply rooted
conviction among the majority that Government can only succeed if it works
in partnership with the people. Partnership for development has also been
the principle guiding the programmes of Government communications. We fully
appreciate that we are one among the thousands of purveyors of informaton
on social developments in our country. As such, we take particular interest
in the quality of mediums of discourse.

The hearings of the Human Rights Commission on racism in the media
represented a critical element of the self-examination that all such
mediums require. Let me restate that while we viewed the decision of the
HRC to conduct these hearings as necessary and correct, we fully respected
their independence. Thus, as Government, we called for the HRC and the
media to reach consensus on the modalities of the hearings, an outcome that
was attained in spite of the thousand voices of condemnation.

It is heartening that the introspection generated by these hearings has
given a spur to the efforts of the SA National Editors' Forum and other
media organisations to deal with this matter of racism as part of the
process of transforming our media and improving the quality, integrity and
credibility of the profession. It is our hope that the final report of the
HRC will set in motion processes that should, in the final analysis, give
South Africa the media it deserves.

Needless to say, such is our partnership with the media that none of us can
succeed without the other. Thus GCIS has taken it upon itself to
continually improve the service it renders to the media. In our co-
ordination of Government media liaison work, we have striven to ensure that
Ministers and officials are available to assist with information required
and to avail themselves for briefings and interviews. Gradually, what had
in the past been a litany of complaints is becoming an exception rather
than the norm.

In addition to regular press breakfasts and other ministerial briefings, we
are upgrading our news service to community media into an on-line
Government service. With the installation of video-conferencing facilities,
the space and time between the two capitals has become that much smaller,
and the lives of journalists that much easier. Besides the general
improvement in the Government's website, we are also proud of the
innovations that have been introduced, including live video and text
transmissions of major activities, involving particularly the President.

But it is a matter of course that improving on what exists, in terms of
mediums of communication, cannot address the massive information needs of
all of society. Clearly, communities require not only the means to receive
information, but also the right to impart their own news and views. It is
in this context that we have intensified the efforts towards the
establishment of a Media Development and Diversity Agency.

Despite some changes with regard to media ownership, the voices,
particularly print media, remain in a few hands. Despite greater black and
female participation in decision-making, the country's media still does not
adequately cater for the multiplicity of information needs within our vast
country. The emergence of community voices in radio needs to be sustained
and spread more widely, including into print. The initiative towards the
MDDA, headed by an interdepartmental steering committee, has gathered
momentum, with widespread consultations involving key stakeholders, media
owners, community media representatives, NGOs, editors, the advertising
industry and regulatory bodies, amongst other.

Among the areas of consensus which have been identified and are contained
in the position paper soon to be released for public comment, are the
following. Firstly, the setting up of the MDDA is in the interest of our
democracy and the existing medium. Such a body should have an arm's-length
relationship with Government as well as public and private media houses.
Secondly, the Government, the private media sector and international donors
should mobilise resources to contribute to media diversity, and this should
include funds, training, print and distribution facilities. Thirdly, the
MDDA should be a body with the necessary authority, and should have a small
structure with the best systems of corporate governance. Fourthly, its
operation should be transparent and it should provide assistance on the
basis of the broad criteria set out in the policy. Lastly, the MDDA should
not interfere in matters of media contempt.

The GCIS is finalising research into detailed funding possibilities, and in
this area some common ground has been found with those that have been
consulted, including that we would avoid compulsory levies, given the
commitment on the part of the private sector to contribute; that all other
funds in Government dealing with media development would be amalgamated
into the MDDA process; that a hierarchy of forms of assistance should be
devised, including part subsidies, grants and soft loans; and that the
ratio of administrative expenditure to disbursements should not exceed
20:80. We intend to complete this process in the 2001-02 financial year.

So, at last, South Africa can take another giant step towards true freedom
of expression, the right to information and the possibility for millions to
be heard. However, ensuring that the people have access to information is
not a matter merely of freedom of expression; it is also about good
governance. After all, government is about the regulation of social
activity by elected representatives in partnership with the people
themselves. It is in this context that the GCIS is at the head of a major
initiative to bring Government closer to the people in the form of
multipurpose community centres or one-stop Government centres. Working with
virtually all the departments and a number of parastatals, a national co-
ordinating structure has been established and three MPCCs have been
launched.

By the end of the 2001-02 financial year each district of the country
should have one such centre providing Government services such as
information, welfare, home affairs, small business advice and health
services. In such a centre, public information terminals, as well as
computers, telephones and fax machines in a telecentre will also be
provided, including in the most remote areas of the country. Indeed,
through this effort we shall not only be able to consolidate community
life, but also ensure that the latest technology is employed to fight
poverty and ensure access to information and resources.

If anything, the enthusiasm of communities where such launches have taken
place is itself confirmation that we are on the right course. But major
undertakings of this nature bring with them major challenges. These include
training, ensuring that departments operate in an integrated manner and
commitment from departments to provide efficient services, as well as
sustainability and maintenance. We are addressing these issues and we urge
that hon members take it upon themselves to assist with the monitoring of
these centres. We are confident that, through co-operation among the three
spheres of government - which has characterised the centre so far launched,
through the reallocation of staff and equipment by the departments, and
through a partnership with the private sector organised into the private
sector consortium, and with whom we will be holding a special workshop in
July, we shall be able to achieve both the quantity and the quality of
services envisaged.

The programme in our growing partnership with African languages and
community radio will improve the contact between Government and those
citizens otherwise bypassed in the normal course of public discourse. This
is what we mean by information for development. But we are also intensely
aware that bettering the lives of the poor requires a partnership between
our country and the international community of invetors, sports persons,
traders, cultural workers, tourists and others.

It is, therefore, a matter of critical importance that we join hands as
South Africans to promote our country abroad. After the decision of Cabinet
on this matter, a project manager was appointed in the GCIS to bring
together line functions such as Foreign Affairs, Trade and Industry,
Finance, Home Affairs, Tourism and Sport, as well as Satour and Investment
SA, in a major integrated drive to develop and promote the brand, South
Africa. This project team will work under an international marketing
council chaired by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, which, in addition to
Government bodies, will include advisers from the private sector. The
Minister will soon be announcing members of the council, who will help
build a strong country partnership, blending creativity, experience, vision
and drive to position our country where it belongs as a prime tourist and
investment destination, as a trading partner and as a core workers with
others in building a better world.

I am certain that in its work, the International Marketing Council will
interact with hon members to ensure that we join hands as ambassadors of a
country that possesses the ingredient to succeed, and as communicators who
portray the country as it is, rather than what it should not be. I suppose
we all agree that the recent visits of our President to Europe and the
Americas again confirmed South Africa's and the President's own standing in
world affairs. The challenges? How we work together to build on these
achievements. This is a challenge about our self-esteem as a people; it is
about our national identity; it is about our pride as South Africans. In
this regard, the concrete achievements that we made together within South
Africa play a critical role.

Yet we cannot underestimate the function of national symbols. It is,
therefore, a matter of great pride that GCIS was intimately involved in the
development of the coat of arms in partnership with other departments and
Design South Africa. Out of this process emerged a crest that is emerging,
along with our national flag, as a symbol of national unity. I trust that
in the not-too-distant future these walls, our streets, factories, schools
and homes will resound to the sound of !ke e /xarra //ke, unity in
diversity. [Applause.]

For Government, the coat of arms is more than just about symbolism.
Together with the Department of Public Service and Administration, the GCIS
has started the process of ensuring that the introduction of the new coat
of arms goes hand in hand with the regeneration of the spirit and the
practice of Batho Pele, putting people first.

Members will have realised that most of the projects we have referred to
involve more than just the GCIS, but a host of departments in joint effort.
The coat of arms, international marketing, multipurpose centres and others
place the GCIS at the core face of the re-engineering of Government for
integrated planning and implementation. The same applies to major
transversal campaigns such as those around HIV/Aids, voter education, Y2K
awareness and the Arms and Investment Procurement Package.

One of the critical ways in which the GCIS provides leadership and ensures
integrated governance, is through the formulation of Government's
communication strategy. The clusters of departmental communicators in
individual departments are then meant to develop subsidiary strategies,
using the national strategy as the framework. This process, introduced only
last year, has obviously not gone smoothly. To start with, Government as a
whole is grappling with the theory and practice of integrated governance.
Other problems faced include the capacity of individual departmental
communicators, resources allocated to communications and access of some
communicators to management planning processes.

The majority of departments have restructured in line with Comtas'
recommendation and prepared their own strategies, and training continues to
improve the quality of the output. We are confident that, working with
directors-general and Ministers, we will ensure that communication receives
the attention it deserves, in the interest of good governance.

The GCIS is also working with provincial communicators regarding training
and development of communication strategies. Progress has been made in
setting up a national training infrastructure for communicators. This
includes the establishment of a standard generating body, a quality
assurance body, a database of service providers, a national skills audit
and the running of courses. At the same time, the GCIS is improving on its
track record of rendering excellent design, print and audio-visual
production services.

Of the three art works that were presented to Cabinet with regard to the
new coat of arms, one of them was by a person who works for the GCIS, which
demonstrated to us the quality of people who are working for the GCIS. The
bulk-buying approach has in some instances resulted in as much as 30%
discount in TV advertising and 10% on print. In order to play the role
expected of it, the GCIS has had go through intense transformation. Primary
in this is the project management approach, which affords the GCIS the
capacity to provide integrated multimedia services to our clients.

About 20% of the staff have been trained in the project management
approach. In almost all respects, the GCIS has broadly achieved levels of
representation reflective of the demographics of the country. We have also
built mutually beneficial relations with our counterparts in SADC, India,
the UK and in the new Pan-African News Agency initiative.

These then are some of the activities of the GCIS. What we present to
members in commending this budget is, certainly, not brick and mortar. But
it is about the spiritual sustenance without which reconstruction and
development will be a wish beyond the horizon. Ours is a slow and
painstaking task of contributing to the building of a nation, inspired by
the civic duty to become active participants in social change and moved by
the passion to see South Africa succeed.

We know too well that information is one of the critical weapons in the
fight against poverty. For millions of people, especially in the far-flung
villages of our country, information on health matters, bursaries and
welfare grants, to quote but a few examples, is literally a matter of life
and death - the dividing line between opportunity and a wretched existence,
between helplessness and hope.

If, through its efforts, the GCIS has made the slightest contribution to
this endeavour, we would be assured that we have played our part. For this,
I wish to thank the Secretariat of the GCIS, in particular the CEO, Mr Joel
Netshitenzhe, and the rest of the staff for their commitment to the
profession in the service of the people. I also wish to thank the portfolio
committee, whose advice and critical scrutiny has spurred us on towards the
excellence to which we aspire. [Applause.]

Mr N N KEKANA: Mr Chairperson, we should all agree, from what the Minister
has said, that it is clear that the GCIS is really doing a wonderful job. I
hope that the DP also agrees with that view.

I believe in grown-up politics: these are not my words, but the words of
the Leader of the Opposition in an article published in The Star newspaper
yesterday. I think it is not enough for the hon Tony Leon to believe in
grown-up politics. He has to be responsible and understand the nature of
politics. Leadership in politics is not about listening to the echo of
one's voice. It is about being responsible to one's own actions and deeds.

The majority of black columnists like Mr Khathu Mamaila, whom the DP
accuses of sunshine journalism, believe in South Africa. They believe in
the winning brand of South Africa as a success story. By giving credit to
Government's achievements and criticising its shortcomings, these writers
are being constructive about their country. The ANC does not believe in
praise-singing journalism. We welcome well-informed and constructive
criticism from the media and other opinion-makers.

This dynamic relationship with the media assists us to reflect properly on
our current situation and focus accurately. Even in business, there is
something called forecasting as an attempt to foretell the growth of the
economy. The DP must mirror this forward-looking approach by economists.
Unforunately, economists in their forecasting consider some of the negative
utterences of the DP. Political stability in any country is the most
important consideration by bussines and investors. Investors consider any
indication of political instability, real or unfounded, in a very serious
light, because of their stakes in our economy.

The Leader of the Opposition must grow up if he is to engage in real
politics. International politics is not simply about what one discusses
with one's friends. Dinner- table talk is not the correct barometer to
measure the mood of the public and, therefore, this cannot guide one's
political messaging. There are better methods of reading the mood of the
people, their fears and aspirations. Government relies on its own surveys
and other opinion-makers' research to gauge the temperature in the country.

We should thank the GCIS for introducing this scientific approach to
governance, and not rely on the voices and opinions in the wilderness. The
Leader of the Opposition and his small party must grow up to the fact that
they are running the country down by spreading lies and an inaccurate
account of the state of our country. The DP and its leadership have nothing
positive to say about the postapartheid Government. To them, the post-1994
era is negative and doomed to fail. The DP does not believe in South
Africa.

Their leadership puts self-interest and their party's interests first,
without due regard to social interest. The DP leadership behaves like young
kids who have no sense of responsibility. They demand sweets and pocket
money, even when this goes beyond the household budget. They are prepared
to hang the country's dirty linen in public and make obscure demands that
are devoid of reality. They speak in forked tongues, calling for
investments and yet preaching doom and gloom about South Africa.

Their attitude to Africa is not different from colonialists and
imperialists, who raped our continent of its mineral resources and yet
called us the dark continent. [Applause.] The Zimbabwe debacle has laid
bare the negative current that is flowing from some South Africans. They
are posturing an attitude representing a backward tendency that has no
interest in the wellbeing of the country. Fortunately, they are a small,
vocal minority. But they should not be ignored.

They use dinner-table talk to analyse and whisper to economists and
journalists a negative picture of postapartheid South Africa. This negative
perception, created by those who oppose transformation, is echoed through
media reports and thus becomes the dominant view in society. This, in turn,
is reflected in the attitude of the international organisations who ask the
kind of questions that they ask. This is a reflection of this negative
attitude, and creates uncertainty.

Despite this vocal chorus, led by the DP, opinion polls continue to reflect
South Africa in a positive light. Last November, Markinor's poll and that
conducted by the HSRC found a more positive view of the sociopolitical
situation from the South African population and business. There is, indeed,
a positive mood in and great optimism about the future of the country. The
challenge is to harness this positive mood and brand the country correctly.
The message that we send as South Africans should portray a picture of
hope. We should be a working nation which is able to brave even the
harshest of storms.

We must remain focused on our key objectives of ensuring that South Africa
is a success story for all. We need to believe in South Africa and have
confidence in our leadership. It is, thus, important for us to focus on the
constructive criticisms that emanates from commentators that are genuinely
concerned about the future of the country.

I think that Government should improve on its communication strategy. There
are more accomplishments reflected in the way Government is improving the
quality of lives of South Africans. There are bold steps taken by
Government to create a clear and predictable environment for investments
and economic growth in the country.

Government has instilled confidence in the security forces, to turn them
into fighters of crime and violence in the country. Government has managed
to contain the terrorism that engulfed the Western Cape in the past year.
Crime in the major cities has stabilised and dramatic criminal acts by
organised syndicates have been stamped out. Decisive action has been taken
to deal with corrupt elements within the Public Service.

Yet, despite these success stories that are even reflected in independent
research, Government departments seem not to have found a way of
communicating the achievements of their line functions very well. They
appear to be reluctant to advertise and praise the work of spirited and
dedicated public servants who are working tirelessly to make South Africa
work. We cannot simply rely on once-in-a-while ministerial or parliamentary
briefings for communicating major Government achievements.

Ministers are newsmakers, because of the responsibility they hold in
society. Every movement by a Minister is newsworthy. Every word that is
said publicly by a Minister is news. The challenge is how to simplify these
actions and messages and make the public identify with Government
achievements and challenges. In Canada Ministers of Government use question
time and motions in parliament as a platform of communication. After every
major address in Parliament, our Ministers must be available to field
questions immediately.

There are many radio stations in the country that are running actuality
news programmes in different languages. They are constantly searching for
comments from Ministers as newsmakers. We need to cut the gatekeepers who
prevent Ministers and heads of departments from communicating with
journalists and opinionmakers. Media liaison personnel should have greater
influence in programmes and strategies of departments. They should not
simply be conveyor belts of a finished product designed by others within
the department.

The success of the parliamentary briefing shows that we have a country that
is hungry for information. There is a need for messages to be packaged in a
simpler form, with content that is easily understood. The positive outcome
of messages distributed through radio and leaflets should not be taken for
granted.

Television news is not the only platform for communicating with the public.
In fact, television news is less about content and more about appearance
and looks. Viewers often remember more about what one look like and less
about the messages communicated. However, the SABC should also create a
platform for more actuality programmes on television when matters of
national importance are discussed in an intertaining manner. We need to
combat the negative sceptics and demonstrate the reality of our situation
in South Africa.

We are recognised internationally as a country that defeated the evils of
apartheid. We have demonstrated through two successful elections that our
democracy is embedded in our people. This brand of resilience and
determination must be reflected in all communities, promoted nationally and
sold internationally.

We call on Mr Tony Leon and his DP to be constructive and believe in South
Africa. He must believe in South Africa the way he believes in the cricket
or rugby team. He should not run down the country. The DP and other
reactionary forces against transformation are seeking to derail, reverse,
delay and in the end, prevent fundamental transformation of our society. We
can never allow them to succeed.

What the country needs is national consensus on issues affecting our lives.
Constructive criticism is welcome, not complaints and DP hallucinations.
The DP often calls on our Government to run the country by the wishes and
demands of the market. They say that our Government should handle domestic
and international issues simply by the mood and deeds of the currency
speculators. No, this is a wrong approach to politics. We refuse to listen
to that. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, the overwhelming sentiment one feels at this time
towards the GCIS is sympathy. I extend my condolences to Mr Netshitenzhe
and his staff, but that sympathy is not extended to the hon the Minister in
the Presidency, from whence all the trouble flows. I think that he must
bear part of the blame for what Mr Kekana's party leader is doing to South
Africa's image.

It is only three months since the GCIS reported to us on the research to
which the hon the Minister has referred. It showed, apart from the
optimism, that a clear and positive perception had been established
regarding the President as ``strong, firm, decisive, articulate and in
control''. [Interjections.] That was three months ago. But that very same
articulate President became mute when his next-door neighbour in Zimbabwe
unleashed land-grabbing electoral stormtroopers. [Interjections.]

The one-time philosophy king who could hold all of us spellbound when he
stood at this podium began writing pseudoscientific letters to a fellow
President which no communication service in the world can sell or explain
away. And as if those public relations disasters were not enough, the
governing party has insulted the media, without whom the GCIS cannot fulfil
its basic mandate of informing the public about Government policies and
activities.

The GCIS itself, appropriately, took a nonparticipative stance in respect
of the Human Rights Commission's racism inquiry, notwithstanding its
proposed work in media diversity and transformation, but not so the ANC.
The ANC submission was not about media racism at all: it was about the bad
press which the hon the President has received, which it ascribed to
racism. In my view the most shameful aspect of that whole despicable
document is the resentful suggestion that President Mandela received a good
press despite being black, because his role in the transition was only to
appease whites.

The media are insulted in that submission by the assertion that they
determine and cover news according to a stereotype in their heads in terms
of which Africans are -


  ... immoral, amoral, savage, violent, disrespectful of private property
  and driven by satanic impulses.

Good heavens! The possibility that a black journalist can be critical was
simply dismissed, as in the celebrated case of Ms Mda.

However, it is, above all, the new task which the GCIS has been mapping out
for itself - that is, the international marketing of South Africa - that
has been most heavily compromised, not only by the Aids and Zimbabwe
issues, but also by the polarisation that the hon the President encourages
every time he insists that we are two nations, every time he returns to the
rallying cry of racism. [Interjections.]

The GCIS research tells one that international imaging will depend, first
and foremost, on the attitude of South Africans towards their own country.
I must tell the hon the Minister that what has sold South Africa to the
world in the nineties was nonracialism and unity. If the hon the Minister
polarises South Africa, we will be lost and no amount of branding and
imaging will restore confidence. [Interjections.] Two nations as a slogan
just does not work, after ``rainbow nation'' and ``miracle''. In fact, it
tells a desperately sad story. [Applause.]

Mrs L MALONEY: Chairperson, we are, indeed, two nations. The mandate of the
GCIS, that is the Government Communication and Information System, is to
ensure that the public is informed about Government policies and action. In
carrying this mandate, Government adopted a communication strategy for the
year 2000, that is a nation at work for a better life.

The multipurpose community centres were borne out of this strategy. Three
of the centres have been launched, that is in the Eastern Cape, the
Northern Province and the Western Cape, in Paarl. A partnership was
established across various sectors of society. This will help in the
mobilisation of people to work with Government in improving their
conditions. The current financial year's budget was increased.
[Interjections.] Shut up, nina! [You shut up!]

This shows how committed the ANC-led Government is in making sure that
Government communicates directly and effectively with the citizens. Through
those centres, the GCIS embarked on several campaigns. On of the campaigns
which they embarked on is the HIV-awareness campaign. These are the
successes. Brochures containing HIV/Aids information are displayed in these
multipurpose community centres. Condoms are also given free of charge to
the communities.

This shows Government's commitment to fighting this disease. It should be
clear that fighting the spread of this disease is not the responsibility of
the Health department only, nor the responsibility of the Government alone.
HIV/Aids is a national responsibility, and all departments and parastatals
must continue fighting this disease.

It is also encouraging to hear people like Bishop Tutu beginning to talk
about HIV. Therefore, we urge other church leaders to follow suit. The GCIS
should also take a lead in educating the communities about other diseases
like TB and others. We also register our sadness that the DP is not taking
HIV/Aids seriously. [Interjections.] Instead, the DP uses it for their
political point-scoring. Therefore, we call on the leader of the DP to
start wearing an HIV-awareness red pin.

Government must set aside the budget for the production of the educational
soapies like Soul City, a film that teaches people about health awareness.
We must educate our children at a very early age about this disease, and we
ask the GCIS to assist in producing those colourful comic books with the
information about HIV, because our children are addicted to these comics.

The restructuring of regional GCIS offices is the stepping stone, because
the old SACS used to have offices based in the urban areas. Currently,
these regional offices are being scaled down, and they are now working at
district level. Such a move ensures that the GCIS gets closer to the
people. We appreciate the value that the GCIS adds within the Government.
Three of these multipurpose community centres were launched, as I have
mentioned before.

Now that Government is at the doorstep of our communities, communities must
be encouraged to enhance the spirit of community ownership of the projects
at local leadership level. Members of this House are urged to mobilise and
sensitise the communities about these centres and ongoing activities. This
is also an important element in stimulating community participation.

The GCIS should also train communities on how different technologies within
these centres work, and how technologies interface to promote the
development of the community. It is expected that some of the volunteers in
these centres, especially among the youth, will emerge as trainees and
create and inform people in telecentre operations. These centres need to be
consistent and persistent, especially in high concentrations in the rural
areas. [Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson, it is, perhaps, an incontrovertable truth that God
has not yet created a government communication system, anywhere in the
world, which enjoys the unequivocal support of opposition parties. The same
must be said of the Government Communication and Information System, which
is the subject of debate today.

There is no doubt that the transformation from the old, decrepit SA
Communication Services has been dramatic, and one in which innovative
technologies and programmes are being designed and implemented by the GCIS
to enhance delivery to what it refers to as its clients, South Africa's
citizens. The chief executive officer, Mr Joel Netshitenzhe has moved
quickly and decisively to staff the GCIS with senior personnel who are
clearly highly professional, competent and committed. In their presentation
to the Portfolio Committee on Communications, these persons put forward
details of impressive integrated strategies, programmes, research analysis
and various multi-media methods of communication which have been devised to
meet the needs of their Cabinet mandate, and which have been devised to
ensure that the public is informed about Government policies and actions.

More than that, Cabinet has enjoined the GCIS to focus its communication
strategy on ways and means to mobilise our people to work with Government
to improve their quality of life. However, one cannot please all people all
of the time, and nobody knows better than Mr Netshitenzhe that his job is
politically delicate and situated between a rock and a hard place. Each day
he must walk, literally, on eggs, and he will hear today, as he has done
from the opposition benches, that, along the way, he has cracked and broken
a few.

What is Government information to some is a clear example of ANC propaganda
to others. [Interjections.] Media exposure, along with money, is the joint
mother's milk of politics. The GCIS has direct access to both and its
leaders are subtle and sophisticated practitioners. When a Government
information system produces prolific, expensive and professional media
coverage just before an election, as was the case prior to the 1999 general
elections, listing Government achievements, it can expect howls of outrage
from opposition parties. Quiet frankly, many of us are still angry about it
and believe that the timing and the content was deliberately constructed to
the advantage of the majority party. We are hoping that there will not be a
repeat performance prior to the local government elections.

My son has a T-shirt simply stating: He who has the most toys wins. An
irresponsible Government using its information system as its own political
toy will also win, for a while. There are examples all over the world and
some very close to our borders. Zimbabwe is a classic example. The GCIS is
a powerful tool in the hands of Government. It is critical to the
development of multiparty democracy in our country that it be used to
nurture and to develop the system of government in the best interest of
this generation and generations to come.

May I also say that, equally, the integrity of the ANC leadership of our
Government is at stake in not being tempted to use their vast majority and
the resources of the GCIS for their own ends. The GCIS is a very ripe apple
in the proverbial political Garden of Eden. To use an example recently
given to us all by Mr Hansie Cronjé, it is folly, indeed, to take one's
eyes off what is good and true and to grasp what is expedient and lucrative
in the short term, but, nevertheless, with resultant devastating
consequences.

Much more has to be done by the GCIS to focus on the role of the opposition
parties and their critical role in the development of our new democracy.
Ways and means need to be explored to expose not only the executive and its
priorities, policies and programmes, but the constituency work and
individual expertise of individual members of Parliament and those in the
NCOP. Our citizens need to be far more exposed to an holistic view of their
Government. The IFP supports this Vote and wishes the GCIS well in its
difficult and delicate contribution to the development of our nation.
[Applause.]

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 17:32.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 8
         June 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Local Government: Cross-boundary Municipalities Bill [B 37
              - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 21252 of 2
              June 2000.]


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 7 June 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:
         (i)     Local Government: Cross-boundary Municipalities Bill [B 37
              - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government - National Assembly).


     (3)    The Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 8 June 2000
         took a decision, in accordance with Joint Rule 216, that the Local
         Government: Cross-boundary Municipalities Bill [B 37 - 2000], be
         fast-tracked by, where necessary, shortening any period within
         which any step in the legislative process relating to the Bill
         must be completed, in order to make it possible for the Bill to be
         passed by both Houses of Parliament by Friday, 23 June 2000.


         In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in both
         Houses for ratification.


     (4)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (i)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 8B - 2000] - Act No 16 of 2000
               (assented to and signed by President on 7 June 2000); and

         (ii)    Nonprofit Organisations Amendment Bill [B 9 - 2000] - Act
               No 17 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 7 June
               2000).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     (1)    Explanatory Memorandum on Vote 22 - "Provincial and Local
         Government", Supplementary Estimate for 2000-2001.

     (2)    Report of the Department of Provincial and Local Government for
         1999.

2.    The Minister for Welfare and Population Development:


     Explanatory Memorandum on Vote 35 - "Welfare", Supplementary Estimate
     for 2000-2001.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Report of the National Prosecuting Authority for 1998-99 [RP 99-2000].

4.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Explanatory Memorandum on Vote 9 - "Environmental Affairs and Tourism",
     Supplementary Estimate for 2000-2001.

5.    The Minister of Labour:


     Explanatory Memorandum on Vote 19 - "Labour", Supplementary Estimate
     for 2000-2001.

National Assembly:

Bills:

1.    The Minister of Public Works:
     (1)    Wetsontwerp op die Eiendomswaardeerdersprofessie [W 20 - 2000]


         The Property Valuers Profession Bill [B 20 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) was introduced by the Minister of Public Works
         on 6 April 2000 and referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Works.


