---
title: 'National Assembly - 05 April 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-04-05
---

WEDNESDAY, 5 APRIL 2000
                                    _____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    _____

The House met at 15:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms T R MODISE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with grave concern reports that SA National Defence Force
       equipment worth more than R7 million has been stolen or is
       unaccounted for;

  (2) believes that effective management controls are an essential element
       of military effectiveness and good governance;

  (3) calls upon the accounting officers to give a clear account of the
       missing equipment and how this situation came about;

  (4) requests the SANDF to institute appropriate disciplinary measures to
       deal with those responsible for the missing equipment; and

  (5) requests the SANDF to ensure that effective controls and systems of
       management of equipment are put in place.

[Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the increase in the petrol price today by 27c per litre to a
           record level of 322c per litre;


       (b)  the inevitable inflationary effect of such an increase and the
           hardships that will bring; and


       (c)  Opec's decision to increase production by 7%, which will result
           in the lowering of crude oil prices in the short term; and


  (2) calls on the Government to alleviate the harmful short-term effects
       of the current fuel price increase by absorbing such increase through
       temporarily reducing the fuel levy and utilising any residual amount
       in the Equalisation Fund until such time as Opec's increase in
       production has an impact on the South African fuel price.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the SAPS on their tough action against drugs dealers in
       the Northern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng;

  (2) notes, however, that such sterling work by the SAPS is undermined by
       the corruption that is rife at certain police stations; and

  (3) calls on the Minister to take action, in consultation with the MEC in
       KwaZulu-Natal, to stamp out such corruption and, as a first step, to
       ensure the closure of the Chatsworth police station in KwaZulu-Natal
       where allegations of corruption abound.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Cabinet has established an emergency reconstruction
       committee to oversee the speedy reconstruction of the flood damage of
       an estimated R2,2 billion caused to the country's physical, social
       and economic infrastructure;

  (2) recognises that the committee will formulate an integrated strategy
       for the needs in the immediate, short, medium and long term; and

  (3) commends the Cabinet for taking this bold step to deal speedily with
       the damage caused by the recent floods.

Mev M E OLCKERS: Mevrou die Speaker, ek hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag van die Huis namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) sy ernstige kommer en afkeur uitspreek oor -


       (a)  die verkragting van twee Belgiese vrouetoeriste in die Oos-Kaap
           twee dae gelede; en


       (b)  die diefstal van persoonlike besittings van toeriste uit
           hotelkamers in 'n gesogte hotel in die Wes-Kaap;


  (2) die hoop uitspreek dat die skuldiges met die volle geweld van die reg
       hanteer sal word; en

  (3) van mening is dat -


       (a)  toerisme van die grootste belang vir die Republiek van Suid-
           Afrika is en dat die negatiewe invloed wat hierdie twee gevalle
           in die buiteland gehad het onaanvaarbaar is;


         b) die persepsie dat die regte van kriminele in Suid-Afrika groter
            beskerming geniet as dié van slagoffers, onmeetbare skade
            veroorsaak het aan die vertroue wat die mense van Suid-Afrika
            in die Regering het en ook aan die land se internasionale beeld
            as 'n gesogte toerismebestemming.
(Translation of notice of motion follows.)

[Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, I herby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its serious concern and censure regarding -


       (a)  the rape of two female Belgian tourists in the Eastern Cape two
           days ago; and

       (b)  the theft of personal belongings of tourists from hotel rooms in
           a sought-after hotel in the Western Cape;


  (2) expresses the hope that the guilty parties will be dealt with using
       the full force of the law; and

  (3) is of the opinion that -


       (a)  tourism is of the utmost importance to the Republic of South
           Africa and that the negative effect that these two incidents had
           abroad is unacceptable; and


       (b)  the perception that the rights of criminals in South Africa
           enjoy greater protection than those of victims,  is causing
           immeasurable harm to the confidence which the people of South
           Africa have in the Government and also to the country's image as
           a sought-after tourist destination.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay the reported reinstatement of Mr James Nkambule,
       the axed provincial ANC Youth League secretary, just three weeks
       after being dismissed by the Premier of Mpumalanga, Mr Ndaweni
       Mahlangu;

  (2) further notes that since 1 April 2000 Mr Nkambule has been holding a
       senior post in Mpumalanga's local government department;

  (3) also notes that Mr Nkambule has publicly admitted to committing fraud
       by siphoning state funds into the ANC coffers for use, amongst
       others, in political campaigning and to fund ANC promotional
       material; and

  (4) expresses its strongest dissatisfaction with the premier's inability
       to resolve the issue.

Mr R S NDOU: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes Deputy President Jacob Zuma's call, at the International
       Confederation of Free Trade Unions' congress in Durban, for trade
       unions of developed countries to concern themselves with ending
       protectionist practices in the economies of developed countries;

  (2) reminds the developed world that free trade that only opens the
       markets of developing countries to developed countries is no free
       trade at all;

  (3) acknowledges that this practice allows rich countries to exploit poor
       countries and defeats the confederation's objective of globalising
       social justice; and

  (4) calls on trade unions, business and governments from the developed
       world to end their protectionism in order to fight international
       poverty.

[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock that the IBA has refused to renew the licence of
       Link FM in East London;

  (2) notes with great disappointment that the IBA did not have the decency
       even to provide Link FM with reasons why its application was turned
       down or to inform them whether they have any right to appeal against
       the decision;

  (3) strongly objects to the IBA's bias against community broadcasting
       services that are used by Christians and churches; and

  (4) notes with great concern that the IBA seem to favour radio stations
       that do not have a Christian content thus giving credibility to
       suspicions that the IBA's subtle ultimate goal is to remove all
       Christian programmes not run by the state or their agents from the
       air; and


therefore calls on the IBA to review its decision and to ensure that
adequate appeals procedures are in place to allow the aggrieved community
radio station sufficient time to appeal.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the unbecoming conduct of students at the Phatsima College of
       Education in Kimberley who boycotted classes and littered the
       administration block of the college yesterday, 4 April 2000;

  (2) notes that it costs the taxpayer a fortune to keep these undeserving
       students in class while deserving ones are roaming the streets for
       lack of admission;

  (3) further notes that the upgrading of teachers' qualifications and that
       of colleges to award degrees in education cannot, and shall not, be
       delayed or even stopped by such people; and

  (4) calls on the education authorities in the Northern Cape to mount a
       full-scale investigation into the matter and, where possible and
       applicable, to set a good example to indicate that this nation is on
       course for a better life.

Ms N N MAPISA-NQAKULA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the wild and false allegations made by the DP about their
       offices being bugged;

  (2) recognises that the impression they were creating was part of their
       mischievous agenda to attack the credibility of the ANC-led
       Government;

  (3) further notes that Attorney-General Frank Kahn dismissed the DP's
       claims and refused to prosecute as no evidence could be found to
       substantiate the DP's irresponsible claims; and

  (4) calls on the DP to stop behaving like spoilt brats.

[Applause.]

Mr N J CLELLAND: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions, under the leadership
           of Morgan Tsvangerai, is leading opposition against the misrule
           of Zimbabwe by President Robert Mugabe;


       (b)  that members of Tsvangerai's Movement for Democratic Change
           participated in a peaceful and lawful demonstration against the
           invasion of white-owned farms by Zanu-PF supporters;


       (c)  that the demonstrators were violently assaulted by armed Zanu-PF
           supporters while Zimbabwean police did not intervene to stop the
           violence; and


       (d)  with concern that Cosatu has been surprisingly silent on this
           matter; and


  (2) calls on Cosatu to -


       (a)  voice its solidarity with the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions;
       (b)  speak out against the violation of the rule of law and human
           rights in Zimbabwe; and


       (c)  bring pressure to bear on its alliance partner in Government to
           do likewise.

[Applause.]

Dr K RAJOO: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the IFP:
  That the House is of the opinion that -


  (1) the interest rate on mortgages is exorbitantly high in this country;

  (2) this nation has a vested interest in seeing to it that the bank rates
       for first-time home owners are low enough to motivate the homeless to
       put an affordable roof over their heads;

  (3) an interest rate ceiling of 10% for first-time, sub-economic home
       seekers should be protected by Government;

  (4) banks, insurance companies and the Government, in the quest to build
       a stable economy and to provide people with shelter, should endeavour
       to and encourage people to build homes, thereby releasing an economic
       spin-off that will improve the economy;

  (5) it is interesting and encouraging that the World Bank Corporation is
       investing in the home loan securities company SA Home Loans in order
       to keep interest rates at an affordable level; and


  (6) the Minister of Finance should encourage home buyers by allowing
       mortgage payments as a beneficial write-off in respect of taxation.

Mr M I SCOTT: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the success of the anti-crime initiative Operation Crackdown in
       the Western Cape, which has resulted in more than 1 000 arrests, with
       893 arrests for serious crimes;
  (2) commends the SAPS, the SANDF and the Ministers of the safety and
       security cluster for their effective implementation of the National
       Crime Prevention Strategy, which is being used with success to tackle
       the scourge of crime in our country; and

  (3) calls upon all political parties represented in the House to come out
       in full support of this initiative.

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that African and European leaders have expressed concern
       regarding Africa's external debt of US $350 billion at the summit
       being held in Cairo;

  (2) recognises that this spiral of debt has left many poor African
       countries with no option but to spend more on the repayment of loans
       than on health and education combined;

  (3) calls on all role-players to caution poor countries about the
       negative consequences of reckless spending and borrowing; and

  (4) calls on the affluent European countries to cancel the debt of the
       poorest African countries, provided that the recipient countries take
       sound measures against corruption, uphold the principles of democracy
       and respect and enforce human rights.

Miss O N MNDENDE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its serious concern about several complaints concerning
       deliberate and insensitive displays, both at the SA Natural History
       Museum and the SA Cultural History Museum;

  (2) expresses disbelief and dismay at the implication that black people
       are subhuman since their cultures are displayed with animals and
       dinosaurs in the SA Natural History Museum, while European and
       Eastern cultures are displayed at the SA Cultural History Museum;

  (3) strongly condemns the apparent acceptance, even after six years of
       liberation, by museum bosses of the colonial label that indigenous
       Africans are primitive and closer to animals; and

  (4) calls on Government to ensure that human cultures, black and white,
       are put together in one museum as soon as possible.

[Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the PAC will finally this week have its national congress,
       which was postponed earlier owing to the disarray that the party was
       in and continues to be in;
  (2) recognises the PAC's lack of leadership, absence of sensible
       policies, organisational incapacity and virtually  nonexistent
       support; and

  (3) calls on the PAC's members and supporters not to waste their time and
       energy further, but to join forces with the country's only
       organisation that has the policies, leadership, organisational
       strength and voter support to effectively tackle poverty, namely the
       ANC.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met skok daarvan kennis neem dat die Kantoor van die Meester van die
       Hof in Grahamstad alle uitgaande telefoonoproepe en uitgaande pos
       gestaak het weens 'n gebrek aan fondse;

  (2) daarop wys dat 'n doeltreffende diens aan die publiek daarmee
       drasties ingekort en selfs vernietig word; en

     3) 'n dringende beroep doen op die Minister vir Justisie en
        Staatkundige Ontwikkeling om in te gryp en hierdie wantoestand te
        beëindig.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr J T DELPORT: Chairperson, I give notice that I will move at the next
sitting day on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock that the Master's Office Grahamstown, has stopped
       all outgoing telephone calls and outgoing mail owing to a lack of
       funds;

  (2) points out that because of this an effective service to the public is
       being drastically curtailed and even destroyed; and

  (3) urgently requests the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
       Development to intervene and put an end to these shocking
       conditions.]

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                           (The late King Lebone)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the untimely passing of King Lebone of the Bafokeng people;

  (2) recognises the central role played by King Lebone in the development
       of the Bafokeng people and his unconditional support for the
       transformation processes in our country; and

  (3) expresses its condolences with and joins the King's family and the
       Bafokeng people in mourning the death of a fine and noble leader.

Agreed to.

                  PEACEFUL CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT IN SENEGAL
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House notes with appreciation the wonderful example set by the
  people and politicians of Senegal in that the peaceful and democratic
  change of government was handled graciously by the retiring President
  Diouf and with magnanimity by the new President Wade.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Gen D T Masuku)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the death of the Surgeon-General, Davidson Themba Masuku;

  (2) recognises Gen Masuku's significant contribution to the
       democratisation of the Republic of South Africa and his ground-
       breaking participation in the setting up of the South African
       National Defence Force;

  (3) regrets his untimely passing away; and

  (4) expresses its deepest sympathy to the family and friends and directs
       that this resolution be communicated to his loved ones.

Agreed to.

                        ALLOCATION OF SPEAKING TIMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 106, the following times be
  allocated to parties for comment on today's statement by the Minister of
  Health:
     Minister: 15 minutes; African National Congress: 5 minutes; Democratic
     Party: 4 minutes; Inkatha Freedom Party: 4 minutes; New National Party:
     3 minutes; United Democratic Movement: 3 minutes; all other parties: 2
     minutes each.

Agreed to.

                               NEVIRAPINE DRUG

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Mr Chairperson, in recent years, and especially
since the advent of the HIV/Aids epidemic, there has been a proliferation
of clinical drug trials amongst human subjects. Many of these are taking
place in South Africa. The reason for this is that South Africans are what
is known as ``drug naive''. In other words, they have not been treated with
medication for HIV/Aids, and are therefore attractive, as subjects for the
testing of new drugs. By contrast, most people in Europe and America have
received previous medication and are therefore less ``pure'' for testing
purposes.

The problem with the proliferation of clinical trials in South Africa has
become so acute that articles have been published in international
literature suggesting that South Africa is an ``easy location'' for
conducting clinical trials. Under normal circumstances, it is justified to
test drugs on human subjects because the long-term gain will be positive,
not only for the subjects, but also for others with the particular disease
or infection, if the medication proves to be effective. But this is not
true in the South African scenario because it is highly unlikely that all
but a few South Africans will ever derive any benefits from the drugs that
are tested here, since once they have been patented and registered, they
are marketed at prices that are unaffordable to us.

Having become aware of this, the Ministry of Health has established a
clinical trials committee within the Medicines Control Council to review
clinical trials of both registered and nonregistered drugs, and to ensure
that the mechanisms for the review of clinical trials are well developed
and carefully structured. This newly established committee has already
introduced some carefully designed standard operation procedures, check
lists and guidelines to achieve its aims.
One of the drugs that is currently undergoing clinical trials in South
Africa is nevirapine, a drug that is thought to be useful as a first-line
therapy in the treatment of people with HIV, including pregnant women.
Studies on the safety and efficacy of nevirapine for mother-to-child
transmission in HIV-infected pregnant women have already been conducted in
Uganda. These studies have not yet been concluded with respect to long-term
safety.

In South Africa, a study known as Saint is currently comparing nevaripine
with short-term AZT and 3TC for safety and efficacy for mother-to-child
transmission. We have been told by the scientists concerned that the
results of this study will not be available until June or July this year.
The Medicines Control Council has not yet registered nevirapine in South
Africa for paediatric use. Before we can reach a policy decision on the
issue of nevirapine, we require the medicine to be registered, as well as
the results of the same study.

It would be immoral and unethical for Government, despite the numerous
requests that we are receiving and the demonstrations that have been
staged, to attempt to make policy decisions regarding the use of nevirapine
in our country until the full results of the clinical trials of the drug
are available. This is true for any country in the world, and I am at a
loss to understand why South Africa should proceed with any less caution
than any other country does.

In a World Health Organisation report on developing resistance to
nevirapine in mother-to-child transmission trials, published on 24 March
2000, it is stated:


  There is currently insufficient information to recommend widescale
  implementation of neviparine for mother-to-child-transmission prevention.

And now, recent developments have underscored the need for caution, even in
the face of the overwhelming challenges presented by HIV/Aids. I have
recently learned that five South African women have died during the course
of an ongoing clinical trial involving nevirapine. As Government, we
sincerely regret these deaths, and offer our condolences to the families
concerned. The trial in question is called the FTC 302 Trial, and is being
conducted by Quintiles Clindepham on behalf of an American company,
Triangle Pharmaceuticals.
On hearing of these deaths I immediately requested the MCC to supply me
with a full report of the circumstances in which the deaths occurred. I
received this report five days ago. It appears from the report that 510
patients have been recruited. The trial aims to compare FTC with
lamivirudine in a triple-combination regimen in people who are HIV-positive
or who have not yet taken any antiretroviral drugs.

The trial has two arms or groups. One group receives FTC and the other
receives lamivirudine. Within each arm there are three strata or subgroups
of patients. The patients in strata one and two receive nevirapine as part
of their drug cocktail, while the stratum three patients do not.

According to the MCC report, which is based on their review meetings with
the drug companies involved, Triangle Pharmaceuticals and Quintiles, two of
the deaths were due to hepatitis. The report further cites the causal
association between nevirapine and the deaths as ``probable'' in three of
the five cases. This means that, based on what has happened in the trial so
far, there is a death rate of 1% and a liver toxicity profile of 11%. These
findings are serious indeed.
As a result, the MCC has halted any further recruitment of study subjects
while full reports are being compiled on all the serious adverse events,
including the five deaths. Also, the MCC has made contact with the Food and
Drug Administration of the USA and they concur with the MCC's concern about
the trial and the further conducting of it.

Yesterday I sent a further request to the MCC for more detailed information
on, amongst other things, all 16 study sites, including those in which the
deaths occurred; all the adverse effects of the drugs, not just those
associated with liver toxicity; consent of the patients, and whether indeed
the consent was fully informed and in a language that was understandable;
the ethics committees that approved the study; the names and CVs of all
investigators in the trial; the protocols and case record forms; the
screening procedures; and the treatment of patients for trial-drug-related
complications, and who paid for such treatment.

In addition, I have asked for a comprehensive report on all HIV/Aids-
related clinical trials approved by the MCC that are currently running in
South Africa, or that have been completed in the past five years. If these
reports are sufficiently comprehensive, I shall have at my disposal full
details of the drugs that have been investigated, the therapeutic outcome,
the numbers of deaths, and any other serious adverse events.

Finally, I am pleased to be able to say to hon members today that even with
these tragic deaths, which sadden us deeply, there is nevertheless a
positive outcome. My department has just completed the task of preparing
proposals for the establishment of a national health research ethics
council. We have discussed our proposal extensively with the provinces and
it will be submitted for discussion and, hopefully, approval at the Minmec
in May this year. This will afford significant protection to our people,
especially those suffering from HIV and Aids who are particularly
vulnerable because of the hope offered to them by various drug companies
through the promise of participation in clinical trials. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chair, hon members, the official statistics for HIV/Aids
for the year 1999 compiled by the Directorate of Aids have for some
inexplicable reason been withheld by the Minister, despite their being
finalised in October 1999. However, I have it on good authority that one in
five pregnant women are HIV positive. Also, while the infection rate in
1991 stood at 2%, 10 years down the track it stands at 20% to 25%, that is
1 600 new infections per day. From these statistics it is clear that the
Government has no coherent strategy in place to arrest the epidemic.
It is indeed quite unfortunate that the drug, despite well-documented
evidence to the contrary, is still being questioned as potentially
dangerous to Aids sufferers. Nevirapine or Viramune is more effective than
AZT in vertical transmission reduction, at one tenth of the cost. It is
administered by giving one dose to the mother when she is in labour and one
dose to the baby within 72 hours of birth.

There are many advantages in using the drug. It is easy to administer. A
client can do it ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, allow the member
at the podium a chance to say anything she wants to, even if it is
controversial. Please continue, hon member. [Interjections.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: As I said, the drug is so easy to administer that clients
can do it themselves. There is no need for a hospital setting and
compliance is easy. Best of all, the drug is cheap at R25 a dose. It is
estimated that 60 000 babies are infected at present, and what it does is
to reduce transmission in early infancy.

I would like the Minister to tell us what is immoral about giving hope. A
mother that is HIV-positive has a death sentence, and if she and her baby
could be given nevirapine to reduce the possibility of infection, there is
nothing immoral about that. She is being given a chance at life.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mrs S V KALYAN: Yes, there are side effects, but they are minimal and
according to the World Health Organisation, it is not dangerous enough to
warrant not giving the drug. The benefits far outweigh the risks. The risk
is far greater if we let the child become HIV-positive. Those persons who
have died did so from complications. The package insert states quite
correctly that it should not be given to persons with liver conditions.

We are waiting for the outcome of the same study. Of course, it is going to
be very, very appropriate. The results are going to be appropriately
announced at the launch of the Aids 2000 Conference. One wonders whether it
is not just a political strategy at the expense of human life.

This waiting game conflicts with the urgency of what is happening in terms
of infections. The Ugandan model has been successful, because it moved the
national HIV/Aids control programme out of Health and formed the Ugandan
Aids Commission. The DP acknowledges that the Government must drive the
programme, but here politicians have taken it upon themselves to divert
this programme and we now have a political campaign at the expense of human
lives.

South Africa has wasted too much time on an incomprehensible approach to
the HIV/Aids epidemic. Let us stop wasting time. We need antiretroviral
therapy, not intellect therapy. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Mr Chairperson, the most positive aspect to this debate
about nevirapine is that it reminds us that there are more than 13 drugs
available from nine different companies in South Africa to treat HIV and
Aids. They are produced by companies from the UK, Switzerland, France,
Germany and the USA. Therefore the narrow focus on AZT in relation to Aids
is irrational. It also reminds us that we must work untiringly with these
countries and companies to cope with the Aids crisis.

The Minister has taken steps to combat the Aids menace and we congratulate
her on these. However, a more concerted effort is needed if we are to save
our nation from a terrible fate, as all that we have gained will be wiped
out if we lose this war. Treatment of mothers, to reduce by 50% the spread
of HIV to infants, is an important issue. It is an issue of cost,
practicality and ethics.

If we cannot treat everyone, then whom do we treat? Surely pregnant women,
rape victims and health workers are the most deserving. If we reduce the
number of infants born to die of Aids from 150 000 to 75 000 at the cost of
R18 million to the state - which is R25 per patient - with the use of
nevirapine, it seems inexcusable not to do so. However, we must then be
prepared for the orphans, and we can only do so if we are sure of their
safety.

This particular issue is being well handled by the Department of Health, as
evidenced by the Minister's statement, but let us show the same clarity and
will with regard to the rest of the war. The issues to be tackled are vast.
They include education about the cause of Aids, tackling the morality of
the youth, lifestyle education, parenting education, developing a vaccine,
treatment of mothers, infants, school children and assisting families of
the Aids-ill.

None of this can be handled effectively unless we stop denying essential
aspects of the disease. If we had a neutron bomb threat - which would wipe
out all the people and leave only the buildings - we would roll out
billions in defence, but with Aids we cannot even get our financing in
order.

For the provinces the entire epidemic is an unfunded mandate. Funds voted
nationally are tied up in a complex world of bureaucracy and cannot flow to
those who should use them. Provinces have no money to train counsellors and
community educators let alone treat mothers and patients. Let us create an
Aids emergency fund and distribute it via the provinces.

In keeping with IFP principles, let us give the provinces autonomy and make
them financially accountable. Let them train health educators and Aids
counsellors. Let them offer group pretest counselling and advise every
individual who attends a clinic or hospital to have an HIV test and know
his or her results. By giving them the right to refuse to be tested, the
focus will change from vague fear to clear knowledge. Let us now vigorously
embrace partnerships with all international donors and manufacturers
willing to fund ethical pilot trials.

As for the myths surrounding the virus, let us put them behind us. Like all
viruses, HIV consists of particles of DNA and RNA. They have been isolated
and seen. Prof Van Rensburg of the medical and virology department in
Stellenbosch has offered to show the MPs HIV in her laboratory. Let us go,
together with the Minister and the President, and see it with our own eyes.
It is a cunning virus. Although it has been replicated, it cannot be used
to produce infection in animals, but related viruses do. Who would like to
see us try to test the virus on humans?

Since the Minister is concerned with ethics and legality, I am interested
to know why misoprostol, which has never been registered for use in
abortion but is registered for use for ulcers, is used as the Government's
mainstay in the treatment of abortion. [Time expired.]

Dr S J GOUS: Mr Chair, my first remark would be that the name of the drug
is spelt wrongly on the Order Paper. Secondly, I would agree totally with
the Minister of Health regarding her approach to and remarks on the
clinical trials, and the Republic of South Africa in terms of toxicity and
drugs. It is essential that one must be extra careful and proceed with
utmost caution. Therefore I would support the Minister's remarks on those
grounds. [Interjections.]

I also welcome the establishment of a national health research ethics
council. I think that would stabilise an unsatisfactory position in the
country. There is a problem though. I see the Minister refers to a trial.
In this trial that she refers to, nevirapine is only used as part of a
cocktail. In other words, it is not the drug on its own. Therefore, it
would be very difficult to isolate the drug nevirapine as the one causing
the damage. Also, it is very different to the trials that we are really
interested in, that is the mother-to-child-transmission trials, where there
is only a low single dosage given. In this case it is an ongoing treatment
for Aids and amounts to big doses for many days.

First of all, there is a big difference in dosage. Secondly, it is in a
cocktail mixture, and it is very difficult to predict what will happen
under those circumstances. Thirdly, liver toxicity is well known in most
antiretroviruses and could have been predicted anyway. Even the pamphlet
insert says: ``A doctor should monitor liver function.'' It is part of the
precautions that a doctor should take when he works with this drug.

All drugs have side effects, some more serious than others. The probable
advantages must always be weighed up against the side effects. For
instance, one would accept the much more serious side effects in the
treatment of cancer than in the treatment of a headache. At the same time,
even a simple headache tablet has a whole list of complications and side
effects, but this does not mean that we should take all headache tablets
off the market. It certainly does not.

Now, the problem is that with regard to Aids, we are at war and if, in
fact, the Minister's remarks meant that all trials in terms of mother-to-
child transmission are going to be stopped, we are very disappointed,
because I think this is not the same thing we are talking about here. We
are not comparing apples to apples.

The New NP has always supported any measure that will prevent the transfer
of the HIV virus between mother and child, and between any two people, for
that matter. Therefore we have always supported the use of even
antiretrovirals. We perceive this resistance to the use of antiretrovirals
in the prevention of mother-to-child transmission as a planned resistance
which we do not quite understand, but there might be an ultimate agenda of
compulsory licensing and parallel imports behind it. The feeling is that
this statement is going to be a smoke screen or excuse not to use
nevirapine in the future.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The hon member's time has
expired. Order! This is a very important debate that affects the total
population of this country, and every one of you should be interested. Your
Minister has introduced it in this Parliament, and I think that every one
of you owe it to yourselves and your constituencies to listen. Leave your
chitchat and listen to the debate or leave the Chamber.

Mr S NAIDOO: Chairperson, and hon members, health is one of the most
important aspects of South African society, and the UDM believes in
preventative measures. It is also our view that, through timely and
effective treatment, one can prevent excessive suffering and hardship.

The introduction of a new drug is always welcomed, but of concern is the
cost of the drug and its availability. Therefore, those affected may never
have access to such drugs. Of importance is the initiative by our
Government, by launching Aids Awareness Day, to undertake precautionary
measures in the spread of the epidemic throughout Africa.

The question of whether South Africa approves of nevirapine or not can only
be considered within the context of the HIV/Aids situation in South Africa.
It is thus impossible to avoid a discussion on the current confusion
reigning in Government's Aids policy. Two years ago, the hon the President,
Thabo Mbeki, then still Deputy President, launched an extensive Aids
awareness campaign. However, in the last few months, the hon the President
as well as members of his Cabinet have made statements that have thrown the
South African debate into disarray. In addition to this, the SA National
Aids Council has been composed in such a way that many of the most
important role-players are sidelined. Furthermore, Government has
consistently insisted on cheaper drugs. This in spite of Glaxo Wellcome's
75% discount offer on AZT and Pfizer's announcement that a certain
specialised Aids drug treatment will be provided at no cost to poor South
Africans.

Clearly, judging by the cautionary statement by the hon the Minister, we
cannot rejoice at the availability of nevirapine when it and other drugs
are not supplied by Government due to the complaints about price. People
wonder why, after millions of rands were lost in the Sarafina 2 debacle,
Government refuses to spend an equivalent amount on these types of drugs.
Nevirapine, like other treatments, is only successful if combined with at
least two other drugs. This is due to the high rate of mutation of the
virus.

We need a clear and unambiguous policy statement from Government with
regard to its role and strategy in respect of HIV/Aids, since many role-
players now feel that they are battling Government instead of working with
it to fight the dreaded disease. We note that important stakeholders have
threatened to boycott the forthcoming summit in Durban, and therefore call
on Government to avert such action as it will have a bearing on the public
and, more so, the Government because many people out there would like to
see a well-considered strategy. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairman, the ACDP is sorry to hear of the deaths of the
women mentioned, and we pray that the families concerned will be comforted
by our Lord Jesus Christ. [Interjections.]

The ACDP is also saddened by the Minister's statement because studies show
strong evidence that nevirapine reduces the transmission of HIV from mother
to child. Medical researchers say the beauty of nevirapine is that it has a
long halflife, and can be given to all mothers in high-risk areas as a
matter of course, without their having to submit to Aids tests and
counselling.

Only a single dose is necessary, given before and after birth. Most
importantly, the treatment costs less than R30. Nevirapine can only be
given once, however, as resistance develops quickly, and outside of mother-
to-child transmission usefulness has clearly not been shown.

The original use of Nevirapine was to prevent further cells from infection.
It does not kill the disease and is therefore used in conjunction with
other drugs when treating rape victims. Nevirapine on its own therefore
does not help rape victims. Government may argue that there is a very small
risk in the case of rape victims, yet we know HIV is transmitted sexually;
therefore the victim must be given the benefit of the doubt, and AZT and
3TC must be an option.

For ethical reasons it will never be possible to get scientific results
regarding treatment of rape victims, as human study on rape victims cannot
carry clinical approval, but AZT has already been given by Government to
health workers and the drug has proven to be 80% effective in preventing
HIV transmission in needlestick injuries. These patients can be monitored
and the information is therefore reliable.

In conclusion, the ACDP believes it is commendable that such emphasis has
been placed on antiretrovirals, but we believe we should also focus on
fighting opportunistic disease infections. Drugs against TB, meningitis,
thrush, shingles and herpes should also be on the essential drugs list and
available free of charge to patients. Although the results of the AZT and
nevirapine trials being conducted in Durban, Pretoria and Johannesburg have
not yet been released, researchers to date did not see this as a major
problem, as so far known results seem satisfactory. We hope these are not
just delaying tactics in view of Government's policy on the murder of
unborn children. [Time expired.]

Mr G E BALOI: Chairperson, we are a nation at work. We are very concerned
about the monsters that ravage the lives of our youth on a weekly basis. We
know that the hon the Minister of Health also cannot sleep at night, and
therefore she has requested us to comment on this issue of nevirapine.
Nevirapine is the nth anti-HIV drug HIV/Aids patients can try, and was
first approved only within the past six months.

In Washington, the United States Food and Drug Administration authority
approved this new class of HIV/Aids medicine, gearing patients to start
adding the drug nevirapine to the treatment combination. Nevaripine is a
new class of drug especially developed to fight reverse transcriptive
enzymes differently by blocking the receptor where the enzymes seem to do
their job, much as a key fits into a lock. Adding nevirapine to older drugs
such as AZT and DDI is mostly done to try to boost the patient's ability to
lower HIV floating in the bloodstream and to strengthen the immune system.
However, nevirapine cannot be used alone. The HI-virus rapidly develops
resistance to nevirapine. The drug is, in fact, not administered to cure
HIV, but to reduce the load of HIV in the body.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, it cannot be a coincidence that the Minister
is making this statement today, because last week I actually got involved
in the same investigation myself. I can confirm to this House that there
are about six contract research organisations, seven academic research
institutions and fifteen pharmaceutical companies in South Africa doing
trials on people. In Gauteng alone more than 300 such trials have been
conducted, and this has been confirmed by the chairperson of the ethics
committee, Dr Falcken.

With regard to the specific trial that the Minister referred to, I have
received complaints and I visited two of the patients at Kalofong Hospital
last week. These are the complaints. The first complaint was that the
consent form of more than eight pages has never been explained to them in
the language of their choice. They signed something that they did not
understand.

Secondly, they were promised money. They were told that they were going to
die in any case. They are paid R40 for every treatment that they receive,
and the side effects are vicious. The other thing is that they are given a
phone number that they can call whenever they need to talk to the ethics
committee. I phoned the ethics committee and the only answer I got was a
fax machine - no other answer. There is no recourse for the patient.

I just want to call on Government today to stop and suspend all these
trials until we have proper controls in the country, because our people are
dying. We need to protect the human rights of our people. These drug
companies are exploiting our people, and the worst thing is that they are
not testing these drugs in their own countries. They are coming here and
using our people as guinea pigs, and this is unacceptable. [Interjections.]

I just want to say that I have also been informed that the Minister has
established a committee. That is to be welcomed because we need some
control. However, is the Minister aware that the committee is going to meet
for the first time on 31 May 2000? What are we doing in the meantime about
our people who are dying? What are we doing to stop these companies? They
must be stopped. They must go and test their drugs in their own countries
and not in South Africa. [Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, I readily agree with what the hon
Patricia de Lille said with regard to the sufferers of Aids. I think that
the ordeal of people who are suffering from the Aids virus will never be
fully understood by people who do not have that virus. It is by means of
research and the development of new drugs that the plight of the sufferers
of Aids can be alleviated. Such action has to be supported.

The main problem with Aids-related medicine is the cost involved in
developing and selling the product at affordable levels. In many cases it
is too expensive for ordinary people to use. On the other hand, development
and research to make such drugs available and safe are expensive. If the
developer, on the one hand, is to be deprived of the profit incentives,
then no new medicines will ever see the light. It is, therefore, essential
that a solution be found to allow the industry its reasonable profit and
experimentation. The social health structures of Government on the other
hand must make such medicines available in an equitable and sustainable way
to as many Aids sufferers as possible, even if this should mean an
affordable subsidy by the taxpayers.

Dit is egter ook nodig om te waarsku teen valse gerugte en verwagtings wat
weens voorlopige proewe ontstaan. In dié verband is die agb Minister se
waarskuwing en verklaring tydig, en ek steun dit. [It is, however, also
necessary to warn against false rumours and expectations which arise as a
result of preliminary trials. In this regard the hon the Minister's warning
and statement are timely, and I support them.]

Dr A S NKOMO: Chairperson, we are like people who are mourning at a vigil.
We have heard announcements of the deaths of five mothers and for us it is
a time of mourning, a time of sadness. We are sad, therefore, that there
are people who use this opportunity to dance on the victims' graves, which
is exactly what happened when the hon Sandy Kalyan was addressing us here.
I would also like, with the permission of the chairperson, to pass over the
speech of the Minister with reference to what the World Health Organisation
has said on this matter of nevirapine in paediatric use. We will pass over
that.

South African law, until recently, did not regulate clinical trials. The
first democratic Government of South Africa addressed this issue by passing
the Medicines and Related Substances Control Act of 1997. Unfortunately,
the implementation of this Act has been arrested. It is sitting in the
Transvaal Division of the Supreme Court of South Africa, having been taken
there by the PMA, which is an ally of a party which is present here, and
which I shall not mention. [Interjections.]

We support the setting up of the MCC clinical trials committee. Clinical
trials need to be regulated, and we need the full force of law behind this
regulation. Clinical trials occur when the pharmaceutical industry needs to
test new drugs in order to establish the safety and efficacy of the new
medicines. Great care needs to be taken when new drugs are first introduced
to humans to ensure that people are not at risk and not exploited in the
process, which is what Patricia de Lille has been talking about.

Governments the world over have legislation to protect their constituents
from abuse in clinical trials, but the pharmaceutical industry in South
Africa does not want us to do so. Members should ask themselves why. I
would like to congratulate the Minister on taking decisive action on this
matter. I would also like to say that the ANC will be ever vigilant to
ensure that the standards of protection of our people are at one with the
best in the world.

It is wrong that our people are used as subjects in clinical trials to
produce scientific data, but do not benefit from the results thereof. When
the trials stop they find that the drug is unaffordable. We need to ensure
that only medicines that will benefit South Africans will be tested on our
people. We need to ensure that all clinical studies are performed to the
highest ethical standards. All ethics committees that review these studies
must be transparent - and the Minister must ask for their names and CVs -
and properly constituted with community representation.

Pharmaceutical companies talk about their rights to intellectual property,
but there must be responsibilities. These companies that own rights to the
drugs should carry the full cost of the study. If state facilities are used
then a cost will arise. Appropriate reimbursement to the state should
occur.

If a patient in a clinical trial has a bad reaction to the drug, then the
pharmaceutical company should reimburse the state for all the medical
expenses that arise. Most importantly, the pharmaceutical company should
have appropriate product-liability insurance. Should a patient be so
unfortunate as to die in a clinical trial, as we have heard from the
Minister does happen, then the pharmaceutical industry has the
responsibility of ensuring that the family is not financially disadvantaged
by this loss.

It is also important that the care of patients is not disadvantaged by the
trial. For example, if a patient living with Aids enters a three-month
clinical trial, what happens at the end of the three months? It is
unacceptable to us that all treatment for the patient is stopped when the
trial stops. Medicines should always be provided free of charge to patients
in clinical trials. Patients should never be made to pay for the study, nor
should doctors receive payments or benefits of any kind that would in any
way induce them to encourage certain outcomes.

Let me state categorically, however, for the benefit of this House, that
the ANC is not against the pharmaceutical industry performing clinical
trials in South Africa. We recognise that clinical trials are essential for
drugs and the development of drugs, if they are available and beneficial to
health. However, there must be a North-South divide on the way these trials
are performed.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Dr A S NKOMO: If they are performed here in South Africa, they must be
performed to the highest ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time
has expired.

Dr S A NKOMO: ... ethical standards because what we do not want is the
development ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Dr A S NKOMO: I am finishing. What we do not want, is the development of
the syndrome of the poor African guinea pig ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Dr A S NKOMO: ... and the ANC'S health plan, on page 53, dealt with this
matter as early as 1994. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:05.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 5 April 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


         (i)     National House of Traditional Leaders Amendment Bill [B 15
              - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government - National Assembly).
TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the Human
     Resources Fund for 1998-99 [RP 55-2000].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Reports of the Board on Tariffs and Trade on the -

     (1)    Increase in the rate of duty on other pigments and preparations
         based on titanium dioxide, Report No 3889;

     (2)    Increase in the rate of duty on alkyd resins, Report No 3894.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter, dated 28
     March 2000, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
     Parliament, in terms of section 201(2) of the Constitution, 1996, of
     the employment of the South African National Defence Force in terms of
     section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution, 1996.

     REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC
     OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996), ON THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH
     AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(2)(c) OF THE
     CONSTITUTION, 1996, IN THE FULFILLMENT OF AN INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATION
     IN THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE


     1.     This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
         authorised the extension of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force (SANDF) personnel and aircraft, in the
         Republic of Mozambique, in fulfillment of an international
         obligation. This employment was authorised in accordance with the
         provisions of Section 82(4)(b)(ii) read with Section 227(1)(b) of
         the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act No 200
         of 1993), [which sections continue to be in force in terms of Item
         24(1) of Schedule 6 of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996)], read with Section 3(2)(a)(iv)
         of the Defence Act, 1957 (Act No 44 of 1957).

     2.     This employment is in compliance with the Republic of South
         Africa's regional support, to the Government of the People's
         Republic of Mozambique, for humanitarian assistance in the
         preservation of life, health, and property, resulting from the
         current widespread rains having caused extensive and serious
         flooding in Mozambique. Due to the necessity for the continued
         support and distribution of aid to Mozambican citizens adversely
         affected by the severe flooding, and due to the deterioration of
         the situation, an extension of the deployment was requested.

     3.     The deployment has been extended from 17 March 2000 to 07 April
         2000.


     4.     The deployment will consist of 60 personnel, three Orynx
         helicopters, two BK 117 helicopters, two Casa-212 transport
         aircraft and two light aircraft.

     5.     The estimated total cost for the extended period is R6 077 232 -
         00.

     6.     I will communicate this report to the Members of the National
         Council of Provinces and wish to request that you bring it to the
         notice of the Members of the National Assembly.


     Regards
     TM MBEKI


