---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-10-05
---

THURSDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 15:31.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I am sure hon members will be very
blessed this week. They have certainly prayed and meditated repeatedly.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Although very briefly!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Very briefly, but repeatedly.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the Council I shall move:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with great concern the contempt  displayed by certain
       Ministries towards the answering of questions within 10 working days
       of their appearance on the Question Papers, according to Rule 239 of
       the NCOP;


  (2) further notes that some questions which appeared during April and May
       2000 remain unanswered to this day, even after a huge attempt, via
       correspondence to the Ministries asking for their urgent replies;


  (3) wishes to bring to the attention that a question to a Minister is
       specifically to obtain information relating to the public affairs
       with which he or she is officially connected or any matter of
       administration for which he or she is responsible; and


  (4) expresses its concern that the contempt displayed by certain
       Ministries damages -
       (a)  the status and authority of this Council;


       (b)  the principle of transparency; and


       (c)  the right to information.

              DEATH OF DEPUTY AREA COMMISSIONER FOR THE LOWVELD
                          IN CASH-IN-TRANSIT HEIST

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the tragic and untimely death of Mpumalanga's Deputy Area
       Commissioner for the Lowveld, Mandla Mahlangu, who was gunned down
       when he went to the aid of what he perceived to be an accident, but
       which in fact was a cash-in-transit heist;


  (2) further notes that Mandla Mahlangu was appointed Deputy Police
       Commissioner in Mpumalanga's key Lowveld area last week after a
       string of successes he achieved while heading the region's crime
       prevention unit;


  (3) offers its heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Mr
       Mahlangu;


  (4) pleads with communities to co-operate with the SAPS in their
       investigations so as to arrest the perpetrators of this heinous act;
       and


  (5) expresses the hope that the perpetrators of this and other violent
       crimes will be speedily arrested and made to realise that crime does
       not pay.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                              TRIBUTE TO SANDF

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council notes that -
  (1) today the NCOP joined with their colleagues in the Other Place to pay
       fitting tribute to the SANDF in order to honour its peace-keeping and
       humanitarian role in our country and our region; and


  (2) the important step in the ongoing reconciliation of its people with
       one another and with our vital institutions was yet another important
       foundation and milestone in the process of nation-building.


  We salute the SANDF!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

               CONTRIBUTION OF NCOP TO DEBATE HONOURING SANDF

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) recognises that members of the Council participated in the Joint
       Sitting of the Council and the National Assembly in a debate
       honouring the SANDF for its peace-keeping role;


  (2) thanks the Chairperson and the speakers for their positive and
       constructive contributions during this occasion; and


  (3) notes that it is thus emphasised that members of this Council have a
       major contribution to make not only in Parliament but also in South
       Africa and that we must do it because we can!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     CONGRATULATIONS TO CAPE GRACE HOTEL ON WINNING INTERNATIONAL AWARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr E A CONROY: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council congratulates a South African hotel which has
  contributed greatly to the placing of our country on the international
  tourist map, namely, the Cape Grace Hotel of Cape Town, which has been
  elected as the best hotel in the world for 1999.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     IMPORTANT MILESTONE REACHED IN SEARCH FOR VACCINE FOR THE HI VIRUS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr P J C NEL: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad daarvan kennis neem -


  (1) dat die Nuwe NP met genoegdoening kennis geneem het van die
       aankondiging, gedoen deur die Voorsitter van die Mediese
       Navorsingsraad, dr Makgoba, dat 'n belangrike mylpaal in die stryd
       teen MIV/Vigs behaal is, deurdat 'n entstof teen die C-stam van die
       MI-virus in Suid-Afrika deur navorsers ontwikkel is, en dat reeds
       vroeg aanstaande jaar met toetse in Suid-Afrika begin sal word;


  (2) dat na 'n lang tydperk van verwarring en onsekerheid oor onder andere
       die oorsaak van Vigs in Suid-Afrika dit werklik 'n welkome ligpunt is
       wat moontlik Suid-Afrika se beeld ten opsigte van hierdie
       aangeleentheid drasties sal verbeter en aan die wÃªreld toon dat Suid-
       Afrika se mense tog glo dat Vigs deur die virus veroorsaak word; en


  (3) dat die Nuwe NP die hoop uitspreek dat na die geskatte tydperk van
       drie tot vyf jaar wat dit sal neem om hierdie tegnies ingewikkelde
       entstof te ontwikkel, dit tog in 'n magtige wapen sal ontwikkel om
       uiteindelik die oorlog teen die pandemie te wen.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Dr P J C NEL: Chairman, I move without notice:

    That the Council notes -


     (1)    that the New NP has noted with satisfaction the announcement by
         the Chairperson of the Medical Research Council, Dr Makgoba, that
         an important milestone has been reached in the fight against
         HIV/Aids in that a vaccine against the C-base of the HI virus has
         been developed by researchers in South Africa and that testing
         will begin in South Africa early next year;


     (2)    that after a long period of confusion and uncertainty about,
         inter alia, the cause of Aids in South Africa, this is truly a
         welcome ray of light which could dramatically improve South
         Africa's image with regard to this matter and show the world that
         South Africa's people indeed believe that Aids is caused by the
         virus; and


     (3)    that the New NP expresses the hope that after the estimated
         period of three to five years which it will take to develop this
         technically complex vaccine it will develop into a powerful weapon
         to eventually win the war against the pandemic.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I want to move as an amendment:


  That the following paragraph be added after paragraph (3):


  ``(4)    the support and resources made available by Government to
         promote this initiative by the Medical Research Council.''

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to that
amendment? There is no objection.

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely:

That the Council notes -


     (1)    that the New NP has noted with satisfaction the announcement by
         the Chairperson of the Medical Research Council, Dr Makgoba, that
         an important milestone has been reached in the fight against
         HIV/Aids in that a vaccine against the C-base of the HI virus has
         been developed by researchers in South Africa and that testing
         will begin in South Africa early next year already.


     (2)    that after a long, period of confusion and uncertainty about,
         inter alia, the cause of Aids in South Africa, this is truly a
         welcome ray of light which could dramatically improve South
         Africa's image with regard to this matter and show the world that
         South Africa's people indeed believe that Aids is caused by the
         virus;


     (3)    that the New NP expresses the hope that after the estimated
         period of three to five years which it will take to develop this
         technically complex vaccine it will develop into a powerful weapon
         to eventually win the war against the pandemic; and


     (4)    the support and resources made available by Government to
         promote this initiative by the Medical Research Council.

                      COMPETITION SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, it is always an honour to
speak in the House. That is why I am taking some of hon members' time, if
they do not mind, despite the fact that there is no speakers' list and, I
think, all parties support the amendment.

I also feel that the Competition Act is an important piece of legislation.
I think it has had a marked impact on the workings of the South African
economy and will continue, I think, to improve the degree of competition in
our economy.

This amendment, to which the Council has made certain additions, deals with
a number of issues. There are three important ones which I would like to
draw the House's attention to very briefly. Firstly, this amendment does
remove the legislative uncertainty that emerged over differing
interpretations of the meaning of section 3(1)(d). I think this will help a
great deal in the future.

Secondly, it deals with the thresholds as to the size of mergers that have
to notify. The main difficulty here was that the original Act meant that
these thresholds could only be adjusted by an amendment and dealt with
every five years. This proved to be creating various practical problems. I
do not think that any of us envisaged the number of mergers that would be
notified to the Competition Commission, and, clearly, the threshold level
needs to be more adaptable than was catered for in the original
legislation.

Thirdly, and an important point, it allows for some interim relief in the
case of a complaint against anticompetitive practices. Given the complexity
of these cases there can be a delay in the consideration, although the Act
does set time limits. So I think, again, that this is the result of our
experience of the first year of the Act.

I would like to thank both the National Assembly and the NCOP for the work
they have done on this Act, and also various stakeholders in our economy
for the very considered and useful propositions they made around the
experiences we had in the first year. I urge support from the House.
[Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, hon members, today's assembly of
the National Council of Provinces is a significant landmark in the future
of the construction industry. It brings to fruition five years of activity
that has engaged all formations of the Government and the industry in an
historic policy-making process.

The collaboration that has led to this landmark moment was set in motion by
a meeting in 1995 between the Department of Public Works and the captains
of the South African construction industry. That meeting addressed the role
of the partnership between the industry and the Government in
reconstruction and development, as well as the structural impediments to
growth, development, delivery and transformation of the construction
industry. It gave impetus to the development of a comprehensive policy
framework, within which the industry can play a more strategic role in
social development and economic growth.

The Bill before us emanates from the White Paper on Creating an Enabling
Environment for Reconstruction, Growth and Development in the Construction
Industry. Published last year, the White Paper sets out a comprehensive
industry development strategy and proposes the establishment of a statutory
construction industry development board, or CIDB, to drive this strategy in
partnership with all Government delivery agencies and the private sector.
This is the essential purpose of the Construction Industry Development
Board Bill before this House.

The construction industry is a national asset in the challenges that face
our country. It has a pivotal role to play in infrastructure delivery, to
meet the needs of ordinary South Africans. It is this objective which
underpins the Government's vision and its commitment to construction
industry development.

We are, fortunately, able to build on an industry which is strategically
developed and which provides much-needed employment and dignity to
thousands of people. In the South African context and, indeed, in the
context of our region, the industry's development must be geared towards
rolling back the enormous legacy of an inadequate infrastructure, its
inequitable distribution, and the underdevelopment of locally based
physical and human resources. Unlocking the industry's potential to address
this stark reality is at the core of the enabling legislation before this
Council, but this potential is impeded.

Previous government policies and market forces have distorted the nature
and profile of the South African construction industry, which is
characterised by adversarial relationships between clients and contractors,
contractors and subcontractors, and in the workforce itself. Its
accessibility is a factor of volatile demand and impacts negatively on
sustainable employment and human resource development. This affects
performance in relation to quality, productivity, safety, health and
environment. It ultimately impacts on value for money to clients and
investors.

Previous legislation affecting the construction industry reinforced the
fundamental intentions of apartheid and limited black participation to the
domain of unskilled artisans and cheap labour. This was achieved not only
through the Bantu Education Act, but also through the Native Building
Workers Act of 1951. Job reservation was further reinforced by the
Industrial Conciliation Act of 1956.

These instruments of policy shaped the entire industry to the benefit of
white artisans, contractors, professionals and materials suppliers. Today
the emerging black sector faces a range of hurdles in the way of accessing
markets, training and finance which contribute to a vicious cycle that pegs
the sector's growth. It is against this backdrop that the Government and
the private sector embarked on a structured process of engagement to
reshape the industry. It is important that I should highlight some of the
significant milestones of this process that underpins the legislation
before us.

The Green Paper published in 1997 invited public comment on the draft
policy to enable thorough planning and consultation with all stakeholders
towards the establishment of the CIDB. The Minister of Public Works
appointed an interministerial task team which started its work in 1998. The
task team established an industry-wide reference group to ensure the
inclusive input of public and private sector stakeholders.

It further set up a number of focus groups for industry specialists to
refine key outputs identified in the Green Paper, such as the register of
contractors, which is an important function of the CIDB. This partnership
redefined Government policy as embodied in the White Paper of 1999.

In November 1991 a two-day industry summit workshop to debate the first
draft legislation was convened. In December, the amended draft legislation
for public comment was published. In July 2000, taking cognisance of public
comment, the draft Bill was further amended and, ultimately, certified. In
August 2000, together with provincial MECs we convened public sector
workshops in all nine provinces. Since then the legislation has been
refined by the NCOP Select Committee on Public Services.

To ensure a further opportunity for public comment, the select committee
invited submissions, which it has considered in the final amendment. I am
pleased to note that these submissions confirm the support of all key
stakeholders.

Under the capable leadership of the acting chairperson, the hon Mokoena,
the select committee has effected significant improvements to the
legislation. The NCOP process has ensured the structured input of all
provincial legislatures. This is particularly significant, in view of the
binding nature of the Bill on all organs of state.

I now want to deal with the essence of the legislation. Recognising the
dispersed nature of the industry, and its many role-players, including
clients and service providers, the Construction Industry Development Board
will constitute a national competence for industry development. It will
provide strategic leadership to realise the Government's vision of a
construction industry policy and strategy that promotes stability, fosters
economic growth and international competitiveness, creates sustainable
employment and addresses historical imbalances as it generates a new
industry capacity. That comes from the White Paper.

The core objectives of the CIDB are to establish and promote appropriate
and uniform best practice standards and guidelines that promote improved
industry stability and performance, as well as social and economic
objectives; to ensure the uniform application of policy throughout all
spheres of Government and provide uniform and ethical standards throughout
the industry; to promote the sustainable growth of the construction
economy, and to improve the investment environment and the participation of
the emerging sector in the mainstream economy.

The board will drive best practice through programmes and instruments that
include the establishment of a register of contractors, a register of
projects and a code of conduct. It is important that the board itself
should comprise outstanding practitioners with a broad development
perspective and a commitment that looks beyond the narrow interests of
individual stakeholders. The appointment of the board must also take
account of the need to reflect the race, gender and geographic composition
of our land.

The responsibility conferred on the board is immense. The board will
therefore continuously require the support and input of stakeholders. This
will be accomplished through the establishment of the stakeholder forum.
This forum will enable the representation of all stakeholders including
government departments, provinces and local authorities. It will also
include representation of employer bodies, the professions, organised
labour, the emerging sector and others. To enable policy co-ordination and
the identification of national priorities, the legislation appropriately
requires the Minister of Public Works to consult with relevant Ministers
and provincial MECs.

In conclusion, the CIDB must be a catalyst for change. It must ensure
sustainable growth, regional and global competitiveness and the continuous
inclusion of historical marginalised sectors of our society. It must
promote investment and value for money to clients.

Finally, I would like to thank the task team, as well as the department's
drafting team and all the stakeholders, for the hard work that has been put
into the legislation before us. In particular I wish to thank the members
of the select committee and the provincial legislatures for their immense
effort to ensure that the legislation was finalised in time for
consideration at today's assembly of the NCOP.

I regard it as critically important that the legislation now reflects the
concerns of the provinces. Today, as I have said, is indeed an historic
day. The passage of the Bill before this House will put the construction
industry firmly on the national agenda in the interests of all South
Africans. As we move forward to implement this enabling legislation, we
will continue to rely on the commitment of all role-players to the growth,
development and transformation of the construction industry. [Applause.]

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, good leaders listen when their people
speak. The construction industry was and still is undeniably in tatters;
the industry is terribly fragmented. We are witnessing a shockingly massive
mushrooming of contractors, especially noticeable when there are projects
to be embarked upon by departments. As a government we either use that old
law about an eye for an eye, which unfortunately leaves everybody blind ...
[Laughter.] ... or put measures in place to correct this anomaly.

Someone has to come up with those corrective measures, someone who is
prepared to confront this situation head-on. This person happens to be the
hon the Minister of Public Works. I want to thank the hon the Minister for
the efforts that she has made to ensure that our lives get better by the
day. I want to thank her for having a great mind and a feeling for our
people. As she is aware, minds are like parachutes; they only function when
opened. [Laughter.] Once again, thanks, Mama Africa.

Again it is a fact that unless one enters the tiger's den, one cannot take
the cubs. Good leaders listen when their people speak. We are now going to
have this independent board appointed by the Minister. What kind of people
are we looking at here? How is the Minister going to identify them? We are
so glad to have a Minister who is not selfish. The Minister will not
randomly pick and choose people. The public is given a chance to nominate
individuals who, in their opinion, can serve as board members. I can hear
some people saying the Minister is too generous. Yes, this is the kind of
leadership we have in the ANC, leaders who will not do anything without
consulting the very people whom we are supposed to serve.

The board will consist of people with vast experience in their own right,
people who are prepared to move and not be moved, because the Minister is
aware that a ship that stays in the same harbour never encounters danger,
but also never gets anywhere. Yes, it is true that good leaders listen when
their people speak. The main tasks of this board will be to provide
strategic leadership, to promote and implement policies and programmes
aimed at supporting emerging entrepreneur sectors, to improve labour
relations and human resource development and to promote best practices to
again guard against those greedy professional looters. The best preparation
for good work tomorrow is to do good work today. The board will be expected
to make sure that this legislation assists the people who are meant to
benefit from it. As hon members know, what one thinks and does shapes one's
future.

One other good thing about this Bill is the fact that all contractors will,
from now on, have to be registered. This is being done to deal with some of
the selfish, unsympathetic, greedy and corrupt contractors who are looting
our government coffers, people who want to succeed while doing nothing. All
I can do is remind them that the only place where success comes before work
is in the dictionary.

I am saying all this because it was possible for one person, using
different names, to be given five tenders. This is why, when I hear some
people sigh, ``life is hard,'' I am always tempted to ask ```compared to
what?'' Contractors should register for us to know the owners thereof and
their entire board of directors. It is not the hours one puts in that
count, but what one puts into those hours. It will now be an offence for
unregistered contractors to embark on any project without obtaining a
formal authorisation. Yes, it used to happen, and they were even paid for
it.

After the passage of this Bill some of these unholy practices will be a
thing of the past. Yes, if it comes to the push, we are ready to milk the
bull. [Laughter.] We cannot allow this situation to continue unchecked. We
cannot fail. Failure does not mean one is a failure; it just means one has
not succeeded yet.

All stakeholders will monitor whatever happens in the construction
industry. There will be a forum of stakeholders, who are also expected to
advise the Minister.

These are the people who are affected directly. This is a clear indication
that the Minister has taken everybody on board. As to who must be
accommodating, it is not the hon the Minister. It is now up to these
stakeholders to effectively make use of this opportunity. Hence, the saying
that opportunity follows those who walk the extra mile. At the same time, I
would like to request the Minister to guard against some of those members
of the board who might, instead of empowering our people, indirectly push
them out of the system. They may even make it difficult for our emerging
contractors to get tenders, only giving tenders to their blue-eyed boys and
blue-eyed girls. Troubles are a lot like people, they grow bigger if one
nurses them.

The people who will serve on this board should be people who will not
easily forget or deliberately forget where we come from. I know that when
we utter such statements some people say things are going to be bad, and
that it means that such a person stands a better chance of being a prophet.
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Thank you on
that note, hon member. I did promise yesterday that I would allow you grace
time, but only for yesterday. [Laughter.]

I take this opportunity to welcome our special delegates from the
provinces, and hope that we will be enriched by their presence. We
sincerely recognise and appreciate their participation. The next person to
open his parachute is special delegate Mr Metele. Mr Metele, please leave
the harbour.

Mr A T METELE (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, let me greet you all this
afternoon in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. This Bill provides for the
establishment of the Construction Industry Development Board to implement
an integrated strategy for the reconstruction, growth and development of
the construction industry, and to provide for matters connected therewith.

Whilst formulating our mandate, the standing committee considered the scope
of consultation on the Bill, the importance of the subject matter to the
citizens of the province, the constitutional mandate of participatory
democracy, and public participation and transparency, and resolved that
this piece of legislation should be considered for public hearing to
empower the nation.

The structures implemented by this Bill will address issues affecting the
workers. The national, social and economic objectives of the Bill include
the growth of the emerging sector, labour absorption in the construction
industry, improved labour relations and positive safety, and health and
environmental outcomes which impact on the provinces.

The Bill includes emerging construction development and addresses the
injustices of the past in this sector. The establishment of the board
ensures that there is accountability and that all projects are registered.
This ultimately ensures that there will be a transparent process in which
structures are managed. The Eastern Cape undoubtedly supports the Bill in
accordance with our mandate. [Applause.]

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Mr Chair, hon Minister, as part of its contribution to the
national project of reconstruction, growth and development, the Department
of Public Works has engaged the entire industry in a structured process of
consultation which resulted in the launch of the White Paper, in order to
create an enabling environment for reconstruction, growth and development
in the construction industry.

This White Paper is like a mirror that reflects the soul of the Department
of Public Works. It identifies the ideals and aspirations of the nation.
The White Paper articulates the building values of the construction
industry which impact directly on the communities and the public at large.
The construction industry's improved efficiency and effectiveness will
enhance quality, productivity, health, safety, environmental outcomes, and
value for money for our country.

The Construction Industry Development Board Bill seeks to establish a
statutory authority to be the specialist agency to co-ordinate the national
endeavour through promoting our vision as set out in the White Paper. Owing
to the nature of duties the board will have to discharge as part of
Government's blueprint, we have given the board a justic personality as it
will have an indispensable role in the South African economy in providing
the physical infrastructure which is fundamental to the country's
development.
This Bill also regulates general powers of the board, such as the
establishment of committees to assist the board in the performance of its
functions. This Bill requires that a balance must be achieved in the
appointment of members of the board with regard to the field of expertise
required, and the board should reflect the race, gender and geographical
composition of our country. It is an explicit requirement of this Bill that
a member of the board may not be a political office bearer and must be a
South African citizen.

The board is required, within a reasonable period of time, to introduce a
best practice project assessment scheme, that is linked to the register of
projects, and which will promote best practice client performance within
the public and private sectors.

The Construction Industry Development Board must establish appropriate and
uniform best practice standards and guidelines that promote improved
industry stability; performance-improved industry and efficiency; and
national and economic objectives, including growth of the emerging sector,
labour absorption and skills training. The board must also promote uniform
application of policy with regard to the construction industry throughout
all spheres of government.

The Bill also requires that only the contractors and subcontractors who are
registered with the Construction Industry Development Board in an
appropriate category of registration will be permitted to practice in
public-sector construction contracts. The establishment of a register of
contractors and subcontractors must not constitute a barrier to access by
emerging sectors. The register of contractors will categorise contractors
in a manner that facilitates public-sector procurement and promotes
contractor development as a primary. The register of contractors must
reduce the risk relating to the selection of contractors, serve to promote
minimum and best practice standards, regulate the behaviour and actions of
contractors in relation to procurement and business practices, and reduce
tendering costs and the administrative burden associated with awarding
contracts. Lastly, the register must promote the development of emerging
contractors by establishing their track records. This will mean the end of
fly-by-night contractors. [Applause.]

Mr N M RAJU: Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon special delegates and dear
colleagues in the House, the Construction Industry Development Board Bill
seeks to establish a statutory authority which is envisaged to co-ordinate
nationally the transformation and development of the industry.

To quote the White Paper:


  The CIDB will exercise leadership and foster the co-operation of industry
  stakeholders to pursue development objectives, improved industry
  practices and procedures - which will enhance delivery, performance and
  value for money, profitability, and the industry's long-term survival in
  an increasingly global arena.

There is no doubt that the need for creating an enabling environment, which
the hon the Minister has referred to, for reconstruction, growth and
development in the construction industry is being adequately addressed by
the Construction Industry Development Board Bill.

Towards this end, the Construction Industry Development Board is to be
established as a juristic person and given powers, functions and duties in
line with its objectives. The CIDB will be the custodian and driver of the
national vision and strategy for construction industry development.

Clause 4, for instance, specifically refers to the promotion of appropriate
research, the implementation of Government policy with regard to the
construction industry, the providing of advice to the Minister, the
provision of consultancy services, establishment of committees, etc, for
optimum performance.

Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the composition of the Board, which must
consist of at least nine, but not more than 13, members appointed by the
Minister. Members must be South African citizens and no political office
bearer may be a member. These appointments must not only be sensitive to
gender and reflect the demographic balance, they should also be consonant
with the geographical composition of the country.

Clauses 16 to 21 provide for the establishment of a register of
contractors, which is pivotal to the development of the construction
industry. Previous speakers have referred to this fact and I welcome the
inclusion of this very important clause.
The size and distribution of contractors operating in the construction
industry must be known. Furthermore the volume, nature and performance of
contractors must be indicated. Matters such as the registration and
deregistration of a contractor are dealt with, as well as the duration and
renewal of registration.

As far as the financial implications for the state are concerned, it is
foreseen that the CIDB will initially rely on state funding until such time
that the register of contractors and the register of projects are
established, whereupon the cost will be partially funded from the operation
of these services to the industry stakeholders.

The state plays a role as regulator, facilitator and client. Of course, as
the single largest client for the construction sector, the Government is
well placed to influence the development.

The total annual budget for the CIDB is estimated at approximately R11,5
million. The CIDB will be funded by the Department of Public Works from
within the MTEF budget allocation.

Finally, there is no doubt that the CIDB is a step in the right direction
to restore clear guidelines for the efficient functioning of the all-
important construction industry in the Republic of South Africa.
[Applause.]

Dr P J C NEL: Mnr die Voorsitter, heel aan die begin wil ek graag my dank
uitspreek teenoor die amptenare van die Departement van Openbare Werke vir
die bekwame wyse waarop hulle hierdie wetsontwerp aan die lede van die
komitee en die gemeenskap bekendgestel het.

[Dr P J C NEL: Mr Chairperson, right at the outset I would like to express
my gratitude to the officials of the Department of Public Works for the
skilful way in which they introduced this Bill to the members of the
committee and the community.]

This is an important piece of legislation because effective, well-
maintained infrastructure forms the very basic foundation for providing an
acceptable quality of life for all and sustainable growth in a successful
country.

As the hon the Minister has already mentioned, the construction industry
plays a pivotal role in this respect. Since the mid-1980s, South Africa has
experienced a constant decline in the construction industry. The turnover
in most instances has more than halved and the industry lost more than 50%
of its employees.

In this regard I would like to quote from a submission made to the
committee by the SA Association of Consulting Engineers:


  There is no doubt that the construction industry is presently in crisis,
  and has been in a serious decline for a number of years, and if this
  country is to become a successful nation in the global sense, there is no
  doubt that a healthy and vital industry is a key factor in achieving this
  goal.

The construction industry is one of the most effective employment-creating
sectors in the economy. The four constituent members of the Construction
Industries Confederation alone represent more than 12Â 000 companies and
employ 330Â 000 people. This figure could, according to these people, be
doubled with the implementation of appropriate policies.

Currently South Africa has no recognised vehicle to drive the
implementation of a common strategy and to systematically promote the best
practice of public and private sector role-players in an integrated manner.

Hopefully the establishment of the Construction Industry Development Board
and the implementation of the board will facilitate the recovery of this
sector. The recovery of this sector can play an important role in making
South Africa an attractive investment destination for local and
international investment.

The members of the board need to be selected very carefully because the
expertise of the actual people on the board, particularly that of the CEO
and the chairperson, is of crucial importance and will determine its
efficiency and effectiveness.

The New NP supports the initiatives as spelled out in the Bill, since the
construction industry and the professions are under severe economic
pressure. Their problems need to be addressed without delay. We can only
hope and pray that the objectives and principles as set out in the Bill
will be achieved sooner rather than later. [Applause.]

Mr O G MADODA (North West): Chairperson, hon Minister, members, this Bill
is a timeous intervention in the long-standing problems of instability,
poor performance, slow and sometimes discordant transformation efforts and
a general situation of a lack of strategic direction in the construction
industry.

The very existence of this Bill expresses both an acknowledgement of and a
desire to solve these problems. This is the basis on which the North West
would like to support this Bill.

We believe that this Bill, as presented, will save the industry from a
situation of near collapse. It will create a stable, growing, sustainable
and viable national asset. Yet it is worth applauding the fact that the
Bill seeks to bring about more rapid transformation in the industry.

It is firmly rooted in the reconstruction and development agenda of our
country. In this respect, whatever new animal we have will contribute
substantially to our national economic development vision, empower the
emerging sector, create meaningful jobs, as well as add to the workforce
for a skilled, safe, healthy and environmentally sustainable country. These
are not easy objectives. They are a major challenge for the envisaged
board.

What we also find encouraging is the fact that the process, up to this
point, has taken every interest group on board, and not only that,
virtually every stakeholder is looking forward to the promulgation of this
Bill into law. With such a lot of goodwill, how could we fail?

Regarding co-ordination and participation, it is worth noting that this
will not be a national board of provinces on which provinces come as
provinces, as in the NCOP. It will be a national board empowered to co-
ordinate various state agencies, as well as spheres of government. To
strengthen this there shall be stakeholder forums created throughout
provinces.

However, we, as the North West, feel that much more attention will have to
be paid to the functional interface between the spheres of government.
Provinces and the local sphere run budgets of hundreds of millions of rand,
and daily take decisions on construction matters, and therefore, we are
worried that to reduce them to no more than stakeholders can create a
situation in which the board lacks both presence and influence where it
needs it most.

If our hope is the envisaged forums, perhaps a much clearer definition of
the status, role and functions of the so-called forums and their
relationship to these spheres of government, could assist in this regard.
Indeed, the objectives and functions of the board will have to be the
mandate of the provinces and the local sphere. If there is one area of our
operation in which we need co-operative means to achieve our objective, it
is here.

It is often argued that our inability to deliver, at times, is not due to
financial and budgetary impediments, which we all acknowledge, but due to
the performance and the capacity of the institutions that we have put in
place. If one looks at the noble intentions of this Bill, and the huge
responsibility it places on the envisaged board, one is bound to ask if the
board will have the necessary capacity, willpower and vigilance. This is
where much of the difference will be made. The continual review and
evaluation of the board will come in handy in this regard.

With a committed, dynamic and focused team, this Bill will yield the
results that we expect. We believe that the board will consist of people of
impeccable qualities who will not be consumed by the culture of corruption.

In conclusion, the North West wishes to congratulate all who were involved
in the production of this Bill. We especially congratulate the Ministry on
this vision. We support the Bill and will work to see its objectives
succeed. [Applause.]

Mr M V NGEMA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Minister, officials of the
Department of Public Works, and fellow delegates, thank you for the
opportunity to make the following comments in this debate which will go
down in the history of the NCOP as pioneering work.

We highly appreciate the spirit of co-operation which prevailed among the
NCOP delegates in the process of negotiations with the department. Our
province, KwaZulu-Natal, proposed 13 amendments to the Bill. Two of these
were improved upon during the negotiations, one was explained to our
satisfaction, and 10 formed part of the improvements that the hon the
Minister thanked the NCOP for contributing. We also appreciate the
willingness, on the part of the department, to look into the contributions
from provinces with a positive attitude.

The pioneering nature of the Bill lies not only in the fact that it ushers
in a new era in the history of the construction industry, but also in the
fact that this is the first Bill from this committee, that I am aware of,
in the history of our democratic Parliament and the NCOP, that was
introduced in the NCOP before it went to the National Assembly.

We in KwaZulu-Natal will always support innovation and pioneering, because
we take these characteristics as signs of progressive individuals,
societies and institutions. It is true that innovation comes with teething
problems, resulting from the venturing into unknown terrain by those who
dare introduce new ideas.

Similarly, the introduction of this Bill in the NCOP presented us, as
provinces, with a number of problems. One is that we did not have
sufficient time to canvass public opinion, as the Constitution of the
country entitles us to do. Certain procedural problems were encountered.
For instance, two of the provinces had to request an extension of time to
enable their committees to meet the deadlines imposed by the NCOP
programme. If provinces are to give the best of their support to the NCOP,
the NCOP programme should empower them to do so.

These challenges, however, should not prevent us from constantly looking
for new ways of improving our work, and should motivate us to look
positively for solutions so that with these new ideas higher levels of
efficiency can be achieved. This is in the idiom of the late Nkosi Albert
Luthuli who warned black people in the cause of their struggle to, ``let
their courage rise with danger.''

New ways and innovations should not be allowed to undermine the overall
objective of our parliamentary system, as set out in the Constitution. We
hope that the hon the Minister will find ways of improving on the omissions
experienced in the process by, for example, allowing the board to have
provincial structures which will make its benefits more accessible to the
poorest actors within the construction industry.

The North West has made a similar plea. We are looking forward to all the
positive benefits for the nation that are contained in the Bill. We are
happy to support the Bill as amended. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Thank you.
From the Chair I can confirm that an application for an extension of time
was indeed received, and it was granted. I just want to place on record
that we did receive such a request and that we did grant an extension.

Mnr J P GELDERBLOM (Wes-Kaap): Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil ook net heel aan
die begin sÃª, namens die Wes-Kaap wil ons die amptenare, wat 'n voorlegging
aan die staande komitee kom doen het, baie hartlik bedank. Baie van die
bekommernisse wat ons gehad het, is tydens sodanige sessie opgeklaar.

Die konstruksiebedryf is en bly vir die inwoners van die Wes-Kaap van
kardinale belang. Die rede hiervoor is dat die konstruksiebedryf in die Wes-
Kaap 'n belangrike bron van werkskepping vir ons mense is. Die Wes-Kaap
ervaar oor die afgelope paar jaar 'n redelike goeie tyd in die
konstruksiebedryf. As ons dink dat ons 'n 17%-werkloosheidsyfer het in
vergelyking met ander dele van die land waar dit 34% is, is ons redelik
dankbaar, alhoewel die situasie nog nie na wense is nie en ons graag
verdere groei in die ekonomie sal wil bespeur.

Veral noudat die voorkeurverkrygingsmodel in werking getree het, is dit
baie duidelik dat die voorheen benadeelde gedeeltes van ons bevolking reeds
baie voordeel trek uit die konstruksiebedryf. Baie belangrik vir die Wes-
Kaap is dat die puntestelsel nou sÃ³ gestruktureer is dat voorheen
benadeelde kontrakteurs, en veral vroue, bo en behalwe vir prys alleen, ook
addisionele punte kry. Daaroor is ons diep dankbaar.

Dit is interessant, en ek wil dit hier laat boekstaaf, dat in die Provinsie
Wes-Kaap se werkedepartement alle kontrakte van onder R2 miljoen nou
toegeken word aan sogenaamde regstellende sake-entrepreneurs en voorheen
persoonlik-benadeelde individue.

By die eerste tertafellegging van hierdie wetsontwerp was daar sekere vrae.
Ons het gewonder of dit nie alweer net wetgewing is wat sentralisties
ingestel is nie. Aanvanklik was ons vermoede dat ons hier miskien weer te
doen het met sentralisering. Kortom, ons was bekommerd dat dit ook die
outonomiteit van die provinsie sou aantas. 'n Verdere bekommernis was dat
die nasionale Minister en die te stigte raad ingevolge hierdie wetgewing
magte bekom wat hulle toelaat om openbare sektorkontrakte na eie goeddunke
goed te keur en toe te ken.

Die positiewe is egter, en dit wil ons aan die Minister oordra, dat wanneer
'n mens tussen die reÃ«ls lees en deeglik na die wetsontwerp kyk, kom jy
agter dat hierdie wetgewing dit ten doel het om die proses te koÃ¶rdineer en
die konstruksiebedryf uit te bou en te bevorder. Voorgenoemde is vir ons
belangrik, want beproefde ondervinding en finansiÃ«le vermoÃ« is vir ons
belangrik vir voornemende kliÃ«nte. Die Wes-Kaap is van mening dat beproefde
ondervinding en finansiÃ«le vermoÃ« baie belangrik en 'n edele doel is.

Wat die raad betref wat ingestel gaan word, is dit vir ons belangrik dat
daar geografiese verteenwoordiging moet wees, soos ook vroeÃ«r hier deur 'n
kollega van die DP genoem is. Sodanige byhou van die beoogde register sal
ook verseker dat kontrakteurs wat oor bewese ondervinding en finansiÃ«le
vermoÃ« beskik op ordelike wyse geregistreer sal word. Die Wes-Kaap steun
hierdie wetsontwerp.

Ons is van mening dat hierdie wetgewing tot voordeel van almal in die Wes-
Kaapse sal wees, dat dit in 'n groot mate die konstruksiebedryf sal orden
en dat dit daarop gemik is om bestaande geleenthede te konsolideer in 'n
enkele wet. Sodoende het dit dan ook ten doel om pertinente nasionale
standaarde in die bedryf te vestig. Ons is van mening dat die steun wat ons
hieraan verleen verder sal lei tot ekonomiese groei en die uitbou van die
ordening van hierdie bedryf. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J P GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): Mr Chairman, I would like, at the very
outset, to convey on behalf of the Western Cape a heartfelt word of thanks
to the officials who made a presentation to the standing committee. Many of
our concerns were resolved during that session.

The construction industry is and remains of cardinal importance to the
inhabitants of the Western Cape. The reason for this is that in the Western
Cape the construction industry is an important source of job creation for
our people. The construction industry in the Western Cape has been having a
reasonably good time in the past few years. When we think that we have a
17% unemployment figure in comparison with 34% in other parts of the
country we are fairly grateful, although the situation is not as one would
wish and we would like to see further growth in the economy.

Especially now that the preferential procurement model has come into
operation it is very clear that the previously disadvantaged sections of
our population are already benefiting greatly from the construction
industry. What is very important to the Western Cape is that the points
system has now been structured in such a way that previously disadvantaged
contractors, and especially women, also receive additional points over and
above price. We are deeply grateful for that.

It is interesting, and I want to put this on record here, that the
contracts of less than R2 million of the works department of the Western
Cape Province are now allocated to so-called affirmative business
entrepreneurs and previously personally disadvantaged individuals.

At the first tabling of this Bill there were certain questions. We wondered
whether this was just once again legislation that was centrally motivated.
Initially our surmise was that perhaps we were dealing with centralisation.
Briefly, we were concerned that it would also affect the autonomy of the
province. A further concern was that the national Minister and the proposed
council would, in terms of this legislation, acquire powers that would
allow them to approve and allocate public sector contracts as they
individually see fit.

What is positive, however, and we want to convey this to the Minister, is
that when one reads between the lines and takes an in-depth look at the
Bill, one realises that the objective of this legislation is to co-ordinate
the process and to expand and promote the construction industry. The
aforementioned is important to us, because proven experience and financial
capability is important to us as far as prospective clients are concerned.
The Western Cape is of the view that proven experience and financial
capability are very important and noble objectives.
Concerning the council that is going to be put into operation, it is
important to us that there should be geographical representation, as has
been mentioned here earlier by a colleague of the DP. Such updating of the
envisaged register will also ensure that contractors who have proven
experience and financial capability will be registered in an orderly
manner. The Western Cape supports this Bill.

We are of the view that this legislation would be to the benefit of
everyone in the Western Cape, that it would order the construction industry
to a large degree and that it is aimed at consolidating existing
opportunities in a single Act. In so doing it also has as objective to
establish pertinent national standards in the industry. We believe that the
support we lend to this will lead to further economic growth and the
expansion of order in this industry.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Chairperson, the UDM supports this Bill primarily because
this statutory body at national level in the form of a juristic person will
exercise an oversight function with regard to the co-ordination of all
construction industry activities throughout the country.
The balanced nature of the board's composition, which takes into account
gender, race and geographical composition, will ensure an element of
inclusivity. This exercise will undoubtedly enhance consistency and
maintenance of standards, and create a platform for the exchange of ideas.

Clause 13 provides for the board to establish a construction industry
stakeholders' forum, to keep the board abreast of matters that affect the
construction industry. This input is commended because a pool of expertise,
such as civil engineers, surveyors and draughtsmen will, for the first
time, be afforded the opportunity to share expert knowledge with one
another. Medical practitioners have been practising this approach.
Extensive discussions are held, in which an exchange of expert knowledge
takes place, before they undertake major operations in theatre. After all,
unity is strength and divided we fall.

Clause 14 of the Bill calls for the reviewing of the board's activities
every five years - which I think is rather too long - by an evaluating team
that will comprise members of the public and private sectors. This is one
away, amongst others, of ensuring that the findings are free from bias -
that they are objective, reliable and valid.

Members will recall that lives were lost in Mpumalanga, near Bushbuckridge,
during the construction of the Nwaretje bridge on the road to Graskop. This
Bill is aimed, among other things, at preventing accidents of that nature.

Lastly, the UDM commends the provisions of this Bill when it comes to the
daunting problem of unemployment we encounter in this country, particularly
in the Northern Province. The establishment of the office of the registrar
of contractors means that a number of people will be employed to serve as
complementary staff or personnel. The same applies to the board itself. My
congratulations go to those fortunate enough to secure these posts.

Let me conclude by congratulating in anticipation those that will serve on
the board, the stakeholders' forum and the review committee, and wish them
good luck. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon member K D
S Durr, I see you have been given an extra minute. You now have three
minutes.
Mr K D S DURR: I thank the Whip for his generosity, Mr Chairman.

Chairperson, I do hope that the high hopes which the Minister has indicated
to us here in her opening speech will be realised. It is absolutely vital
for all of us that that should be. We have many statutory bodies, informal
associations and professional bodies operating in this field already, and I
do hope that we do not create further duplication with double or multiple
jurisdiction. We have common cause that it is vital for us to free our
construction industry to play its locomotive role in our society.

So much was said by the Minister about tourism. People always talk about
tourism and the jobs it creates. Well, the construction industry is just as
vital and just as promising, or more promising, an industry. It has a
multiplier effect on the economy; it is labour-intensive; it does not
generate imports or put a strain on the balance of payments; profits got
are not transfer-priced out of the country; and raw materials are home-
grown. The industry is ready, willing and able to deliver.

It is depressing to think that in a country such as ours, with our pressing
housing problems, with our Rolls-Royce construction industry, large numbers
of budgeted funds still go unspent, leaving people unhoused.

We in the Western Cape are one of only two provinces that have spent their
entire housing budget. Other provinces have underspent by R400Â million, in
spite of the massive housing backlogs, and yet our building industry in the
Cape faces further serious budgetary cuts. This year we were cut, and we
will be cut again to R238 million in the year 2004.

The fact is that the greatest single asset that any nation has is its built
environment: the existing stock of houses, the existing stock of public
buildings, schools and hospitals, the existing roads and the existing
physical infrastructure.

Also here we are falling behind. It will be a challenge to the board to see
what we can do to meet these massive shortfalls for maintenance -
maintenance that will become far more expensive later if we leave it too
long. I can say to the Minister that we in the Western Cape also feel the
impact of the fact that new housing starts in South Africa generally are
25% down on a year ago, and in the Western Cape we now have the worst
situation since World War II, so for us it is a serious situation indeed.

Therefore, we support the measure. We support this effort on the Minister's
part to try and arrest the situation and focus everybody on a common goal,
hopefully a common national goal, with all of the elements of our society
working together to the greater good, providing not only housing, but the
whole plethora of what constitutes the built environment.

With that, we support the Bill and we wish the Minister well. We hope she
will choose wisely and that she will choose people who will not only come
here to represent their disciplines and be spokesmen for their interest
groups, but also share her vision. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms B THOMSON: Chairperson, hon Minister, special delegates and hon members,
as legislators we carry an enormous burden on our shoulders. We have a duty
to ensure that all laws that pass through Parliament fundamentally
transform the quality of life of all South Africans. The Construction
Industry Development Board Bill being dealt with today is no different.

The economic struggle in South Africa is a challenging one. Enormous
challenges confront the Department of Public Works in this regard. Poverty
is rife and the progress of emerging contractors remains static. It is in
this context that we see the formation of the Construction Industry
Development Board. The board seeks to address the inadequacies of the
current construction industry as envisaged in the White Paper on Creating
an Enabling Environment for Reconstruction, Growth and Development in the
Construction Industry.

Though the task ahead is enormous and huge, the Department of Public Works
will have to tackle the bull by the horns. On the one hand we have big
wealthy construction industries, whilst on the other hand there are poor,
struggling, emerging black contractors. Within our communities there is a
proportion of contractors who are promising in the construction industry,
but have not been given the opportunity. The opportunity now arises; it is
none other than the CIDB. The CIDB is to function as a permanent vehicle to
drive the strategy in partnership with all government delivery agencies and
the private sector.

The construction industry is part of the backbone of our economy. The hon
Minister Sigcau refers to it as a national asset. The board will attempt to
take emerging contractors on board as these have experienced numerous
historical and economic constraints, that have hindered the full
participation of smaller companies in the economy. The White Paper on
Creating an Enabling Environment for Reconstruction, Growth and Development
in the Construction Industry states that -


  Government believes that emerging construction-related SMEs can
  contribute significantly to the realisation of key economic and
  redistribution objectives for a number of reasons.


  They can be powerful generators of income and employment opportunities
  since they generally use less capital investment per unit of output than
  larger enterprises.


  SMEs can be more competitive than larger firms on certain types of small,
  disparate and geographically dispersed projects because they generally
  have relatively lower overheads.


  The relatively low entry barriers in terms of skills and capital
  requirements make SME contracting an important entry point for
  historically disadvantaged person into the construction industry.

Lastly, the ANC supports the initiative of the department as this may go a
long way in easing labour unrest in the construction industry. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! It would
appear that the bull is becoming popular in this House. Maybe I need to ask
the hon the Minister to respond.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, first of all I would like to
thank the hon members for their support for the Bill, and also for pointing
out those areas in which they want us to be extra vigilant. It was
interesting to note that some  amakhosi can still wax lyrical. The first
speaker was really good, and it reminded me of the days when I was part of
Contralesa. [Laughter.]
I want to assure this House that, as Public Works, we actually want to
ensure that the construction industry does become regarded as one of the
assets of Government. We also want to believe that it is the type of
industry that, if well organised, will be able, as much as any other
industry within Government,  to form relationships and ties even across our
borders, if it is well managed. I do want to believe that the board that we
are talking about today is something that, as members have also
acknowledged, could be just the right institution to make sure that the
aspirations of the people within the industry are met.

I want to assure members that in the choice of whoever serves on the board,
some of their concerns will have to be addressed. The very fact that we
have said that it is going to be geographic shows clearly that we are
mindful of the fact that there are provinces out there and that the people
have got their own aspirations. We are also putting the whole issue of
ethics at the forefront. We want to believe that if there is no code of
conduct, if people are not registered, the issues around accountability
become very difficult.

In the year that I have been in Public Works, one of the disturbing
features has been the manner in which at times, as Government, we are taken
for a ride, in the sense that one gets a contractor quoting how much will
be spent on a particular job, but, when one actually looks at the product,
which might have been passed as the right product by officials from our
department, one just says to oneself, ``Goodness me! Only a quarter of what
was budgeted has been used on this.'' Hence one gets sad stories like that
of the classroom which fell on children. Hence one gets stories like those
about what I sometimes fondly call ``winter roads'', which get washed away
in summer.

I do want to believe that this will be part of what this board has to be
vigilant about, so that we really maintain good standards. If this industry
is to be an industry to be reckoned with, if it is to be highly
competitive, it really has to uphold the highest standards.

I must say to hon members that I have been whispering in corridors and in
my office that we have to blacklist some of the people who really give us
shoddy work. Someone said there was a mushrooming of the number of
contractors, and I have noticed that, especially when I deal with the
Community-Based Public Works Programme. One just wonders. One day a group
of young people - I happen to know one of them - came into my office.  They
were coming straight from their Std 10 classroom and told me that they were
already forming a consortium. I just could not believe what was not
happening.

When I asked who was backing them, I discovered that there was not so much
by way of backing as they already had a contract to build a road. My
question to them was: Who, at that committee, deals with tenders? So one of
the things we are paying particular attention to is the whole issue of
capacity-building, because it is highly critical. The area in which people
believe that Government has not delivered is always around issues to do
with capacity-building.

It is important and pleasing that Government is putting the whole issue of
human resource development at the forefront. Members might not have
noticed, but there is a lot of work going on in the partnership that Public
Works now has with the Department of Labour in ensuring that there is some
kind of training so that we end up showing areas of excellence, because
this is an industry we are proud of.

The issue of maintenance was also mentioned. One of the downfalls and one
of the areas in which we find ourselves having to pay the price of neglect
is over some of the Government buildings that we have. Hence, as a
department, we were happy when Cabinet agreed that with every new building
that we put up in future we must, right from the outset, set aside 1,3% to
see to the future maintenance of that particular building.

I thank the hon members, and I think the manner in which they have handled
this Bill really makes me feel encouraged that the step we have taken as
Public Works is appreciated, and if there is such encouragement, we dare
not fail. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   NATIONAL HEALTH LABORATORY SERVICE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon members,
you are alerted to the fact that there is a printing error in the Bill's
number on the Order Paper, the second B having been omitted. The Secretary
has corrected it by referring to the Bill as B52B. I would like members to
take note of that. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the hon
the Minister of Health and call upon her to address this House.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, hon members, I am indeed delighted
that the second reading debate on the National Health Laboratory Service
Bill heralds the final stage of a long process in the restructuring of
laboratory services in South Africa.

Members will recall that in 1994 my predecessor, Dr Nkosazana Zuma,
established several committees which were to advise her on how to
restructure the health services. Many of these committees laid the
foundations for the present health services, which are designed to improve
access to quality health services.

Among the committees which were established was a committee on the
restructuring of health laboratory services which was chaired by Prof Jan
van den Ende. This committee noted that public health laboratory services
were fragmented, partly due to the historical policy of separate
development. Laboratory services were often duplicated in urban areas and
lack of co-ordination resulted in wastage of resources. Many laboratories
were involved in research which had no direct impact on improving service
delivery. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I am sorry to
interrupt you, hon Minister. I think the information on the screen is
misleading, and if the screen is not functioning properly I ask that it be
switched off. Thank you. Continue, hon Minister. You were being referred to
as Tshivhase.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: No, I am Dr Tshabalala-Msimang. [Laughter.]

This was not the beginning of the debate on the restructuring of laboratory
services. This need was identified even by the old regime as early as 1973.
The then South African government established the Meiring-NaudÃ© commission
of inquiry into laboratory services. The commission of inquiry recommended
the establishment of a single nationally controlled and co-ordinated
laboratory service. It also recommended that laboratory research be better
co-ordinated to support the national health system. It is, however,
regrettable that the previous regime did not have the courage and political
will to implement the recommendations of the commission of inquiry,
because, frankly speaking, those recommendations are as relevant today as
they were 27 years ago.

After considering many options on the restructuring of laboratory services,
the Health Minmec opted for the establishment of a public entity as a
vehicle for amalgamating all health laboratory services under a single
umbrella. Thus, in 1998, the Ministry of Health established a task team on
the restructuring of laboratory services, chaired by Prof Kallichurum, to
advise Government on the implementation of these recommendations. The
Health Minmec accepted the report of Prof Kallichurum and appointed Dr
Nicholas Crisp as the project manager to implement the recommendations of
the task team.

There are approximately 6 000 health workers employed in public health
laboratory services in South Africa. They are mainly pathologists, medical
technologists and technicians, research scientists, professional nurses,
administration staff and general assistants.

The SA Institute for Medical Research was established in 1917 by the
government, in partnership with the Chamber of Mines, primarily to conduct
medical research into diseases which were common on the mines. This
institute now employs over 2 000 people and provides almost 50% of all
laboratory services in the public health sector, the rest being provided by
the provincially owned health laboratory services.

The Department of Health opened negotiations with the Chamber of Mines with
a view to integrating all laboratory services into a public entity. When
the Chamber of Mines withdrew unconditionally from the SA Institute for
Medical Research, as of 1 January 1999, this paved the way for the
comprehensive restructuring of all publicly owned laboratories into a new
public entity.

I would like to thank the Chamber of Mines for its commitment to medical
research, which they have demonstrated throughout the years through their
participation in the SA Institute for Medical Research as joint partners
with Government.

The intention of this Bill, therefore, is to establish a new national
health laboratory service to support the national health system. The new
organisation will be formed by disestablishing the SA Institute for Medical
Research, the National Institute for Virology, the National Centre for
Occupational Health and the forensic chemical laboratories, and
amalgamating these institutions with the provincial health laboratory
services under a new public entity. The aim of this entity will be to
provide integrated, co-ordinated, affordable, accessible and equitable
health laboratory services, primarily to the public health sector.

This consolidation of health care resources will promote the harmonisation
of laboratories, standards and quality assurance, efficiency, cost-
effectiveness and the rational use of resources, amongst other things,
through benefits from economies of scale. It will also promote access to
new and appropriate technologies.

South Africa also has a firm academic background of research and
development to improve service delivery. An important component of the
National Health Laboratory Service will be the possible creation within it
of a national institute for communicable diseases, which will be formed
from the National Institute for Virology together with the public health
microbiology laboratory at the SA Institute for Medical Research and an
epidemiology unit.

This new institute will play a crucial role in the surveillance of
communicable diseases not only for South Africa, but also for the SADC
region. The National Institute for Virology, which came into being in April
1976 when the laboratories of the Poliomyelitis Research Foundation were
transferred to the Department of Health, currently serves as the national
reference laboratory for South Africa and the region for viral diseases of
medical importance. The institute is also a World Health Organisation
reference laboratory for viral haemorrhagic fevers and for vaccine-
preventable viral diseases such as poliomyelitis. Scientists from the
institute have played a key role in diagnosing and assisting in the control
of viral haemorrhagic fevers in Africa and the Middle East.

The institute is also a key laboratory in the global network of the WHO
involved in the global polio eradication campaign. It carries out research
in support of the South African Aids vaccine initiative, popularly known as
SAAVI, which many hon members may have read about after the press briefing
by the president of the Medical Research Council yesterday. May I add that
we fully support this initiative and that we have contributed large amounts
of resources for the work they do.

I am outlining all these details for everyone to appreciate that what we
are doing is to consolidate these national scientific resources to enhance
South Africa's competitive advantage and to harness scientific expertise in
support of our health system and of the region.

It is therefore my vision that, through the National Health Laboratory
Service, we will establish a truly competent organisation to support
Government in its efforts to provide quality care to its citizens. Through
this organisation we will be able to monitor new and re-emerging diseases
through a robust and integrated national disease surveillance system.

We should develop this organisation into a centre of excellence where we
will train our young scientists, especially those who come from
historically disadvantaged backgrounds, to take up their rightful place in
science. The aim is to raise others as we rise. The benefits of
amalgamating our health laboratory services will be felt throughout the
region. This Bill provides for the National Health Laboratory Service to
provide services beyond our borders. We will have a vehicle to harmonise
laboratory standards throughout the SADC region and support those
neighbours on the continent who do indeed need our support.

The National Health Laboratory Service also provides a mechanism for
harnessing the energy and resources of all the provinces, as the Health
Minmec will become the supreme policy-making body whose policies will be
implemented through a board. This will allow the National Health Laboratory
Service greater flexibility to manage the organisation on sound business
principles, whilst also attending to the values of access to quality and
equitable health care services.

The process of amalgamating the various laboratory services into a single
public entity is clearly spelled out in the Bill. Our Government is
committed to implementing progressive labour relations legislation to
ensure that the transition and transfer of personnel to the new public
entity will be as smooth as possible.

The Bill makes provision for proper transitional arrangements. We also
conducted an in-depth audit of all the assets which will be transferred to
the new entity in order to ensure that the transition will be as smooth as
possible. To avoid chaos in the implementation process, the Bill allows for
different dates for the commencement of different provisions of the Act.

I would like to thank the Select Committee on Social Services for carefully
considering this Bill. I was regularly informed by officials from my
department about progress in the discussions with the select committee and
was able to give guidance whenever needed. I have studied some of the
submissions from the various provinces and stakeholders. The level of
debate and comments which were reflected in those submissions did indeed
impress me. I am sure that many members were almost becoming experts on
many technical matters relating to laboratory medicine.

In a special way I would like to thank the chairperson of the select
committee and her staff for piloting the Bill up to this stage. I sincerely
hope that the NCOP will pass the Bill and refer it to the portfolio
committee in the National Assembly for its perusal and ratification. This
is an important piece of legislation. It is one of the final pillars of the
transformation of service delivery in our country. I am sure that everyone
will agree that, in the light of dwindling resources for basic services, we
need to consolidate our basic health care resources to ensure better co-
ordination, efficiency and effectiveness, and this is the primary objective
of this Bill. [Applause.]

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, hon Minister, special delegates and members, the
National Health Laboratory Service Bill before us today, as the Minister
has already indicated, represents the culmination of a long process of
discussions and consultations which started as early as 1998, and is
another step towards the transformation of the health sector.

The purpose of this Bill, as stated in its preamble, is, firstly, the
establishment of a single national public entity that will provide
laboratory services in the country; secondly, the restructuring and
transformation of the public health sector laboratory services; and
thirdly, the development of policies that will enable this entity to
provide health laboratory services as the preferred service provider for
the public health sector.

Government's programme of transforming the state demands that we develop
efficient, user-friendly and accountable governance structures, recognise
the Public Service to more effectively meet the priorities of social
delivery, and support the ongoing transformation of public institutions to
ensure that their resources and skills contribute to accelerated change.

State-owned laboratories, dotted all over the country and duplicating
services, definitely did not live up to the objectives outlined above.
Rather, the practice currently in place lends itself to huge amounts of
wastage and poor management of both financial and human resources.

It is commonly believed that the so-called urban provinces have generally
better access to specialised services. Gauteng has 57 laboratories, 23 of
which are state-owned, whereas the Northern Cape has zero state
laboratories and only three belonging to the SAIMR. The statistics confirm
that state-owned laboratories, especially in rural areas, are inequitably
spread across the nine provinces. The Bill before us is intended to redress
this inequity. The Bill is also intended to ensure that the norms and
standards are maintained across all laboratories in the country.

It is recognised that the amalgamation of the various laboratory services
into a single parastatal unit will be a complex one, and will present many
challenges to those participating in the process. Some of these challenges
and concerns articulated through our provinces are concerns about job
security, redeployment or transfers, future relations between unions and
employers in the new entity, and so on.

These insecurities are very valid and understandable, particularly when a
number of organisations or bodies are merged into one. What we always have
to keep in mind are the principles that underpin any human resource
transition process. Regarding the first principle - professionalism, we
should always ensure that staff of a national parastatal consist of persons
of the highest professional standard and competency to ensure quality
service delivery.
The second is accountability. Each and every new employee within this new
entity should be made aware of their responsibility to both the state and
the public, as the ultimate beneficiary of the services. Thirdly, there
should be transparency. If decisions are taken without proper consultation,
the fears and concerns that I mentioned earlier will continually arise, and
the provision of a secure and professional environment will not be
realised.

Fourthly, this process should be inclusive. It is important that all
persons and groupings that will be affected by this process are properly
consulted on issues that will affect them.

It is evident, throughout the Bill before us today, that these principles
will be, and would continue to be, adhered to. Over a period of time
workshops were held with all stakeholders in eight of the nine provinces,
and there were four common positive outcomes identified that will arise out
of this amalgamation process.

Firstly, there would be a better service to clients; secondly, there would
be standardisation, or a common management structure; thirdly, there would
be improved access to career opportunities and training, and lastly, there
would be standardised benefits and conditions of employment, amongst other
things.

By highlighting these positives, I am by no means diminishing or negating
the serious concerns articulated around possible retrenchments and
transfers that I mentioned earlier on. These are concerns that were not
only raised by the current employees and their various representatives, but
also by the respective provinces, as the Minister pointed out. After
intense engagement around this matter, we were assured by the department,
and the leader of the task team, that these concerns were given serious
consideration, that job losses, if these were to occur at all, would be
very minimal, and that alternatives, such as reskilling and retraining,
were being considered. This is one of the matters that is currently on the
table of the Interim Negotiating Forum for discussion.

Some of the significant amendments that we agreed upon will be elaborated
upon by my colleagues who will speak after me, and some of these have
already been touched on by the hon the Minister. I must say that we were
all of one mind that this Bill, with the amendments as proposed, goes a
long way in the creation of quality service delivery and in making
accessible a highly specialised service to not only our fellow South
Africans in the most remote areas of our country, but also to the Southern
African region, and indeed the continent.

In concluding, I want to also thank the Minister and her department for
assisting us throughout the Bill. It was definitely a painstaking exercise
that we went through. I also want to thank the task team that was with us
throughout the process, and the members of the committee and their
respective provinces.

In conclusion, I want to present the committee report, as tabled in the
ATC, for adoption by this House. I must add that all provinces but one, the
Western Cape, voted in favour of the Bill as amended: B52-2000. [Applause.]


Mr T MHLAHLO (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, hon members, recognising that Act
108 of 1996 provides for the right to health care services and requires the
state to take legislative and other measures to achieve the progressive
realisation of that right, this Bill then is clearly a step towards meeting
that basic requirement, and, further, shows determination by Government and
the Minister of Health to ensure that it is adhered to.

We believe, as a province, that this Bill is a step in the right direction
as it further seeks to provide for the establishment of professional
boards, and to facilitate accountability and democratisation of the
council. This is quite an important piece of legislation that the nation
enjoys. It can be associated with the transformation process of the
laboratory services sector. In fact, the Bill purports to unify laboratory
services in the country, and it also constitutes part of the
rationalisation process of integrating former TBVC states' laboratory
services.

As the province of the Eastern Cape, we were honoured to be part of the
process involved in considering this piece of legislation, and we have done
that successfully.

We wish to thank key stakeholders in our province for their input when
developing our views around this piece of legislation. Whilst we, as a
province, are faced with many challenges with reference to health care
facilities, it is noted that the main objectives of this Bill outline
positive solutions which will be implemented to combat the challenges we
confront today.

We further note, and welcome, the inclusive nature of the council.
Stakeholders will be part of the process of decision-making and direct the
processes of this new council. The labour movement in this country has also
been reflected in the proposed Bill, in that it will be part of the
decision-making process, and we welcome that.

The health sector is the most critical area which we need to give priority
into this country, as it seeks to establish academic standards and criteria
for registration, and the right to practice in the profession. We want to
congratulate the Minister and the Government on taking that direction. The
South African community will participate in the council, and this
development represent the realisation of our constitutional mandate as a
province.

We salute the Minister of Health for the role she plays towards the
realisation of this health need in our country. We also note the fact that
currently South Africa, particularly its health sector, is confronting
critical challenges, and we believe, as a province, that we need to provide
the necessary support so that we can realise our basic interventions in the
life of the country.

We also, in conclusion, want to accept the intervention in order to make
sure that there are no duplications of services in South Africa. We have
experienced this kind of exercise, precisely because we were constituted by
two former homelands, and the Cape provincial administration, which
provided these services separately. We also wish to make sure that we
cannot proceed alone in isolation from Africa.

We note the fact that this service will not only provide for South African
citizens, but will be a service for the entire region. We believe this is
within the context of realisation of the African renaissance as a
Government programme. Therefore, we believe, this Bill is very progressive
and we support it as a province. [Applause.]

Ms S N NTLABATI: Chairperson, for many years we searched for a solution in
order to unite the fragmented services of our laboratories. We did that
because we had promised people a better life, and a better life for all,
now. We had promised our people accessibility to services now, not
tomorrow.

This Bill shows that the transformation agenda is on track, that it is on
course. Transformation never makes for popular talk. Why? Because it mostly
brings fears and uncertainties, and has done so, even during the years of
discussion about this Bill.

The Free State supports this Bill. We support it because it is going to be
cost-effective. It is going to integrate fragmented services.

Just to give hon members a picture of how things were in the Free State,
all the hospitals and clinics in the eastern and northern Free State were
using the SA Institute for Medical Research, while other services in the
southern Free State, in the same province and the same department, were
using provincial laboratories. Also, in the big municipalities such as
Bloemfontein, they had their small laboratories. This is how fragmented the
service was.

I am happy to say that in the Free State all stakeholders were involved,
for quite a long time, in trying to alleviate this uncertainty. Hence I am
pleading with the Minister for speedy implementation to allay these fears.
Yes, we never promised that there would not be one or two who might fall by
the wayside, but we said that almost everybody would be accommodated.

My other plea to the Minister is for her please to assist the institutions
of higher training in recruiting students, black female students in
particular, in the fields of technology, medical technology and
haematology, with the aim of creating gender balance. In reality this field
is still dominated by males.

My other plea to the Minister and the department relates to the field of
epidemiology. One has to be a doctor in order to be able to study
epidemiology. We do not dispute that. But because we are talking
transformation and are talking about empowering people, it is possible for
other sectors in the health field to be taught extensively about
epidemiology without lowering any standards.

I congratulate the Minister and the department on the good work done so
far. [Applause.]

Mrs T E MILLIN (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon members of this House, at
the outset may I state that the IFP and KwaZulu-Natal support the Bill in
question, bearing in mind the letter and spirit of co-operative governance.

We in KwaZulu-Natal have a unique situation, a government of coalition.
Whereas our respective parties do share some similarities, chief of which
might be that we both derive a considerable majority of our support from a
large black power base, as well as some common aims and objectives with
regard to uplifting, empowering and enriching that hitherto oppressed
majority, the IFP and KwaZulu-Natal, in coalition with the ANC, and in the
GNU at national level, is nevertheless a party with its own policies and
goals, by which we seek to facilitate, uplift and empower our oppressed
people. This we do by assisting people to help themselves to succeed, while
facilitating an enabling environment for an investor-friendly, yet
equitable labour market, conducive to a sophisticated, market-driven, free-
enterprise economy, by decentralising, by privatising wherever practicable
and by devolving maximum powers to the lower levels of government.

Thus, in view of the above, some concerns are noted with regard to the
nationalising and centralising of the various institutions in terms of this
Bill, particularly at a time when our Government has extensively embarked
on a programme of privatisation. Similar moves to centralise continue apace
in other spheres of Government policy.

Concerns have also been expressed by my party and others in KwaZulu-Natal,
as well as other provincial members in the ruling party and national
Government during the NCOP process, regarding the frenetic rate at which
some Bills, such as the one before us, are being fast-tracked through the
NCOP. The term ``fast-track'' derives primarily from railway transport,
whereby various stations on route are eliminated to speed up passage from
point A to point Z. In applying that principle to the fast-tracking of
Bills, one could contend that a bypassing or curtailment of the democratic
consultative process, as a consequence of fast-tracking, might well lead,
in the likely event of this Bill becoming law once passed in the National
Assembly, to certain constitutional challenges and concomitant amendments.
Labour legislation is a current case in point.

May one ask whether or why it is necessary to centralise under one umbrella
the bodies contemplated in this Bill? Is this not a case of attempting to
fix something that ain't broke in the first place? And, do the unions not
have valid concerns, in that many unionised workers would be retrenched
when too many jobs are already being shed?

The time does not permit further comment, save to say that notwithstanding
the concerns raised on behalf of my party, the majority coalition partner
in KwaZulu-Natal, as stated earlier, in a spirit of co-operative
governance, we give our support herewith to the Bill before this House.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs L JOHNSON (KwaZulu-Natal): Madam Chair, thank you for affording me the
opportunity to participate in this debate. KwaZulu-Natal welcomes and
supports the National Health Laboratory Service Bill as amended. I want to
place on record that as we were deliberating on this Bill in our portfolio
committee we never had serious concerns. We went through the Bill until it
came to the NCOP and we were briefed on the Bill.

I would like to quote section 27 of our Constitution:
  (1) Everyone has the right to have access to -


       (a)  health care services, including reproductive health care;
       (b)  sufficient food and water; and
       (c)  social security, including, if they are unable to support
           themselves and their dependants, appropriate social assistance.


  (2) The state must take reasonable legislative and other measures, within
       its available resources, to achieve the progressive realisation of
       each of these rights.

We come from a history of fragmentation, duplication and maldistribution of
health services in this country, which were not accessible to the majority
of our people, in particular those residing in rural areas. The National
Health Laboratory Service Bill seeks to establish a single, national public
entity to provide public health laboratory services in the country. The
object of the service, among others, is to provide cost-effective and
efficient health laboratory services to all public-sector health care
providers.

The Bill will ensure that laboratory services are not urban-biased, but can
be made available to rural areas as well. As was mentioned earlier by
speakers before me, there are other provinces that do not have the service,
and we hope that the provinces will, for the first time, have access to the
laboratory services.

The Bill will also empower the Minister to accelerate the restructuring and
transformation of the public health sector laboratory services in order to
make them part of a single, national public entity.

We also appreciate the work done over the years by the SA Institute for
Medical Research, the National Institute for Virology, the National Centre
for Occupational Health and all provincial health laboratory services that
have been providing this service.

Once more, we wish to congratulate the department and the Minister on
bringing this Bill before us, and we are looking forward to its addressing
the inequalities of the past. [Applause.]

Mr J HORNE: Chairperson, hon Minister, special delegates and members of
this House, the Northern Cape is now fully aware of the huge task which the
Minister, her Department of Health and provincial MECs set themselves when
they embarked on the process to establish the National Health Laboratory
Service in 1998. It is truly a mammoth task.

The proposed organogram which details the structures envisaged for this new
service is comprehensive and indicative of the hard work that is still
waiting for the service once this legislation is passed. This organogram
shows how the previous, historically fragmented service of the public
health laboratory service will be accommodated under one umbrella body.

We see this Bill as achieving the goal of merging the fragmented laboratory
service into a comprehensive service that will be cost-effective to the
Public Service sector, which is still the primary user of this service. We
also see this Bill as achieving the intention of providing co-ordinated and
efficient lab services in all the provinces. The Northern Cape is also
aware of the thorough consultation process undertaken by the department and
project task team. Part of this consultation was the communication of the
process of transformation for the new laboratory service to all provinces.

It became clear that in almost all provinces and in the various areas of
voluntary service there were overlapping areas of concern about this new
entity. Northern Cape employees were particularly concerned about
retrenchments, changing service conditions and salary structure,
redeployment and the future of lab technicians. The Northern Cape believes
that this Bill comprehensively addresses most of the concerns of the
various stakeholders. We are satisfied that our amendments, which  include
organised labour on the board of the National Health Laboratory Service and
in the transition phase, will assist in the process of transformation in
the laboratory service envisaged by this Bill.

We were also concerned that the functions, powers and duties of the service
would give way to unilateral decision-making, but we are convinced that the
amendment which instructs the service to exercise its responsibility in
accordance with the national health policy will ensure that these powers
are not ad hoc or for personal enrichment. We want to congratulate the
department and the task team on the sterling work they have put into
setting up such a complex entity as the National Health Laboratory Service
Bill. We in the Northern Cape have fully deliberated all aspects of this
Bill and we support the Bill with all its amendments. [Applause.]

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, transformation
has never been an easy process to undertake and successfully accomplish.
That fact notwithstanding, and no matter how slow, painful or complicated
the task may be, the continuation along the path of the improvement of the
delivery of services to the benefit of all the people of this country must
be sustained. The provision of cost-effective and efficient health services
is part of the Government's programme to realise that goal.

At this point one needs to point out that this particular Bill was not fast-
tracked, but rather has the distinction of having had two meetings for
dealing with initial negotiating mandates, after provinces were given an
extra week during which to further consider the Bill. The National Health
Laboratory Service Bill seeks to put in place enabling mechanisms and
processes for the purpose of realising the objective of creating a single
unified laboratory service out of the fragmented state and state-funded
laboratory services which exist at present, some as a result of historical
developments and past policies of separation.

It can be expected that restructuring the laboratory services will have
unavoidable casualties and opponents, just as in any other exercise.
However, in this process the positives outweigh the negatives because it
will result in an improved quality of service to clients, brought about by,
among other things, a centralised one-management structure at national
level. That will provide better co-ordination and an improvement in the
capacity to manage delivery.

The integration of the disadvantaged laboratory services will also benefit
provinces through, among other things, the standardisation of services
through national norms and standards, as well as improved financial
viability through better business practices that reduce the duplication of
services. Contrary to fears in some quarters, the one-management structure
that will result from the integration process will not disadvantage
provinces in any way. Instead the system will enhance, through the pooling
of resources and expertise, the provinces' ability to receive quality
service through the numerous branch areas that will be established, taking
into consideration provincial and regional boundaries, thereby establishing
service points where previously none existed. The Northern Province
supports the Bill as amended. [Applause.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, our laboratory services have
always been world-renowned. We have successfully won the battle against
polio through our comprehensive immunisation drive, spearheaded by the
efforts of our laboratories. In recent weeks, especially in those provinces
that were at the receiving end of the devastating floods earlier this year,
we have seen an increase in malaria cases. Through our laboratory services
we were once again able to establish that the DDT could be used to prevent
an outbreak of malaria by spraying the homes of people most at risk from
the malaria-carrying mosquitoes. I am talking about these two success
stories because I believe that our success can benefit not only South
Africa, but also our brothers and sisters in the region.

In the case of the polio vaccine, we are already sharing the fruits of our
expertise with our neighbours. This Bill, in terms of clause 16, allows us
formally and in a structured manner to render laboratory services to
foreign countries. South Africa this year ratified the protocol on health
in the Southern African Development Community. Almost all the articles of
this protocol refer to how we in the region can better co-operate with one
another to offer a full range of cost-effective and quality integrated
health services.

This Bill brings into sharp focus how, through our new National Health
Laboratory Service, we can assist ourselves and our neighbours in health
systems research and civilian communicable disease control, and also in the
control of HIV/Aids and sexually transmitted diseases, malaria and many
other diseases. This Bill allows us to share our technical skills with our
neighbours on the continent and throughout the world, and for them to share
their skills, so that together we can better combat the old and the new
diseases which confront our society every day.

The North West takes very seriously the responsibilities we have to the
rest of Africa. We believe, like our President, that Africa's time has come
to emerge from the scourge of disease that thas ravaged our continent for
far too long. We believe that this Bill will assist South Africa's
endeavours to make Africa disease-free. This newly structured National
Health Laboratory Service will provide us with the tools to assist us in
our own fight to overcome some of the worst diseases known to mankind. To a
large extent we have succeeded in the urban areas, but our rural areas need
an efficient lab service which will match the standards and quality of
those in the most sophisticated urban areas. We know that this Bill
provides the framework to bring about the standardisation and quality
control needed in our country. The North West therefore supports this Bill
with all its amendments, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I do not think the Constitution has
been changed, so I remain Chairperson of the NCOP. [Laughter.]

Mr E ISAACS (Western Province): Madam Chair, hon members, I thank you for
the opportunity to raise the Western Cape's concern and objections to this
National Health Laboratory Service Bill. The department of health in the
Western Cape has raised concerns around the establishment of the NHLS on
numerous occasions. We hope that after the Minister has heard our arguments
she will agree with us that the fast-tracking of this Bill will certainly
not be in the interests of the people it intends to serve.

We strongly object to the preferred provider status of the NHLS. One of the
main motivations of the creation of the NHLS outside the Public Service is
a rationalised, efficient and cost-effective service. The NHLS, as a
precondition for stimulating efficiency, must open itself to competition,
especially in terms of the tariffs it charges and the quality of service it
provides. The Western Cape objects to clause 15(1) in terms of which public
health sector providers are bound to purchasing their laboratory services
from the NHLS. Surely, the word ``must'' should be substituted by the word
``may''.

Regarding provisional management autonomy, the NHLS Bill only makes
reference to the national board and the executive management committee. No
reference is made to the provincial management structures, powers and
functions. This could infringe upon the province's functional or
institutional integrity as protected in section 41(1)(g) of the
Constitution.

About the transfer of assets to the NHLS, item 7 of the transitional
provisions in the schedule to the Bill makes provision for the automatic
transfer of movable and immovable assets from the province to the NHLS. It
could be argued that these provisions also infringe upon the functional and
institutional integrity of the province, as contained in section 41(1)(g)
of the Constitution. We feel that legal opinion needs to be sought on the
implications, mechanisms and constraints of the transfer of assets from a
province to the NHLS.

Furthermore, concerns have been raised about the transfer of designated
staff from the province to the NHLS, because negotiations around conditions
of service have not been finalised. The interim negotiating forum was
suspended before agreement could be reached. The transfer of employees from
a province to the NHLS must not commence until there is a properly
constituted bargaining chamber, there is agreement and all conditions of
service have been defined. The bargaining chamber needs to have all the
labour unions represented that will represent the staff of the NHLS.

The range of complexity of these issues cannot be overemphasised. Many of
the provisions need to be agreed upon before they can be included in the
Bill. The following should be added to item 3 of the schedule of
transitional provisions regarding persons transferred from the service of
departments:  The transfer of employees to the NHLS from provincial and
state laboratories must be in terms of section 41 of the Public Service Act
of 1994 and section 197 of the Labour Relations Act. The consequences of
staff not wanting to be transferred needs to be investigated. This could
have serious cost implications because of having to pay the remaining staff
within provinces and being forced to buy services from the NHLS.

The Western Cape is concerned about the contravention of the Competition
Act, No 89 of 1998. The creation of the NHLS, as the preferred provider of
laboratory services to the public sector and as an organisation available
to provide services to the private sector, may also contravene the
Competition Act. A legal opinion will need to be sought in this regard.
Concerning local government as stakeholder, minimal reference is made to
local government as a stakeholder. As far as we are aware there has been
minimal, if any, consultation with local government structures. However,
they are an important user of laboratory services and will become more so
with the proposed primary health care devolution of to local government in
most provinces.

With reference to clause 18 and funding for the NHLS, any moneys referred
to in this clause must not refer to a shift of budgeted funds from the
provincial health departments to the NHLS, irrespective of whether these
funds are part of the equitable share or conditional grant.

We are aware of the discussions between universities and the NHLS project
team around a hybrid model, etc, but want to emphasise the important
implications the outcome of these discussions will have on provinces and
the existing joint agreements. Therefore, provinces should be included in
the discussions. The universities in this province and the NHLS project
team have reached a working agreement acceptable to both parties to date.

The above-listed concerns are but some of the major concerns with regard to
this NHLS Bill which the NCOP intends to rushing through. We cannot
appreciate the national Health Department's ignoring our concerns. Why the
haste? This Bill should, in fact, be referred back to the drawing boards.
[Interjections.] The Western Cape therefore strongly questions the
desirability of this Bill.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I would like to welcome the leader of
the Free State delegation, Premier Direko. Welcome to the NCOP. [Laughter.]

Dr P J C NEL: Mevrou die Voorsitter, dit is vir die Nuwe NP in beginsel
onmoontlik om hierdie wetsontwerp te steun, en wel om die volgende redes.

Teenstrydig met die privatiseringsbeleid van die Regering, beoog hierdie
wetgewing om laboratoriumdienste te nasionaliseer en te monopoliseer. Dit
sal 'n kwade dag wees vir gesondheidsdienste as mediese dienste nie meer op
'n kompeterende basis gelewer kan word nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P J C NEL: Madam Chairperson, in principle it is impossible for the New
NP to support this Bill, for the following reasons.

In contrast to the policy of privatisation of the Government, this
legislation envisages nationalising and monopolising laboratory services.
It will be a bad day for health services when medical services can no
longer be rendered on a competitive basis.]

Clause 15(1) reads as follows, ``Public health sector service providers
must purchase laboratory services from the Service'' - the NHLS. The New NP
is of the opinion that a more cost-effective and quicker service can be
provided by the private sector in certain instances, and it should not be
excluded as an option for the public sector service provider. The New NP is
concerned about a possible decline in the standards of services owing to
the amalgamation of 110 branches of the SA Insitute for Medical Research,
the National Institute for Virology and eight provincial health laboratory
services. The centralisation of the service could create endless transport
problems, causing a delay in receiving of results from tests by doctors in
hospitals.

In the Free State we are extremely concerned about the closing of the
provincial laboratory service.

Tans is die oorgrote meerderheid van die laboratoriumpersoneel sowel as die
akademiese komponent op die diensstaat van die provinsie. Met die sluiting
van die provinsiale laboratorium beteken dit dat die totale
personeelkomponent nou op die universiteit se betaalstaat sal wees. Dit
word beraam dat dit die Universiteit van die Vrystaat ongeveer R30 miljoen
per jaar gaan kos, wat hulle net eenvoudig nie het nie.

Die mediese natuurwetenskaplikes is hoogs gekwalifiseerde mense en het te
doen met die opleiding van nagraadse mediese studente sowel as navorsing.
Hulle is tans besig met baie belangrike navorsingsprojekte waarmee hulle
reeds internasionale bekendheid verwerf het. Met die sentralisering van
laboratoriumdienste loop mediese fakulteite die risiko om gemarginaliseer
te word ten opsigte van basiese navorsing wat dan hoofsaaklik deur die twee
groot sentra gedoen sal word, en wat sal beteken dat die fakulteite net 'n
doodgewone laboratoriumdiens sal lewer.

Ek het gister met ontsteltenis verneem dat die taakspan van die departement
nog geen ooreenkomste gesluit het met enige van die agt universiteite nie.
Intussen hang die toekoms van al hierdie werknemers in die lug. Ek het rede
om te glo dat die betrokke vakbonde ook ontsteld is oor hierdie
aangeleentheid. Dit wil vir my lyk asof hierdie stuk wetgewing meer
probleme gaan skep as wat dit gaan oplos. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Currently the vast majority of the laboratory staff as well as the
academic component are on the payroll of the province. The closing of the
provincial laboratory means that the entire staff component will now be on
the university's payroll. It is estimated that this will cost the
University of the Free State approximately R30 million per year, which they
simply do not have.

The medical scientists are highly qualified people and deal with the
training of postgraduate medical students, as well as research. They are
currently busy with very important research projects which have already
earned them international renown. With the centralisation of laboratory
services the medical faculties run the risk of being marginalised with
regard to basic research, which will then primarily be done by the two big
centra, and which will mean that the faculties will render just a normal
laboratory service.

I learnt with concern yesterday that the task team of the department has
not reached agreements with any of the eight universities. In the meantime
the future of all these employees hangs in the balance. I have reason to
believe that the relevant trade unions are also upset about this matter. It
seems to me that this piece of legislation is going to create more problems
than it is going to solve. [Applause.]]

Me E M C GOUWS: Mevrou die Voorsitter, agb Minister en lede, die DP is al
dikwels in hierdie Huis daarvan beskuldig dat ons ondemokraties en teen
hervorming en nuwe wetgewing gekant is.

Die regerende party noem gerieflikheidshalwe nie die feit dat ons die
oorgrote meerderheid wetgewing heelhartig steun nie. Ek sou sÃª dit is 'n
blatante poging om ons af te maak as 'n party vasgevang in rigiede reÃ«ls en
dat ons eintlik die vyand van demokrasie is. Hoekom kan die DP nie hierdie
wetgewing steun nie? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Ms E C GOUWS: Madam Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the DP has
often been accused in this House of being undemocratic and opposed to
reform and new legislation.

The governing party neglects to mention the fact that we wholeheartedly
support the overwhelming majority of legislation. I would say this is a
blatant attempt to laugh us off as a party that is caught up in rigid rules
and that is, in fact, the enemy of democracy. Why can the DP not support
this legislation?]

Because we must put our money where our mouths are. Creating new jobs must
be the priority of the Government. That is what they make the people
believe they are trying to do. How on earth does this work if one closes
down 110 SA Institute for Medical Research laboratories, the National
Institute for Virology, the National Centre for Occupational Health,
provincial health laboratory services and three forensic laboratories?

Furthermore, they are limiting the role of research at our universities. We
thought that the Government was looking at privatising most parastatals,
but now we see they are creating one. The DP submit that, while there may
be some justification for the rationalisation of all public-sector
laboratory services into a single national laboratory service, such service
should not have the monopoly over the provision of laboratory services to
public-health-sector providers. It should be impelled to provide a service
competitive with that provided by the private sector. In the absence of
such competition, there will be no guarantee that the NHLS will feel
impelled to provide a cost-effective, efficient service to public sector
service providers.

Die Huis het gehoor van die groot rol wat ons gaan speel ten opsigte van
hulp aan lande in Suider-Afrika. Dit moet 'n bonus wees en nie as primÃªre
motivering vir hierdie wetgewing dien nie. Ons eerste prioriteit is Suid-
Afrika. Ons moet kyk na meer werkgeleenthede, na die afwenteling van mag na
die private sektor en na die doeltreffendste en bekostigbaarste wyse waarop
voorsiening vir medisyne vir die behandeling van ons siek mense gemaak kan
word.

Hierdie wetgewing gaan nie hiertoe bydra nie. Die DP steun nie hierdie
wetsontwerp nie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The House has heard of the great role which we are going to play with
regard to aid to countries in Southern Africa. This should be a bonus and
should not serve as the primary motivation for this legislation. Our first
priority is South Africa. We must look at more job opportunities, at the
devolution of power to the private sector and at the most effective and
affordable way in which provision can be made for medicine for the
treatment of our sick people.

This legislation will not contribute to that. The DP does not support this
Bill. [Applause.]]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, Mpumalanga is
very impressed with the active participation and inclusion of organised
labour in the preparation of and deliberations on this Bill.

The dialogue that ensued and the suggestions made, especially by these
stakeholders, signal a very good precedent for the future of the National
Health Laboratory Service.

The department and all stakeholders have shown a keen interest in ensuring
that the Bill is indeed inclusive of the needs of all workers who are
currently employed in this very tenuous position. No one should be held in
a state of limbo where his or her future is determined by a piece of
legislation, thus our concession.

While it is true that some of the workers currently employed in
laboratories across the country have found themselves in this very
unpleasant situation for some time now, it is nevertheless imperative that
we, as responsible legislators, provide a more permanent environment for
those workers in the numerous laboratories across the country and for those
workers who will, in future, be participating in this service.

The provinces wanted to be sure that this Bill would be conducive to
personal growth and the improvement of skills and have clear career pathing
for all those hoping for promotion in the future in this service.

Mpumalanga is sure that we have succeeded in this Bill as it now stands. We
understood and empathised with the frustration of workers who, in one
laboratory, will be overworked whilst others in another would have very
little or no work to do at all. We have seen the need to level the playing
field so that workers have job satisfaction in their workplace. We believe
that this Bill successfully addresses this problem.

This Bill also shows further concern for the wellbeing of workers by the
inclusion of comprehensive transitional provisions which deal with the
complex period of transition. This foresight will ensure that workers who
are currently in the employ of the various laboratories are transferred to
the new service. Even those workers who are dissatisfied with the transfer
will have recourse to refer their dispute to the Commission for
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration.

Hopefully, no one will need to resort to this course of action. We are
confident that all the parties involved in the National Health Laboratory
Service will find the new structure a viable option for their future,
except, of course, people who are used to flying kites instead of flying
parachutes. They would go for the very cosy option of flying kites because
there are no challenges involved. They would not get involved in
deliberations and come to waste the time of this Chamber.

In addition to our concern about workers' rights, our province was very
concerned that this new public entity might not be accessible to the needs
of the community. We were assured, though, through our interactions and
deliberations in the select committee process as well as in the other
provincial committees, that although it was never the intention that
laboratory services should provide direct access to the community, the
community will nonetheless feel the direct benefit when their local pubic
health care service uses the laboratories.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, let me first of all quickly deal with
the New NP and DP. I just want to respond to them by saying that I am
surprised by the response of the Western Cape and the New NP because it was
their own party which, in 1973, started this process. All that we have done
is to show the courage and political will to indeed, once more, engage in
extensive and robust consultations for the implementation, of course with
improvements, of the recommendations that were made by the NP itself. When
did they change? I do not understand.

In a way the Western Cape must begin to understand that they are not an
island, not just a holiday mecca in South Africa, that they have to support
and share expertise with the rest of the country. They do have expertise
and we need to tap into that expertise. In fact, they should be proud that
we are trying to tap into their expertise.

I hope one day they will realise that they are part of South Africa, not
just on an island out there.

I thought Mr Nel understood that we live in the world of IT today. So his
concerns about the delay in laboratory results are really unfounded.
[Interjections.] As we indicated, these days results are transmitted
electronically. So his grounds for concern are really unfounded.
[Interjections.]

The DP starts off by convincing us that they have been supporting the Bills
because they are interested in transformation, but they do exactly the
opposite. I think the most upsetting thing they have said today is that
they do not support integration. They are very concerned that the new
public entity will provide services for SADC as well. Nobody has said we
are going to start with SADC. I do not think one can start out there and
omit one's home, but obviously, in the spirit of globalisation, we must
start with regional integration. I do not know to which region those hon
members belong, and yet, they are the people who support liberalisation.

Let me also just address, very briefly, my sister from KwaZulu-Natal, Mrs
Millin. Let me start off by saying I really need to thank KwaZulu-Natal for
having been very objective and co-operative in the process leading up to
today with regard to the Bill under discussion. Mrs Millin's concerns will
be accommodated in the fact that the implementation of the Bill will be
staggered. We will not immediately implement all the provisions of the
Bill.

Let me also dispel the notion that this has been fast-tracked. We have just
heard that the process started in 1987. We came into power in 1994. We
picked it up. From 1994 to date is actually six years. So hon members will
agree with me that the train has indeed been very, very slow. The people,
our passengers, have been able to come on board, including those who
perhaps might not have wanted to get onto this train. So the train has been
deliberately been slow to allow all of us to get used to the fact that the
train moves on. However, from now onwards the implementation is going to be
fast indeed.

Obviously, transformation, by its nature is quite threatening. It does
indeed bring about uncertainties. Sometimes it brings fears and sometimes
it is not easy, but transform we must. We have indeed been understood by
most of the stakeholders. I do not know about the Western Cape and the DP,
but most of the stakeholders, including the people who are employed in the
different laboratories, have understood the direction in which we want to
proceed. We have reassured them, to the best of our ability, that we will
ensure that the creation of this new single national public entity will be
as smooth as possible. Obviously, we seek their support and also their co-
operation to ensure that indeed this transformation is as smooth as
possible. [Interjections.]

As I have said, what we are trying to do, and I think we will succeed in
doing this, is to ensure that we indeed create quality services, that we
consolidate ...

Mr K M S DURR: Chairperson, would the hon the Minister please take a
question?

The MINISTER: Chairperson, no, can I please finish.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The Minister says she will not take a
question. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: Chairperson, the hon member can put the question in writing
and I will come and answer it here. [Interjections.]

What we are trying to do is to consolidate all our basic health care
resources so that we can ensure co-ordination, efficiency, effectiveness
and quality services.

The hon member from the Northern Province referred to casualties, and I
think some of those casualties are indeed, the Western Cape and the DP.
However, they can be assured that this public national entity we create
will provide quality diagnostic services - quality capacity for us to
diagnose, to ensure that people indeed recover as speedily as possible from
their injuries. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution (Western
Cape dissenting).

The Council adjourned at 18:07.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          WEDNESDAY, 4 OCTOBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 4 October 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)           South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 62 -
                  2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee
                  on Finance - National Assembly).


         (ii)    Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Justice and
                  Constitutional Development - National Assembly).


         (iii)   South African Rail Commuter Corporation Limited Financial
                  Arrangements Bill [B 64 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
                  75) - (Portfolio Committee on Transport - National
                  Assembly).


         (iv)    African Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund
                  Bill [B 65 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
                  (Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs - National
                  Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 4 October 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


         (i)     Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Second Amendment Bill [B 66 - 2000] (National
              Council of Provinces - sec 76) - (Select Committee on Social
              Services - National Council of Provinces).

3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled on 2 October 2000 and are now referred
     to the Portfolio Committee on Education:


     (1)    Government Notice No 777 published in the Government Gazette No
         21444 dated 11 August 2000, The date on which TEFSA ceases its
         functions made in terms of the National Student Financial Aid
         Scheme Act, 1999 (Act No 56 of 1999).
     (2)    Government Notice No 789 published in the Government Gazette No
         21438 dated 11 August 2000, Approval that the pilot project Travel
         and Tourism Standard Grade, Grade 10 - 12 becomes a fully fledged
         instructional offering, made in terms of the National Education
         Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (3)    Government Notice No R.848 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21501 dated 1 September 2000, Correction notice to Government
         Gazette No 21192 dated 18 May 2000, made in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (4)    Government Notice No 3102 published in the Government Gazette No
         21539 dated 6 September 2000, Call for public comment on draft
         document - The National Policy Framework on Whole-school
         Evaluation, made in terms of the National Education Policy Act,
         1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:
     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 4 October 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (a)    Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 60 - 2000] (National Assembly
         - sec 77) - (Select Committee on Finance - National Council of
         Provinces).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
     Standards for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the National
     Health Laboratory Service Bill [B 52 - 2000] (National Council of
     Provinces - sec 76), dated 4 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the National Health Laboratory Service Bill [B 52 -
         2000] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 52A - 2000].

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Construction
     Industry Development Board Bill  [B 59 - 2000] (National Council of
     Provinces - sec 76), dated 3 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
         subject of the Construction Industry Development Board Bill [B 59
         - 2000] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76), referred to it
         and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76
         Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 59A - 2000].

                          THURSDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Amendment Protocol on Trade in the Southern African Development
         Community (SADC), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendment Protocol.

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority
     for 1999-2000.
3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity Regulator
     for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 1999-2000.

4.    The Minister of Health:


     Report of the Medical Bureau for Occupational Diseases for 1999-2000.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Adjustments
     Appropriation Bill [B 60 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 5
     October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the Adjustments
         Appropriation Bill [B 60 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 77),
         referred to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
         thereon.


