---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 May 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-05-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 MAY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on
the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent reports in the media that there are divisions in the
       ANC on its position on Zimbabwe;
  (2) believes that these inaccurate reports are designed to create
       confusion and to obscure the central role played by South Africa and
       President Mbeki in finding a lasting solution to the Zimbabwean
       crisis;

  (3) wishes to state that the ANC's position on Zimbabwe is unanimous,
       with the emphasis on -


       (a)  the need for rule of law, political tolerance and respect for
           human rights;

       (b)  an equitable land and wealth distribution programme; and

       (c)  the need for Britain to honour the 1980 Lancaster House
           agreements; and


  (4) acknowledges that a parliamentary delegation will be sent to Zimbabwe
       to observe the elections and to report back to this House and that it
       is unethical and wrong to prejudge the elections before they take
       place.

[Applause.]
Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that it is clear that there are serious contradictions within
           the ANC over President Mbeki's approach to Zimbabwe, as the hon
           Pallo Jordan's motion in Parliament on Tuesday, 23 May 2000,
           reflected a view within the ANC that free and fair elections in
           Zimbabwe are, at best, unlikely to occur; and

       (b)  President Mbeki's repudiation of the National Democratic
           Institute's conclusion that free and fair elections are not
           possible shows up his lack of understanding of what is happening
           in Zimbabwe and that his visits since the referendum have been
           to talk to and show solidarity with President Robert Mugabe;


  (2) requests President Mbeki to go and see the truth for himself, which
       is that free and fair elections cannot take place in an atmosphere of
       violence, thuggery and land invasion; and

  (3) states that the attempts by the ANC to paper over the cracks and
       fractures within their own organisation on this vital issue and to
       pretend ...

[Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) takes note of the media statement by the hon Chief Justice and the
       hon President of the Constitutional Court, dated 22 May 2000, in
       which they described the attack on the judiciary by ANC spokesman, Mr
       Smuts Ngonyama, in relation to the Allan Boesak trial as
       ``deplorable'', ``unjustifiable'', ``unreasonable'' and as
       undermining confidence in the judiciary;

  (2) further notes that the Chief Justice and the President of the
       Constitutional Court stated in relation to the comments by Mr
       Ngonyama that ``They do not deal at all with the evidence given at
       the trial or the reasons given by the Supreme Court of Appeal for its
       decision confirming, in part, the decision of the trial judge. They
       constitute an attack on the judiciary as an institution, impugning
       the integrity of six judges, including five judges of the Supreme
       Court of Appeal ...

[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr B A D MARTINS: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Organisation for African Unity celebrates 25 May as
       Africa Day;

  (2) further notes that on this day the African people celebrate the
       heroic struggles waged against colonialists in pursuit of freedom and
       national liberation;

  (3) acknowledges that despite our achievements, the continent is still
       plagued with poverty, malnutrition, the HIV/Aids pandemic, wars and
       internal conflicts which affect a number of countries;

  (4) recognises that these conditions affect women and children in an
       adverse manner;

  (5) believes there is a need for the total cancellation of the debt of
       poor countries and to work for greater economic and social
       integration across the continent; and

  (6) calls on South Africans to observe this historic day and to use this
       day to pledge support for the continent ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]
Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House notes -


  (1) the current furore surrounding the drafting of the Local Government
       Property Rates Bill;

  (2) that the Leader of the New NP, Marthinus van Schalkwyk, had already
       warned, on 12 May, of these problems and the secrecy in which the
       drafting process had been conducted, and had called on the Government
       to make the drafting process more open and transparent;

  (3) that in that speech the New NP leader committed his party to
       opposing, by all parliamentary means available, any attempts to use
       this new law to impose ill-considered or punitive new taxes on South
       African property owners;

  (4) that the level of public concern and fear about this draft law
       continues to rise every day;

  (5) that the secretive drafting process continues without Government
       clarification; and

  (6) that other opposition parties have finally woken up to this danger
       and have begun to add their support to the concerns expressed by the
       New NP.

[Interjections.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the higher than expected rise in the Producer
       Price Index following a weakening currency and a lower than expected
       economic growth rate;

  (2) urges the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the Reserve Bank
       not to stick to inflation targeting at the expense of economic
       growth;

  (3) appeals to the Government to focus on sustainable economic growth
       that will create more jobs; and

  (4) calls on the Minister of Education to continue to transform the
       education system to create the skills needed for building the 21st
       century economy.

Mr G P MNGOMEZULU: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with serious concern the continuing war between Eritrea and
           Ethiopia;

       (b)  that this war is causing untold suffering to the ordinary people
           of both countries, especially women and children;

       (c)  that the war is exacerbating the drought situation;

       (d)  that the war is denying ordinary people aid from the sympathetic
           international community; and

       (e)  that this war is a setback to the efforts made by African
           leaders to alleviate the poverty and illiteracy of our people;


  (2) calls upon -


       (a)  the leaders of both countries jointly to work for peace by
           ceasing hostilities immediately; and

       (b)  the leaders of both countries to respect the resolution of the
           Organisation of African Unity regarding borders; and


  (3) commends the OAU for its efforts to bring peace in that part of the
       world and other troubled spots on the continent.

[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the ACDP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Judge Heath yesterday stated that 127 proclamations to
           investigate allegations of corruption have not yet been
           published by the Department of Justice; and

       (b)  state assets of great value are at risk pending the publication
           of these proclamations; and


  (2) calls on the Department of Justice urgently to publish these
       outstanding proclamations to enable the Heath Investigating Unit to
       investigate these matters and, where possible, recover state assets
       which have allegedly been misappropriated.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of Azapo:


  That the House -
  (1) notes -


       (a)  the continued difficulties around the process of demarcation of
           boundaries in the rural areas for the purposes of local
           government;

       (b)  murmurs of strife in certain parts of the country if these
           difficulties are not resolved; and

       (c)  that at the heart of these difficulties is a contradiction
           between electoral democracy and African traditional democracy;


  (2) believes that -


       (a)  it is, in fact, possible and desirable to harmonise these two
           forms of democracy in both theory and practice; and

       (b)  the Constitution of this country puts an obligation on all of us
           to seek such a practical harmonisation of the two systems; and


  (3) calls upon all those who are intimately involved in these processes
       to resolve the issue in a spirit of co-operation and compromise.

Mr J H NASH: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  20 shacks burnt down in the Joe Slovo area in Langa; and

       (b)  two people died as a result of the fire;


  (2) recognises that this is not the first time this year that such an
       incident has been reported;

  (3) sends its condolences to the families of the deceased and all those
       affected; and

  (4) calls on the public to be cautious when using household utensils that
       may cause fire and to exercise maximum vigilance during this winter
       season.
[Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the announcement by the SA National Parks Board that they will
       grant concessions for private lodges in our national parks;

  (2) congratulates the Parks Board on its initiative in promoting
       privatisation in a manner which will create jobs;

  (3) trusts that the Parks Board will concentrate on conservation, while
       leaving the hospitality industry to do what it does best, thereby
       advancing the best interests of tourism in South Africa; and

  (4) urges the Parks Board to follow the modern trend of developing new
       lodge sites outside conservation areas in order to preserve the
       pristine nature of ecologically sensitive areas.

[Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises the critical role that telecommunications and broadcasting
       must play in the human and economic development of our nation;

  (2) notes that civil society has been asked to nominate suitable persons
       to serve on the Independent Communications Authority of SA;

  (3) urges the Minister of Communications to ensure that this new body
       will be able to operate independently and will be resourced in such a
       manner as to ensure its effectiveness and efficiency; and

  (4) warns that the previous lack of a competent and respected regulatory
       regime in South Africa severely damaged our credibility in these
       sectors, both nationally and internationally, hindered vital
       technological development, lost jobs and repelled investment.

Rev A D GOOSEN: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the announcement that Eskom has brought under control its
       bulk municipality debt from a staggering R1,5 billion to about
       R450 million;

  (2) believes that this is indicative of the improved emphasis on
       effective management systems in parastatals and provincial, national
       and local government, resulting in more efficient and effective
       delivery to communities and consumers; and

  (3) commends Eskom, Salga and the various Government departments, that
       made up the bulk debt normalisation committee, for their effective
       solution of the debt problem.

[Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with approval the remarks made by Mr Mluleki George, chairperson
           of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, that the
           amended section 49 of the Criminal Procedure Act will make it
           impossible for the police to do their work, because they will
           have to wait for criminals to threaten their lives before they
           may shoot them, and that it should therefore be revisited;

       (b)  with shock that according to Mr George, the amended version was
           adopted without consulting the SA Police Service or the
           Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security; and

       (c)  that the SAPS is vehemently opposed to the new section 49;


  (2) congratulates the New NP because it was the only party that voted
       against the amended version of section 49, because of its unpractical
       nature and the fact that it will endanger the lives of our policemen
       and women; and

  (3) calls on -


       (a)  the Ministers of Safety and Security and for Justice and
           Constitutional Development to resolve the uncertainty with
           regard to this matter speedily; and

       (b)  the Cabinet, Parliament and Government departments to do a
           detailed analysis of the practicability of proposed legislation
           before rushing it through Parliament.

[Time expired.]
         CONGRATULATIONS TO KIRSTENBOSCH BOTANICAL GARDENS ON AWARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates Kirstenbosch Botanical Gardens on being awarded the
       23rd gold medal for the Old Mutual Kirstenbosch Exhibition at the
       Chelsea Flower Show in London; and

  (2) is of the opinion that this is proof of South Africa's standing as a
       country that cares for botanical issues, aesthetics and our
       environment.

Agreed to.

                     AFRICA UNITY DAY - FORMATION OF OAU

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, today on Africa Day we mark the 37th
anniversary of the Organisation of African Unity. On this day in 1963, 32
heads of state signed the charter of the organisation in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia. Our continent has come a long way from 32 to today's 53
independent countries of Africa. Liberation struggles, which freed our
peoples from colonial bondage, were waged. Neocolonial challenges of all
shapes and degrees have since emerged and still face Africa. African people
are yet to fully shake off the effects of four centuries of the slave
trade, which preceded the colonial period.

One of the biggest challenges of our times is the attainment of peace on
our continent. Articles 1 and 2 of the charter list the objectives and
principles of the OAU. They are: To promote the unity and solidarity of the
African states; to co-ordinate and intensify the co-operation and efforts
to achieve a better life for the people of Africa; to defend their
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence; to eradicate all forms
of colonialism from Africa; and to promote international co-operation,
having due regard to the charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Without peace, the realisation of the above
noble intentions recedes and it is made so much more difficult. The
resources that should go towards improving the conditions in which our
people live, get diverted towards wars and conflicts that take millions of
innocent lives.

Let us use this occasion to reflect on the African condition in honour of
those who went before us, who left us the legacy of daring to care; in
honouring every ordinary African who looks up to his or her leaders to
improve their lot; in honour of the millions who have died and continue to
die senselessly; and in honour of the children of the continent and the
future. Let us take the opportunity of today's debate to recommit ourselves
to the ideals that drove our forefathers and mothers, within our own
borders, in our relations and interactions with fellow Africans, in the
policies that determine the interventions that we make as a country on the
continent. Let us uphold the spirit that prevailed 37 years ago - the
spirit of hope, the commitment to do what is correct in the interest of our
people and, above all, the determination to succeed against all odds.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Speaker, hon members, I find it fitting and proper
to make Amilcar Cabral my entry point to the subject under discussion
today. Cabral asserts that:
  Hope is true and well founded only when it grows
  out of the unity between action that transforms the
  world and critical reflection regarding the meaning
  of that action.

Hope, action and reflection run through the very fabric of Africa as a
golden thread beckoning and challenging Africa. Dreams and visions may, and
should, be there, giving birth to hope; but unless appropriate action and
constant reflection are in place, Africa is doomed to see elusive mirages
and thus be on a vicious circular journey to nowhere forever.

Africa Unity Day compels us to look at our distant and recent past - not
out of nostalgia, but out of the critical reflective need to take stock of
how we, that is Africa, have deported ourselves and conducted our affairs
on this journey to nationhood on a Pan-African scale. The turbulent 50s and
60s could well be described as Africa's ``the best of times and the worst
of times'', or the three steps forward and the two steps backwards, to use
the clichés. One may profoundly ponder and wonder. In the 1950s, a star was
born - Ghana - giving the entire African continent hope of a new dawn of
freedom and liberty. Ghana and many African states since then have seen
their rise and fall. Some are still reeling punch-drunk or power-drunk to
this day.

Amidst all this hope and despair, a vehicle came into being, in the form of
the Organisation of African Unity, or the OAU, and hopefully, not the
acronym, IOU, spelling out Africa's perpetual indebtness, cap-in-hand to
the benevolent coffers of the world's nations that are up and doing. 25 May
1963 is indeed an historic beacon that rekindled the flame of hope since
the remarkable Pan-African yearnings of the 19th century and the earlier
diaspora. In the words of Tom Mboya, the inception of the OAU can be
likened to ``the discovery of Africa by Africans, that is Africa's desire
to be understood and to be recognised for her viewpoint and perspectives of
her own peoples''. Thanks go to Emperor Haile Selassie for his generosity
in providing the temporary secretariat and donating funds to meet the first
year's expenditure to kickstart the fledgeling OAU.

It is a great pity for Africa that Kwame Nkrumah, Emperor Selassie and many
others later went down as ``corrupt despots''. The bane of Africa seems
stubbornly to be corruption, despotism, nepotism and the arrogance of the
abuse of power. Tribalism or ethnicity is still our albatross in Africa.

Coming to the sunny side of the African street, so to speak, we reflect on
the objectives of the OAU. Overall, these intentions and objectives were
undeniably noble. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Madam Speaker, hon members, this
year's celebration of Africa Unity Day highlights challenges and
opportunities. We need a new vision for our continent to solve its many
problems and to capture its many opportunities.

In January 1993, when speaking at the World Economic Forum convened in Cape
Town, the hon the Minister of Home Affairs, Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi,
launched a daring and visionary challenge to the representatives of the sub-
Saharan continent to pursue the path of international economic integration
first, as the precursor to greater political co-ordination and possible
African unity in future.

Our continent has the natural and human resources necessary to foster its
economic growth and infrastructural development, and yet we are moving on
the path towards economic prosperity and social stability at a much slower
pace than other parts of the world. New countries are constantly emerging
and coming in line with the integrated development which now characterises
the global village.

Last week's issue of the world's most prestigious financial magazine, The
Economist, carried a cover page describing Africa as ``the hopeless
continent''. We must accept, rather than ignore, this challenge which
identifies the real mission of a new generation of Africans. If we wish to
give substance and credence to the notion of an African century, we can no
longer delay, we can no longer hesitate, and we can no longer ponder. If we
are to succeed, we must act, and act fast. [Interjections.]

The world is moving at a pace which mercilessly leaves behind those who
cannot keep up. This we must accept as a fact of life which can hardly be
mitigated by whatever concession we can receive in terms of greater and
more effective international aid and assistance. For me, the starting point
is where my leader set the route for us follow seven years ago. We must
achieve a more rational and effective utilisation of our resources on a
subcontinental basis, so that they can be put towards the development of
the massive technological and physical infrastructures necessary to
accelerate our economic growth.

Like all other national states throughout history, African countries are
equally jealous of their political prerogatives and remain unlikely to
renounce them in order to foster greater international integration. I hope
that my generation can see the completion of the dream of our continent
having reached the same level of political unity recently achieved by the
European Union. However, this goal can only be achieved through economic
integration first, to which end the time has, perhaps, come to conceive new
supernational structures which can manage, produce and deliver, acting with
a stronger technical rather than political profile.

We need to draw on our African pride, to take charge of our destiny by
building our future with our own hands from our own efforts, our own
intellect and the vast natural resources with which God has endowed our
land. This vision of courage and pride should inspire a new generation of
efforts towards African unity.

During its first stage, African unity pursued the cause of independence of
the continent from colonialism, racism and oppression. This mission will
not be completed until the oppression of new tyrannies and civil wars has
been eradicated throughout Africa. In order to complete this task, a new
stage should begin to lead us into the new mission of a new generation.
This is one which must rely on bricks, mortar and computer chips alike.

The unity of Africa is to be forged on the anvil of hard work leading to
the continental technological advancement and accelerated social
development. We have a real opportunity to get it right, relying on what
society can do for itself under the co-ordination of a pragmatic, but
visionary, long-term plan of development. On this day, we must accept that
only hard work and goodwill will free our continent from its social plagues
giving hope to its people and confidence to the rest of the world in what
the President of the country, President Mbeki, has propounded as the
African renaissance. [Applause.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, I saw a very interesting movie last year.
[Interjections.] The name of the movie is A Mirror Has Two Faces. Indeed,
Africa also has two faces. One resembles despair and the other portrays
hope. Despair could be best captured by the popular expression of the
eighties: ``Africa is dying''. Pik Botha frequently used it. A spirit of
despair radiates from the front page of The Economist. The headline was
referred to by the previous speaker and it reads ``The hopeless
continent''.

However, from time to time, Africa also shows a face of hope best
illustrated in front page reports such as ``Emerging Africa'' - The
Economist of 14 July 1997, ``Tanzania is Africa's latest rising star'' -
Business Day of 14 April 1999. On the 37th anniversary of the OAU we should
ask ourselves which face Africa is going to show in the 21st century. If
this century is indeed going to belong to Africa, then Africa will have to
refute the analysis, which also appeared in The Economist, that the new
millenium has brought more disaster than hope to Africa.

The African renaissance will only materialise if Africa gets its act
together. What needs to be done is the following. Africa should stop
blaming outside forces for its predicament and start accepting
responsibility for its own future. [Interjections.] The African Charter on
Human and People's Rights is the only document of its kind that balances
enjoyment of rights with performances of duty. It is Africa's duty to start
creating its own future. If Asia, which was also colonised, could do it,
there is no reason why Africa cannot follow suit. Africa should furthermore
start concretising its own treaties.

The Abuja Treaty envisages the establishment of the African economic
community over a period of 40 years of which the establishment of regional
economic communities during the first eight years was a prerequisite. After
nine years, nothing has materialised. Without investment strong regional
economic communities remain a pipe dream. And foreign investment will be
hard to come by as long as civil war, interstate conflict and violation of
human rights remain on the television screens of the industrialised world.
Leaders guilty of the aforesaid atrocities should be unmasked in public as
traitors to the cause of the African renaissance and silent diplomacy
should be shelved.

By the way, I find it peculiar that the South African Parliament has not
yet ratified the Abuja Treaty, especially against the background that
President Mbeki criticised other leaders for not enforcing the provisions
of the treaty in their own countries. Africa should furthermore utilise the
opportunities given to them in terms of the Lomé Convention and the African
Growth and Opportunity Act and stop complaining about conditionalities.
Conditionalities should be attached to debt relief without which the
economic rot will start all over again. Finally, the OAU itself will have
to be reformed dramatically.

Ons kan maar eers vergeet van die hervorming van die VN. Die OEA behoort bo
aan die lys van dié wat hervorming nodig het. Die OEA moet in staat gestel
word om die mooi ideale van burgerregte, politieke regte, kulturele regte
en maatskaplike rregte af te dwing. Hulle kan nie langer agter artikel 2(7)
van die VN-handves skuil wat inmenging in die huishoudelike sake van 'n
lidstaat verbied as dit kom by die flagrante oortreding of vertrapping van
menseregte nie. Artikels 55 en 56 van dieselfde handves verplig in elk
geval state om menseregte wêreldwyd te bevorder. [Tyd verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We can forget about reforming the UN for the moment. The OAU ought to be
at the top of the list of those in need of reform. The OAU should be placed
in a position to enforce the fine ideals of civil rights, political rights,
cultural rights and social rights. They can no longer hide behind article
2(7) of the UN's charter, which prohibits interference in the domestic
affairs of a member state when it comes to the flagrant contravention or
treading underfoot of human rights. Articles 55 and 56 of the same charter
in any case compel states to promote human rights throughout the world.
[Time expired.]]

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, we thank the Speaker
for calling for this debate.

The OAU developed out a quest for an African self-assertion inspired by
shared experiences in the struggle against colonialism, imperialism and the
threat posed by the possibility of continued minority racist regimes in
Southern Africa. It serves as a framework for mobilising and consolidating
continental unity in the struggle against these evils.

Despite the ideological differences between and among OAU members states,
this commitment and this orientation of the OAU has not changed. We as the
UDM reject the view that the OAU is nothing but a drinking club for African
heads of state. [Interjections.] We know that this a well-documented view
in literature on this. Our view is that the problems facing the OAU and its
slackness in responding to continental conflict derive from the economic,
political and institutional constraints posed by the international system
of the UN which is dominated by the five Security Council member-states.

We would like, as a party, to recognise the very important and innovative
initiatives taken by our Government and President Mbeki in bringing about
new approaches, and for demanding a political and adequate institutional
base so that African governments can play a primary role in setting the
agenda for the reassertion of African interests in the international
community. We are well aware that ideological differences should not be
seen in isolation. They should be seen against the background of the
inability of some of these african states to offset the economic
constraints that are placed on them and the blackmail by metropolitan
countries or the former colonial countries.

We would like to take the view that we should, as a country, continue to
support President Mbeki's approach in the intended operation of the OAU
and, as a people, help the Government in establishing economic policies
within the country that give our country more and more credibility in the
role it plays regionally and internationally. One of the reasons for the
failure of countries like Nigeria to play a leading role in the OAU,
whether there is a civilian government or a military regime, has been the
inability of governments to secure and receive the continued support of
their own people. We will not have a sustainable foreign policy that is
able to bring about proper innovations in the working of these
international organisations if the domestic policies of the country do not
receive or enjoy the firm support of the people. We are not implying that
there are doubts or weaknesses in these policies. We are saying that we
need to support the initiatives taken by our Government in the innovation
and restructuring of the regional international system. [Time expired.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, African states all belong to the United Nations
Organisation. They also belong to the Organisation of African Unity, which
may be regarded as a regional collective security arrangement under Chapter
8 of the UN Charter. In addition a number of geographically proximate
African states have also entered into collective defence agreements.
Despite their diversity, it is safe to say that all subregional
organisations in Africa - even the larger ones such as SADC - lack an
institutional crisis-prevention and management mechanism. As a result,
regional military involvement in conflict resolution has been ad hoc and
not in accordance with a specific operating procedure.

The great deficiency within SADC relates to the absence of conflict-
management structures and of integrated systems, processes and methods to
deal with issues such as human rights and the advancement of democracy and
good governance. This is clearly a contentious issue. The OAU seems to have
been relegated to a conflict management role as an intermediary between the
UN and its higher moral authority for ensuring international peace and
security, on the one hand, and the subregional organisations with their
perceived political will and the executive power, on the other.

The type of conflict caused by the political breakdown in African countries
can really be remedied by short-term military interventions if the urgency
of African security challenges precludes the luxury of a drawn-out process
of establishing workable conflict-management mechanisms. We do not have the
resources for long-term peacekeeping. The prospect of subregional
collective security, or even defence regimes developing successfully in
Africa, is not considered to be good or even desirable. The process of
state formation and state building in Africa on the whole has not produced
very strong foundation stones for larger security contracts.

Many African states came to independence through low-intensity conflicts
waged by liberation movements against colonial powers. Having taken power
in this way, the new state incumbents were left highly exposed and
vulnerable to challenges from within, intent on using these very same
methods against them.

It is time to place state-building and good governance at the centre of our
efforts. The OAU and the African subregional organisations need to be
clearer on the moral and political principles which should inform the
relationships between and within states in the region. These organisations
should uphold minimum standards, the violation of which should be
sanctioned equally across the board and not only when the culprit is a
relatively less powerful member of the organisation.
The ACDP stands unequivocably for freedom, democracy and human rights and
these values should underpin our foreign policy in Africa and elsewhere.
The ACDP is opposed to an African parliament which is, at the least,
premature and possibly irrelevant as the OAU strengthens and functions more
effectively. [Time expired.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, today is Africa Unity Day. Today Africans
are also fighting one another all over the continent. The fighting in the
Congo has been dubbed Africa's First World War because of the involvement
of neighbouring countries. Tens of thousands of Africans have already been
killed in the border war between Ethiopia and Eritrea. A million Africans
have died in the Angolan War in the last 25 years. In the Sudan, 2 million
Africans died in the civil war. In Burundi there is a seven-year conflict
between Hutus and Tutsis, while in Somalia there is a failed state ruled by
rival warlords, and so I can continue, and I have not mentioned Zimbabwe
yet.

I am proud to be an Afrikaner and my mother tongue is Afrikaans. We named
ourselves after this continent and it is not for the PAC, the ANC, or any
other party to decide whether I am an African or not. Enemies that hope to
get rid of Afrikaners will be disappointed. We are in South Africa to stay.
As an Afrikaner, I enjoy the beauty of this continent. As an Afrikaner and
as an African I am proud of the potential of this continent, but as an
African I am also deeply worried about the future of this continent.

I know the argument that African wars are caused by outside powers, but
surely that cannot be true for so many conflicts? I know the argument that
there is conflict all over the world, so why the fuss about Africa? But
surely if one compares wars and bloodshed between the continents at this
moment, Africa is the champion? We must not bluff ourselves. Are there
solutions? Yes, there are. As Africans, members of the FF are committed to
solutions because we are here and we are going to stay here. As Africans we
must be honest with ourselves in admitting our problems, and stop blaming
everyone else - as we are hearing here at the moment - but ourselves. As
Africans we must stop making talk-shops of all African meetings without
taking action.

In Kampala in 1990, at the heads of state conference, it was moved that a
conference on security, stability, development and co-operation must be
launched in Africa, based on the successful European model. In a paper
adopted in Kampala sound principles were adopted and I can agree with them,
but few were implemented. A few examples are the following. It says on page
six that there must be a limitation on the tenures of political leaders.
Namibia and Zimbabwe are examples I can name. The right to property and
participation of the citizens in government are referred to on page five.
Hon members must look at Zimbabwe at the moment.

In Europe their conference on stability focused on the prevention of
conflict. They identified the oppression of minorities and ethnic conflicts
as Europe's biggest threat and are daily busy addressing this. In this
whole document on Africa, the equivalent of the European one, no single
reference is made to the positive handling of minorities or ethnic
conflicts. We lie to ourselves and bluff ourselves if we think that this
problem will go away because African heads of state do not mention it.

The new, young African leaders must prove to the world that they are not
repeating Africa's mistakes of the past. Time is running out and we will be
watching them - President Mbeki is one of them - as to whether they are
going to succeed or not, because we are proud of them. [Time expired.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, the founder members of the Organisation
for African Unity deserve applause for their efforts in shaping the destiny
of this wonderful continent.

The 1958 All Africa Peoples Conference paved the way for the launch of the
OAU. The conference pledged political, moral and diplomatic support for all
liberation movements, and endorsed the principle of freedom by any means
necessary, including that of the armed struggle.

The 1960s saw the formal decolonisation of many African states such that,
by 1963, there were 32 independent states. In May 1963, both camps - the
radical Casablanca group and the moderate Monrovia group - represented by
32 independent states, met in Addis Ababa and formed the Organisation for
African Unity whose charter and governing principles were a compromise
between the aspirations of the two groups.

Some failures arose from the OAU's founding document or charter, and some
provisions in the agreed charter tied the hands of the OAU and prevented it
from offering much-needed solidarity to other Africans and solving some of
the problems faced by Africans affected by the diaspora and those on the
continent.

In 1994 the secretary-general of the OAU, Salim Ahmed Salim, reminded us of
the challenges faced by the OAU, and why it was formed in the first place,
by saying:


  A desire that our shared historical experience made necessary, a desire
  that the political and geographical configuration as well as the economic
  viability of the continent have made necessary, a desire to give Africa
  the appropriate hearing it deserves in the councils of the world and a
  desire that had been bequeathed to Africa by the Pan African Movement.

It was without a doubt the liberation of South Africa in 1994, that meant
that the OAU programme of action in the decolonisation of Africa in
general, was completed. Indeed, this was an achievement for the
organisation!

However, the 21st century poses new and complicated challenges for the OAU
to grapple with. The OAU cannot remain as it is. It has to be transformed
and be capacitated to deal effectively with African problems. The new OAU
programme of action should be geared towards addressing the following
areas: Firstly, the creation of a well-resourced OAU conflict ... [Time
expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, we are a people who never give up! Our
struggle is a protracted one! We have struggled for over 500 years!

Having said that, let me say that Africa Liberation Day is the culmination
of the Pan African idea which was conceived in 1776 by Africans, who were
victims of the slave trade, outside Africa. This was formalised in 1900
into a vision for Africa's liberation and unity. This vision was translated
into action by Pan Africanist leaders at the Fifth Pan African Conference
in Manchester in 1945. It is this vision which brought about the
decolonisation of Africa.

It was for the Pan African cause that Kwame Nkrumah was overthrown, Patrice
Lumumba of Congo and Murtala Muhammad of Nigeria assasinated, and the PAC
founding President, Mangaliso Sobukwe, poisoned on Robben Island. Africa
Liberation Day was set aside by the Organisation for African Unity in 1963,
as a day on which all sons and daughters of Africa and the struggles they
waged to regain their humanity would be remembered.

We, in the PAC of Azania, bore the brunt of Pan Africanism in the darkest
days in this country, when some leaders were ashamed to call themselves
Africans. They considered concepts such as Africanism and Pan Africanism as
antiwhite. We are glad that those whom imperialists once instigated to
defame the PAC and Pan Africanists as racists, have at last awoken from
their colonial slumber, and have discovered that they are Africans after
all. [Interjections.]

In the past, they hated any reference by the PAC to a ``United States of
Africa'' or the ``Giant Monolithic States of Africa'', as Zephania
Mothopeng put it. But now, they not only call themselves Africans, they are
compelled to accept Pan African efforts such as the establishment of the
Pan African Parliament. They no longer can slander Pan Africanism in the
face of the profound distress Africa shall continue to suffer if the Pan
African solution is not applied.

It is clear that Pan Africanists were far ahead of those who had no vision
for a post-colonial Africa or had been ideologically hijacked. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N J CLELLAND: Madam Speaker, I am confident that this century can be the
African century, that Africa can become a true home for human rights,
enterprise and expanding opportunity.

Unfortunately, just five months into this African century, our continent,
our region and our country are facing a massive wave of international Afro-
pessimism. Last week's edition of The Economist was nothing short of an
orgy of Afro-pessimism. [Interjections.]

The truth is that Zimbabwe's President, rebels in Sierra Leone and even the
weather in Mozambique bear more blame for Africa's image right now. But the
world has, for the past decade, looked to South Africa and its leaders to
prove them wrong, and to take up the reins of leadership. That leadership
must work tirelessly towards solving the crisp problem of Africa, which is
the absence of democracy in many African countries.

Appeasement of tyrants will not turn them into democrats. Now is not the
time to rally around tyrants in a misguided show of African solidarity
against the world. The focus of all of us and all our efforts and attention
must be to move towards democracy in Zimbabwe and everywhere else in
Africa. It is only in democratic countries that there is real peace, real
hope and real progress. All of these are possible and can be achieved if
South Africa and Africa come of age.

This century can be the African century. But this vision is dependent on
strong, emboldened leadership and a dedication to the kind of positive
change that only solid liberal democratic principles can achieve. On this
anniversary of the founding of the OAU, we need to dedicate ourselves, our
Parliament and our people to being a positive force for democratic change
on this continent where all of us live as Africans. [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the Organisation for African Unity is the
most significant and comprehensive of all political organisations in
Africa. Therefore, the culture of democracy must not be undermined by the
OAU's lack of enthusiasm to participate actively in resolving problems that
arise from democratic plurism among African politicians.

South Africa, after many decades of struggle, has successfully emerged from
colonisation. So have many other African states. Yet, efforts made to
achieve peace is literally in vain. Innocent people in Rwanda, Zimbabwe,
Ethiopia, Uganda, Angola and in many other states are suffering due to
economic, religious and political disputes.

The OAU must not ignore the historical facts of Africa. The Germans and the
English shamelessly divided the African continent into colonies between
themselves without consulting with the indigenous people of Africa. This
has, unfortunately, indoctrinated a territorial attitude amongst the
African people.

Serious respect must be given to the implementation of the OAU Charter for
the mere sake of peace and stability in Africa. The ongoing conflict in the
African states concerned is a devastating act of reverting to colonisation.

The least developed countries must be prioritised, and attempts must be
made by the UN and OAU to facilitate good governance, democracy, debt
relief, trade access and poverty reduction. Corruption is destroying the
livelihood of the people. The timing can never be more right for regional
multilateral approaches to conflict resolution.

Therefore African leaders throughout the continent under the umbrella of
the OAU should take the lead in dealing with their own conflicts by
striving for the following objects: to promote unity and solidarity; to
improve social, economic and political standards; to promote international
co-operation; and, finally, to defend the territorial integrity and
independence of African states. [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, die OEA is in Mei 1963 in die lewe geroep
deur 31 onafhanklike Afrikastate met die volgende vier doelstellings: om
eenheid tussen Afrikastate te bewerkstellig, die vasteland van kolonialisme
en apartheid te bevry, vrede te bevorder en ekonomiese vooruitgang te
verseker.
Die blote feit dat 37 jaar gelede daarin geslaag kon word om 'n
eenheidsbeweging te midde van groot verdeeldheid in die lewe te roep was op
sigself 'n prestasie, iets wat Europa eers ná eeue van struweling en oorlog
kon regkry. 'n Verdere sukses van die OEA was die feit dat hy tydens die
Koue Oorlog as fisieke vergestalting gedien het van die Afrikablok, en
heelwat ekonomiese en ander voordele vir Afrika bekom het deur Amerika en
die Sowjet-Unie teen mekaar af te speel.

Die ekonomiese, tegnologiese en ander hulp wat na Afrika gestroom het, het
egter weggesink in 'n moeras van etniese en ander konflikte wat die
vasteland ná 37 jaar nog steeds teister. Angola, Mosambiek, die DRK,
Brazzaville, Rwanda, Burundi, Soedan, Somalië, Ethiopië, Eritrea, Sierra
Leone, Liberië, Algerië, en nou ook Zimbabwe en die moorde op blanke boere
in Suid-Afrika vertel 'n tragiese geskiedenis van Afrika. Waaraan is dit te
wyte? Wat is die lesse van die geskiedenis vir 'n Afrika wat maar net nie
na verwagting op dreef kan kom nie?

Ek wil twee daarvan uitwys. Vanuit die staanspoor is die OEA aan bande gelê
deur die feit dat dit 'n kompromis was tussen twee uiteenlopende groepe oor
Afrika-eenheid. Kwame Nkrumah van Ghana het die standpunt verteenwoordig
dat 'n mens eers die politieke koninkryk moet soek en die res sal vanself
kom. Daarteenoor het die voormalige Franse kolonies onder leiding van
Houphouet-Boigny van die Ivoorkus en Senghor van Senegal gesê Afrika moet
hom op ekonomiese vooruitgang en eenheid fokus.

Ongelukkig het die OEA hoofsaaklik die Nkrumah-opsie gevolg, en hom so
besig gehou met politiek-ideologiese kwessies dat die ekonomiese
ontwikkeling van Afrika in die slag gebly het. Ontwikkelingshulp aan Afrika
het dikwels in bodemlose putte van geldgierige magselites geval.

'n Tweede rede vir die gebrek aan sukses - hier verwys ek agb lede na die
Duitse staatswetenskaplike Werner Pfeiffenberger - is dat Afrika hom bevry
het van die juk van kolonialisme. Hy het alles daaraan verbonde met passie
verwerp, maar die onnatuurlike staatsgrense wat deur kolonialisme getrek is
as 'n heilige koei behou. Die gevolg is, Afrika is nie op natuurlike, op
volksetniese wyse staatkundig georden nie.

Die onnatuurlike koloniale grense dwing etniese groepe met strydende
belange, kulture en lewenswyse in een staatsbestel saam, met die gevolglike
oorheersing van meerderhede en vrugtelose, kunsmatige pogings om minderhede
te beskerm. Die meetsnoere van kolonialisme, sy grense, het vir Afrika nie
op lieflike plekke geval nie. Solank as wat Afrika vasklou aan koloniale
staatsgrense wat die natuurlike konsep van die nasiestaat en die
selfbeskikking van volkere minag, sal konflik bly voortduur.

Die uitdaging vir die OEA is om verbeeldingryk mee te werk sodat Afrika
weer staatkundig op natuurlike volksetniese wyse georden word met
selfbeskikking vir al sy volke. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, the OAU was founded in May 1963 by 31
independent African states, with the following four objectives: to bring
about unity amongst African states, to free the continent of colonialism
and apartheid, to promote peace and to ensure economic progress.

The mere fact that it was possible, 37 years ago, to establish a unitary
movement in the midst of great disunity, was in itself an achievement, and
something that Europe could only achieve after centuries of quarrelling and
war. A further success of the OAU was the fact that, during the Cold War,
it served as the physical embodiment of the African bloc, and acquired a
considerable number of economic and other privileges for Africa by playing
America and the Soviet Union off against each other.

However, the economic, technological and other aid that flowed to Africa,
disappeared into a quagmire of ethnic and other conflicts, which are still
ravaging the continent after 37 years. Angola, Mozambique, the DRC,
Brazzaville, Ruanda, Burundi, Sudan, Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Algeria, and now also Zimbabwe and the murder of white
farmers in South Africa, tell a tragic tale of the history of Africa. What
is the cause of this? What are the lessons of history for an Africa which
simply cannot start progressing according to expectations?

I want to point out two of these. The OAU was hampered from the outset by
the fact that it was a compromise between two divergent groups as regards
African unity. Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana represented the point of view that
one should first seek the political kingdom and the rest would follow
automatically. In contrast, the former French colonies under the leadership
of Houphouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast and Senghor of Senegal said that
Africa should concentrate on economic progress and unity.

Unfortunately the OAU for the most part adopted the Nkrumah option, and
concerned itself to such an extent with politico- ideological issues that
the economic development of Africa fell by the wayside. Development aid to
Africa often landed up in the bottomless pit of the avaricious power élite.

A second reason for the lack of success - here I am referring hon members
to the German political scientist Werner Pfeiffenberger - was that Africa
freed itself from the yoke of colonialism. It rejected everything connected
with this with passion, but the unnatural state boundaries drawn by
colonialism were retained as a sacred cow. Consequently Africa was not
ordered politically in a natural, ethnic way.

The unnatural colonial boundaries force ethnic groups with conflicting
interests, cultures and lifestyles together in one political set-up, with
the consequent domination of majorities and fruitless, artificial attempts
to protect minorities. For Africa, the lines of colonialism, its
boundaries, are not fallen in pleasant places. As long as Africa clings to
colonial state boundaries which disregard the natural concept of the nation
state and the self-determination of peoples, conflict will continue.

The challenge for the OAU is to work together in an imaginative way so that
Africa can once again be politically ordered in a natural, ethnic way, with
self-determination for all its peoples.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, for many centuries now, Africans and their
continent have been the main victims of every system of social and
political oppression that ever existed. We were the main victims of slavery
and colonialism, and are now victims of neocolonialism. Europeans and all
their institutions, including the church, declared an African as something
less than human, something without a soul and therefore something deserving
of subhuman treatment.

In addition to the economic motive, this is the basis for racism, slavery
and colonialism. In the African struggle for emancipation from colonialism
and racism, in particular, we asserted the inherent right of all human
beings to freedom and dignity. That right to freedom is equal and
independent of whether one is a sophisticated bank owner in New York or a
peasant in some remote village somewhere in the forests of the Congo.

The formation of the OAU in 1963, by some of the most venerable names on
the continent, which included Abdel Nasser, Mwalimu Nyerere and Kwame
Nkrumah, was the collective assertion of this belief in the fundamental
right, first of ourselves, and then of all of humanity, to be free. The
OAU, in pursuance of this belief, exerted itself in the arduous campaign to
liberate every corner and every soul on the continent from colonial and
racist oppression. That mission was accomplished.

However, the social and economic advancement of the peoples of Africa
remains a huge challenge. In fact, in many instances, the advent of
political freedom heralded a decline in the living standards of many
Africans. That is due to a number of factors, including, firstly, the
assumption by many that the design of a new flag, the singing of a new
national anthem and the installation of a black ruler marks the end of the
struggle. The economy of the country, including landownership in certain
instances, remained in the hands of the others. That kind of attitude has
cost Africans dearly.

Secondly, the psychological and cultural damage visited upon Africans by
centuries of slavery, colonialism and racism remains uncorrected. Economic
and social development are also a function of psychology and culture.
Thirdly, the accumulation of capital and wealth in the West over many
centuries, some of it at the expense of the Africans, is too great an
advantage for others to overcome.

There is a sense in which the instability, the cruel wars and social strife
we see in Africa reflect, in varying degrees, some of these factors. We
must now mobilise to overcome these factors and improve the lives and
dignity of all our people on this continent. [Applause.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President and colleagues, it is
not enough for us to deplore the unacceptable state of insecurity and
instability in many parts of the continent. It is not enough to only
describe the current situation in Africa. What should concern us in South
Africa about Africa is the fact that almost all of Africa shared a common
fate, from the days of the slave trade through colonialism and up to
apartheid. Yet something, somehow, went wrong.

Perhaps it is opportune to reflect on Joseph Conrad's description of the
colonisers, through the character of Mr Kurz, as ``hollow to the core,
reckless without hardihood, greedy without audacity and cruel without
courage''. This was a moral judgment - a judgment because of what was done
to a people among whom existed an age-long basis of African spirituality
meaning, ``I belong, therefore I am''.

The several conferences of the heads of state and government of the member
states of the OAU since 1991 have been seized with the responsibility to
readdress the conflict and instability on the continent. In their own ways,
the adoption in 1998 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
and the decision at the Algiers summit in 1999 on unconstitutional changes
of government were a recognition of the fact that the problems of security
and stability in many African countries had impaired their own capacity to
develop and to achieve the necessary level of intra-African and inter-
African co-operation.

These are necessary to attain the integration of the continent and
absolutely necessary for the continent's socioeconomic development and
transformation. These leaders of the OAU were also passing a moral judgment
that, linked to the hazards of colonialism and imperialism, some of
Africa's leaders, just like Mr Kurz, had become and remain hollow to the
core, reckless, greedy and cruel without courage.

It will not be an exaggeration to note that Mr Mandela's stature and
presence in the Great Lakes region is a constant reminder of a moral call -
a reminder that moral urges of people and their sacrifices are used by
others for base ends. The rulers exploit the goodness and nobility of men
and women for evil purposes. Without a union of co-responsibility, the
problems facing all our independent states, without exception, will remain
difficult and those responsible for the imminent disintegration of Africa
will get a new lease of life. This, for us, is a wake-up call in Africa. A
call for co-ordinated efforts, not only by the governments in Africa, but
by every sector, is required.

Governments, indeed, have a duty to create the environment in which peace,
security, stability, development and co-operation can take place. There
must be African solutions to Africa's problems, with the assistance of
other role-players. A concept of security, arising from a common history,
culture, geography and destiny, must include economic, social, political
dimensions of the individual, family, community, local and national life.
The security of all Africans, their land and property and their states as a
whole, is indispensable for stability, development and co-operation in
Africa. Lastly, but most importantly, without prejudice to the United
Nations and OAU Charters, member states of the African Union should not be
indifferent to situations of civil strife, humanitarian disasters, gross
violations of human rights and acts of wanton repression in Africa. This
will be a formidable dedication to the formation and establishment of the
Organisation of African Unity.

All these are affirmations in the context of stability, which in turn
requires that the states be guided by strict adherence to the rule of law,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms devoid of religious,
ethnic, regional and racial extremism. It is noteworthy that a Pan-African
Parliament can serve as a monitoring institution to ensure that all three
branches of government in any one state must adhere to the provisions of
the laws promulgated by an assembly of freely elected representatives. No
one should be exempted from accountabilty.

All rights and freedoms should be promoted and protected so that there will
be freedom of speech and ideas. In the knowledge that there can be no
sustainable development and growth without security and stability and,
therefore, hardly anything to co-operate on, our leaders further declared
that a rapid, physical and economic integration of the continent was vital
in the face of the globalising world; that popular participation, equal
opportunities and equitable access to resources must underlie all
development objectives and strategies; that, with a shared vision,
partnerships and trust between leaders and citizens will be critical; and
that the sovereign rights of African countries to control their natural
resources must be respected.

With these as criteria, there must emerge, in organic ways, the
fundamentals for co-operation towards the African renaissance. This, in
turn, must mean that a closer co-operation and intergration of African
countries will need to subordinate certain responsibilities to continental
or subregional institutions. A successful example of such a co-operation is
the European Union, in which most of our former colonisers, only 50 years
ago, after debauching each other, could not feed themselves.

We cannot ignore international developments like globalisation after the
Cold War, external pressures and the absence of a common objective. In the
end, for the regeneration of Africa, only the absence of a common objective
will count. If Africa continues to be disparate, we will continue to have
competing civilisations within her, divided and weak, her progress only a
dream. Our continent's progress will be seriously damaged, and this must
lead to a weakening effect. But what will be worse is the inner
psychological tensions and conflicts between those of us who plan to unite
her and those who oppose this.

Our leaders at Sitre in Libya, Abuja and Addis Ababa, in pursuit of the
African Union and the strengthening of the OAU, are working towards the
unity of the mind and heart, with a deep sense of belonging together in
Africa; but never for a moment forgetting where we have come from and never
forgetting the deliberate part played by the forces that literally
disrupted and scrambled Africa.

Here in South Africa, as a celebration of Africa Unity Day, the launch of
the conference on security, stability, development and co-operation this
month, is designed to lead to policy measures and the processes for its
implementaton, as a fundamental part of the OAU's programme. However, our
celebrations and unity will remain tenuous if we fail to address corruption
and crime, with special reference to illicit diamond dealings with the
developed world; if we fail to address drug trafficking and the attendent
money-laundering in which banks, headquartered in the developed world, are
involved; if we fail to successfully address the indebtedness of Africa to
the developed world; if we fail to address HIV-Aids, which has the
potential of decimating Africa; if we fail to address the subjugating of
women in Africa; if we fail to respect the rights of workers, who
constitute the vast majority of the population; if we fail to recognise
that millions of semi-starved, poverty-stricken people continue to stalk
our continent, then our own insensitivity will be an impediment for the
realisation of the African renaissance.

In June-July of 1963, I had the privilege to extol the virtues of the
formation of the OAU in Johannesburg. Today, I am grateful for the
opportunity, in a liberated Parliament, to reflect on our continent. In the
spirit of ``I belong, therefore I am'', I say and pronounce: ``Nkosi
sikelel'iAfrika. Mayibuy'iAfrika''. [God bless Africa. Let Africa return.]
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Resumption of Debate on Vote No 30 - State Expenditure (Intelligence
Services):

Ms N N MAPISA-NQAKULA: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President and hon members
of the National Assembly, the end of the Cold War about a decade ago
enabled governments the world over to re-examine international peace,
security and development, particularly in the context of a fast-globalising
world.

Added to the traditional threats to national security, are the following
issues: The need to free people from disease and want; the need to secure
our environment; the challenge to beat organised crime, corruption and
cyber crime; the need to fight religious and political extremism; the
growing gap between rich and poor within states and between them; the
internalisation of disputes between states or parties, etc.

The above issues, among others and to varying degrees, constitute the core
of debates that take place globally on national and international security.
The questions this House and Government have to grapple with are: How
should South Africa position itself in the world described above?
Conversely, we as a country need to understand how the world in turn
positions us. The next question to be asked is: Are we investing enough in
our intelligence structures in terms of financial, human and
infrastructural resources, in order for them to be competitive?

Undoubtedly, Africa and the whole world have a lot of interest in us, and
the huge foreign diplomatic and intelligence representation in our country
and region is a clear testimony to this. The foreign intelligence services,
we know, are on an aggressive recruitment drive and information-gathering
drive, within our country.

South Africa, almost on a daily basis, has to intervene in line with
national, regional and international expectations in numerous forums that
deal with varied topics, from intra and interstate disputes to the design
of a more equitable world trade regime. As an integral part of Africa, our
country is one of the role-players who are pursuing the object of Africa's
rebirth, the success of which will bring more stability and development to
the whole world.

As a young democracy that has just emerged from the a turbulent past, it is
our responsibility to be alert to the fact that we are still prone to
internal destabilisation. The new threats to national security, our
responsibility to the world and our concerns about internal stability
directly imply that our intelligence structures currently have to and do
play an expanded role. This requires that our intelligence officers get
equipped with new and cross-functional skills on a sustainable basis.

If there ever was a time for intelligence to support policy formulation,
that time is now. Similarly, if there ever was a time when accountability
had to be dynamic, and characterised by mutual trust between the
legislature, the executive and the intelligence community, that time is
now.

The above observations are precisely occasioned by this expanded role of
our intelligence structures. Through our intelligence structures, acting
with their respective legal mandates, our country has to measure up to the
challenges discussed above. In the above regard, this House correctly
designed a notion of a single intelligence community, for, if we were to
act in a decentralised manner, we would certainly be weaker, in part due to
our recent history, but also due to the nature of the intelligence
function.

It is sad for me to report to this House that our intelligence community
still suffers from mistrust, within the intelligence structures on the one
hand, and between the intelligence structures on the other. Undoubtedly,
this is one of the reasons why intelligence products coming from Nicoc are
often of an uneven nature. Consequently, the expectation of the consumers
of these intelligence products are not satisfied - a situation that is
clearly unacceptable. Concrete and practicable measures need to be
implemented to address this malaise of mistrust.

Regarding Africa and the Government's policy popularly known as the African
renaissance, the question has to be asked: Is the intelligence division of
the SA National Defence Force and the SA Secret Service successful in
forewarning our Government about impending threats to and opportunities for
our national security and interests? Whatever the answer is to the above
question, we need to resolve it ourselves to enhance the capacities of
these two institutions.

In April 1998, a ministerial commission of inquiry into the transformation
of the intelligence division of the SANDF was established by the Ministers
of Defence and Intelligence, the object of which was to investigate that
structure and make recommendations on its transformation. A report of that
commission will soon be submitted to the sponsoring Ministers. This House
should evaluate any such transformation on the basis of the ability of the
intelligence division to qualitatively improve and therefore adequately
forewarn Government about impending threats and opportunities, particularly
in Africa.

With the establishment of the Scorpions and the very many other formations
of the SAPS, whose core mandates are to fight different types of crime,
should we not ask ourselves the question: What is unique in the efforts of
all these respective structures that gather information and investigate
crime? For example, what is the unique feature of the National Intelligence
Agency's collection efforts when compared to what the SAPS intelligence
division does? In gathering intelligence on organised crime, what niche
does each intelligence-gathering effort serve? Does the sum total of these
unique features give us the global strategy of the Government on fighting
organised crime? Should we not be exploring the possibility of
rationalising some of these many instruments on the one hand and enhancing
their effectiveness on the other?

The country has a huge backlog of vetting - a problem that clearly
exemplifies the inadequate resources available to the NIA, in respect of
personnel, expertise, and finance. This House needs to pursue the right
objective in this regard. Give the National Intelligence Agency the
resources it needs to discharge this function. Such a step will put to rest
discussions within that organisation that some parts of its counter-
intelligence mandate be decentralised amongst the state departments - a
dangerous step indeed.

As Parliament, as Government and indeed as management within the
intelligence structures, we need to adequately address mismanagement,
corruption and inefficiency within all our structures. Let us display zero
tolerance towards these ills and weed out the culprits from the ranks of
the intelligence services. Let us, on the basis of practical steps, promote
efficiency and professionalism.

Year after year, the Auditor-General's report in part reflects the
inability of the National Intelligence Agency to account for its assets. In
reality, this is an inherited problem, amongst others, from the
Bophuthatswana intelligence services. Instead of letting this inherited
problem tarnish the image of the National Intelligence Agency, the relevant
former BIS officers should be made to account for the missing assets, as a
matter of urgency, particularly those who continue to serve as officers
within the National Intelligence Agency and the SA Secret Service.

Related to the above matter are the boards of inquiry in respect of some of
the NIA's covert units. This House and the executive should be given
timeframes within which these investigations will be completed. The
Minister should be commended for setting up these boards. But I say to the
Minister that our interest is more in their outcome.

As we debate the budget of the intelligence services, can our decisions be
informed by the priority tasks that the Government handed down to these
services? Can we be also informed by the respective budgets of some of the
foreign intelligence organisations, particularly those that are active
within our country? The question we need to ask ourselves is: Will the
budget we are about to allocate to the intelligence services enable them to
translate their legal mandate into actionable programmes in order for our
country to be secure? I am directing that question to the hon the Minister
of Finance.

At this point, I would like to recognise the appointment of Dr Faizel
Randera, our first Inspector-General for Intelligence. We trust that as he
discharges his responsibilities, he will be able to determine if our
intelligence structures are adequately resourced, if the policies
regulating their activities are appropriate and, very importantly, if our
intelligence structures observe the law in the conduct of their duties.

A scrutiny of the prevailing threats to and opportunities for our national
security tells us that we need to continually evaluate the legal mandate
and policies that regulate the activities of our intelligence structures.
As a country, we need to continually evaluate competency and effectiveness
of our intelligence structures, particularly in respect of expertise,
resources, organisation and acceptability, whose core component part is
representivity. We need to ensure that we develop calculated strategic
relations with select, but competent, allies in the world. We need to
develop an ongoing dialogue between the legislature, the executive and the
intelligence structures where issues such the ones raised above can be
discussed and resolved.

The challenges facing our country, as discussed above, call for the
development of human resources in the intelligence family. Through such a
pool of expertise, the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, our
committee, can be appropriately staffed to carry out its functions
efficiently, the inspector-general's office can have suitably qualified
people, the intelligence structures should have officers who can measure up
to their responsibilities and the executive can have suitably qualified
advisers.

The broad meaning of national security requires that, as this House and as
Government, we need to conduct our business in a manner that does not
undermine our national security. It is therefore imperative that Cabinet
sees to it that all heads of departments speedily appoint security officers
as recommended by the National Intelligence Estimate of 1999. This process
should advisedly be done in consultation with the National Intelligence
Agency, since this structure has the national counter-intelligence
responsibility. We are not talking about people who must check whether
doors are locked or not.

Year after year, there is talk of a need to regulate the private security
industry; yet, to date, there is no draft Bill which has been tabled before
our committee. What timeframes inform this task? In this regard, the
committee will soon engage the Ministry so that this matter can be
resolved.

The Minister also needs to be commended for setting up the National
Communication Centre task team, particularly because the whole world is
investing more in technological means of gathering intelligence, while not
eliminating age-old human means. Again, the committee will engage the
Minister in this regard so that the setting up of this National
Communication Centre can be speeded up.
Perhaps this is a feature of transformation, but it needs to be registered
that our intelligence structures are in a near-permanent state of
restructuring which seldom gets followed through by implementation of
decisions. Gaius Petronius, in AD 66, must have been warning against this
potentially paralysing feature of directionless planning when he said:


  We trained hard, but it seemed that every time we were beginning to form
  up teams we would be reorganised. I was to learn that we tend to meet any
  new situation by reorganising, and a wonderful method it can be for
  creating the illusion of progress while producing confusion, inefficiency
  and demoralisation.

Our intelligence structures should heed these wise words and thereby begin
to walk the talk.

The committee would like to congratulate Mr Mavimbela and Mr Denis on their
appointments as directors-general of the NIA and SASS, respectively. We say
the same to Barry Gilder and Ms Pikoli, who were appointed deputy directors-
general of the NIA and SASS, respectively. The Joint Standing Committee on
Intelligence commends the Minister for appointing a black woman to this
demanding responsibility. [Applause.] This, to us, is a further
demonstration of our committment to break away from the stereotypes of the
past, when intelligence was the domain of white males. I am sure that this
team of young managers will inject our services with vibrant leadership.
[Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, members,
intelligence services in our young democracy are faced with tremendous
challenges. It is precisely for this reason that intelligence services
should be a multidimensional practice whose focus is on finding and
analysing information concerning threats to our country. To this end,
intelligence services concern protecting information, people and equipment
in South Africa. The services deal with all security measures, both active
and passive, designed to safeguard our country.

The technological advances in modern times have turned the world into a
small village. This confronts our intelligence services with even greater
challenges which need strong financial muscles in order to protect our
young democracy, which is competing with world giants on intelligence.
Fortunately, the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence has established
good rapport and co-operation with these intelligence giants of the world.

I agree with the hon the Minister that our intelligence services need to
have a vision, such as serving our people as a whole impartially. We
therefore applaud the fact that our intelligence services have been
transformed and are no longer partisan, as was the case during the
apartheid regime. The IFP applauds this transformation. According to the
1994 White Paper on Intelligence, intelligence is organised policy on
relevant information that may contain secret information.

Meyer confirms this contention when he states that it is this
transformation of intelligence away from the concept of secret information
that was gathered for use on the battlefields or to merely keep the head of
state supplied with relevant information and with a finished, polished and
forward-looking document designed to meet the requirements of protecting
the state.

For intelligence services to provide useful intelligence in advance of
decision-making, it must deliver the right decisions at the right time.
Intelligence products have to be relevant to the needs of our young
democracy and the times in which we live. The biggest success story of our
intelligence services is that it is now possible, as the Minister said, to
have a debate on intelligence. The transformation of intelligence was taken
a step further a few weeks ago when the Joint Standing Committee on
Intelligence organised a public seminar on oversight. This seminar helped
to remove misperceptions about the services about which the Minister spoke
yesterday.

Intelligence services aim at discovering the truth regarding events and to
objectively and timeously communicate that truth. We sincerely hope that
our intelligence services will contribute to making the forthcoming local
elections free and fair, as was the case with the 1999 elections. The only
concern is that the resources currently at our disposal are certainly not
sufficient. That is why the Ministry has up to now done more with less. We
need more financial and human resources to make our intelligence a success
story in fighting organised crime, white-collar crime and other threats in
our country. [Applause.]

Mr S P MAKWETLA: Madam Speaker, if the President were to permit me to quote
him, as I wish, I would say we are indeed a bad example. What the President
meant by this is best articulated by Ray Hartley of the Sunday Times in his
column Clause 16 in the issue of Sunday, 14 May this year, in which he
wrote, and I quote:


  Countries who relate to other nations either as client states or as
  members of some or other evil empire, appear to be nonplussed by the
  assertiveness and the sometimes eccentric independence of South Africa, a
  country with a negligible economy in global terms, perched precariously
  on the world's poorest continent.

  How, they must be asking themselves, has this upstart pipsqueak of a
  nation come to play so important a role in world affairs?

Hartley further says, and I quote:


  Of course, there are people locally who are sceptical. They are a
  minority, but an influential one which often dominates the public agenda.

  These domestic sceptics question nothing. Lacking the belief that their
  country could possibly be right and the great unipolar bosses wrong, they
  feel embarrassed by the questioning of assumptions which has come to
  reign in Pretoria.

  Their expectations that an end to the Cold War would lead to an
  unquestioning alignment with their idols in the West have been cruelly
  dashed.

  And they must be dashed if our nation is to keep its sovereignty and its
  pride.

I have uncharacteristically quoted generously from Ray Hartley's article
because his patriotic reflections underpin part of the consequential
demands which our transformation project and our international agenda are
imposing on us. It was to be expected that for our freedom to be
meaningful, we would have to enjoy the right to self-determination as a
people and as a country.

Since the advent of our democracy, South Africa has been nonconformist on
some of the difficult issues around the world. This is not surprising,
because steadfastness to principle has been one of the defining
characteristics of the ANC. It has shunned shortcuts to the solution of
complex social issues to pursue what is considered correct, even when such
ideas were not popular. It has consistently sought to win over society to
its point of view, thus evolving a genuine advanced detachment at home and
abroad.

Political practitioners who have been down this path before have always
advised that noble goals such as the ones we are pursuing should not be
embarked upon if they cannot be defended. I submit that the budget we are
debating this afternoon falls squarely within this ambit of policy
decisions.

I concur with the sentiments expressed by the Minister yesterday afternoon
that we need to be more candid, as Parliament, in our discussions of issues
in and around intelligence, and I wish to start doing so right away.
Notwithstanding our national priority to improve the material life of
millions of South Africans, our Parliament and the executive must change
their mind-sets on our national security expenditure.

Yesterday the Minister illustrated graphically how our intelligence
establishment is called upon to do more with a progressively decreasing
budget. Similarly, we are told that the broad national concensus on our
defence needs, as contained in the Defence Review document, cannot be
funded. In practical terms, what this means is that the costly policy plans
of both Government and Parliament - plans which are expensive owing to the
money and time consumed to produce them - are rendered valueless, because
budget allocations bear insignificant relevance to the goals.

To illustrate the crippling effects of this underfunding, within the
limited time at my disposal, I will use the signal intelligence division,
which is responsible for over 90% of the collection within our services, as
a case in point. Whereas R88,1 billion was budgeted for this division in
the year 1996-1997, this has rapidly declined to a mere R5,2 million in the
2000-2001 Budget. To amplify this deficiency in our allocation, we are
reliably informed that should the third cellular network licence be issued
during the course of this financial year, the signal intelligence division
will require R5 million - the entire budget of this division - to grow the
capacity for interception.

The operational budget of the NIA has declined from R38,9 million in 1997-
1998 to only R14,7 million in the 2000-2001 Budget. Whereas in the 1999-
2000 Budget the Public Service received a 6,3 % salary increase, the
intelligence services only received a 5% increase due to its budget
constraints. As a result of these steady budget cuts, the salary scales of
our intelligence services are level with those of the broader Public
Service, when the convention is that they should not be so, due to the
perculiar conditions of their occupation.

This brings me to the theme of my plea, namely that this Parliament must
take an unequivocal stand. South Africa needs a strong intelligence
service, and we must not bicker about it. Indeed, there is nothing
democratic about being weak. On the contrary, we need strength to defend
our democracy. Mature western democracies are a good examples in this
regard.

As for those of us who are in the ANC, we harbour no secret agendas on
these matters. I know there will always be a temptation amongst those who
sit in the opposition benches to be sceptical of such statements. For the
benefit of those who are not avid readers, like myself, allow me to read
from a resolution passed by the highest organ of the ANC at the national
conference, in this instance, at the Mafikeng conference. The conference
confirmed its belief that intelligence work ``has to be informed by the
loyalty and commitment of the intelligence services to the Government of
the day, in keeping with the broad provision of the Constitution and the
relevant statutes''.

The conference further resolved that:


  In order to achieve the above, the ANC must take the lead in ensuring
  that the peace and stability cluster departments are not subject to
  narrow party-politics, and this applies especially to the intelligence
  services. In this regard, the development of a national concensus on
  intelligence has to be a priority for the ANC and the ANC-led Government.
  This should also be accompanied by a change of attitude towards this
  cluster when it comes to the allocation of resources, especially the
  budget.

The ANC has no interest in dealing with these matters in any other way.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mev M E OLCKERS: Mevrou die Speaker, ek wil eerstens die hardwerkende,
lojale en eerlike lede van die veiligheidsdienste met groot waardering
bedank vir die lewensgevaarlike werk wat hulle in die belang van Suid-
Afrika doen. Die Nuwe NP salueer hulle hiervoor.

Maar dan is daar die ander kant van die saak. Die verslag van die Ouditeur-
generaal dat die swak manier waarop die SA Polisiediens se geheime dienste
en die Nasionale Intelligensie-agentskap die afgelope jaar hulle geldsake
gehanteer het hom dwing om 'n gekwalifiseerde verslag aan die Parlement
voor te lê, laat rooi gevaarligte vir die dienste se finansiële
bestuursvaardighede flikker.

Daar was nie slegs uiters swak finansiële bestuur nie, maar ook swak beheer
of algehele veronagsaming van regulasies. Bestuurders, veral van
streekkantore, word van onbevoegdheid en die goedkeuring van ongemagtigde
besteding en selfs diefstal beskuldig. By ondersoek van die Polisie se
geheime rekening is bevind dat onder meer bedrae van R44,4 miljoen en R48,2
miljoen ongemagtig bestee is, 34 motors gesteel is ensovoorts.

Daar kan geen verskoning vir hierdie swak toedrag van sake meer wees nie.
In die afgelope jare het die finansiële en toesighoudende vaardighede
jaarliks 'n afdraande grafiek getoon. Sekere onreëlmatighede staan reeds
sedert 1995 oor. Hoe lank gaan hierdie Parlement dit nog goedpraat of
ignoreer? Die vorige regering kan ook nie meer hiervoor blameer word nie,
want dit is al ses jaar sedert die nuwe bestuur vir sake verantwoordelik
is.

Dit is tyd dat die intelligensiedienste baie meer verantwoordelik optree en
die agting wat hulle behoort te geniet in werklikheid verdien. Dit is die
laaste plek waar bedrog as aanvaarbaar ervaar mag word. Daar sal diepgaande
en grootskaalse indiensopleiding in hierdie dienste moet plaasvind. Dit sal
as 'n absolute prioriteit gestel moet word. Miljoene rande word aan
konsultante bestee om verskillende take namens die dienste waar te neem, na
te vors en raad te gee, maar wanneer dit by die uitvoering daarvan kom, val
alles plat.

Geen land kan sulke onbeholpenheid in sy veiligheidsdienste bekostig nie,
en die staande komitee sal met 'n groot vergrootglas na die bestedings van
die dienste moet bly kyk. Geen diens of groep mense moet die idee kry dat
hulle onaantasbaar is nie en dat hulle aan niemand verantwoording hoef te
doen vir hoe hulle met die publiek se geld werk nie.

Wanneer die Ouditeur-generaal skriftelik navraag doen, word dit beantwoord
en nie net geïgnoreer nie. As dit dus na die Parlement gebring word omdat
die Ouditeur-generaal nie meer weet wat om te doen nie, maak dit die
Parlement ook skuldig as ons nie optree nie.

As 'n mens met geheime fondse en projekte werk, behoort jy uiters versigtig
te wees omdat die publiek baie krities oor sulke fondse staan. As die
waghond namens die mense wat belasting betaal, naamlik die Ouditeur-
generaal, in sulke kras taal 'n verslag lewer, moet die Minister en die
staande komitee 'n verantwoordelike en sterk standpunt inneem.

Ek kan vandag met absolute oortuiging sê dat hierdie staande komitee sterk
optree. Van die voorsitter tot by al die lede van die komitee bestaan daar
'n dringendheid dat hierdie situasie reggestel moet word. Ek was baie
beïndruk deur die openhartige en diepsnydende vrae tydens vergaderings en
die ondersoeke wat die komitee ingestel het. In werklikheid wag ons nog
steeds op sekere antwoorde. Dit is 'n voorreg om onder die voorsitter, me
Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, te dien, want sy gee goeie leiding, sy is
vasbeslote om dinge uit te sorteer en sy verdra nie nonsies nie. [Applous.]

Die Nuwe NP het met dank kennis geneem van die stappe wat die Minister
reeds gedoen het om hierdie probleme aan te pak. Ons sal die vordering fyn
dophou, maar weens bogenoemde redes en die feit van 'n gekwalifiseerde
verslag van die Ouditeur-generaal kan die Nuwe NP ongelukkig nie hierdie
begrotingspos steun nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, firstly I wish to thank, with great
appreciation, the hardworking, loyal and honest members of the security
services for the life-threatening work that they do in the interest of
South Africa. The New NP salutes them for that.

But then there is the other side of the coin. The report of the Auditor-
General relating to the poor manner in which the secret services of the SA
Police Service and the National Intelligence Agency have handled their
monetary affairs during the past year, which forced him to submit a
qualifying report to Parliament, sends out warning signals in respect of
the financial management skills of the services.
There was not only extremely poor financial management, but also poor
control or complete disregard of regulations. Managers, especially of
regional offices, are accused of incompetence, approving unauthorised
expediture and even theft. On investigating the secret account of the
Police it was found, inter alia, that there were amounts of R44,4 million
and R48,2 million in unauthorised expenditure, that 43 motorcars were
stolen, etc.

There can no longer be any excuse for this poor state of affairs. During
the last few years the financial and supervisory activities have shown an
annual downward trend on the graph. Certain irregularities have already
been standing over since 1995. How long is this Parliament still going to
defend or ignore this? The previous government can no longer be blamed for
this either, as the new management has been responsible for matters for six
years now.

The time has come for the intelligence services to act much more
responsibly and in fact earn the respect that they should enjoy. It is the
last place where fraud may be considered acceptable. In-depth and large-
scale in-service training will have to take place in these services. These
will have to be regarded as absolute priorities. Millions of rands are
spent on consultants to undertake various tasks on behalf of the services,
to do research and to give advice, but when it comes to putting things into
practice, everything falls flat.

No country can afford such ineptness in its security services, and the
standing committee will have to continue examining the expenditure of the
services very closely. No service or group of people must get the idea that
they are untouchable and that they are not accountable to anyone as regards
the way they handle the public's money.

When the Auditor-General issues a written enquiry it must be answered and
not just ignored. When it is therefore brought to Parliament, because the
Auditor-General no longer knows what to do, Parliament is also implicated
if we do not take action.

When one works with secret funds and projects, one should be extremely
careful, because the public is very critical about such funds. If the
watchdog on behalf of the people who pay taxes, namely the Auditor-General,
submits a report written in such strong language, the Minister and the
standing committee must take a responsible and strong stand.

I can say with absolute conviction today that this standing committee takes
strong action. From the chairperson to all the members of the committee
there is an urgency that this situation should be rectified. I was very
impressed with the frank and in-depth questions that were raised during
meetings arranged and investigations launched by the committee. We are in
reality still waiting for certain replies. It is a privilege to serve under
the chairperson, Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, because she provides good
guidance, she is determined to sort matters out and she brooks no nonsense.
[Applause.]

The New NP notes with appreciation the steps the Minister has already taken
in tackling this problem. We will keep a close watch on the progress made,
but for the aforementioned reasons and the fact of a qualified report by
the Auditor-General, the New NP unfortunately cannot support this Vote.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Dr S C CWELE: Madam Speaker, as much as Martha wishes us to forget the
past, the unfortunate situation is that the demon of apartheid is still
alive and kicking.
Last Thursday the Minister of Safety and Security outlined in this House
how the National Crime Prevention Strategy is succeeding to make South
Africa a better and a safer place to live in. Shame to the prophets of
doom, goodbye to negative publicity, and ``Halala'' to the majority of our
compatriots who correctly perceive this victory over criminals as one of
the signals clearly demonstrating that we are on course to a better life
for all.

Izinswelaboya, imidlwembe nezigelekeqe zishonelwa yilanga futhi azinalo
ikusasa kule lizwe. [Criminals, hooligans and robbers are in deep trouble.
They have no future in this country.]

Despite these successes, crime remains one of our biggest threats to both
human and national security. It remains our public enemy number one. The
challenge is compounded by the fact that crime, particularly organised
crime, is not just a simple national phenomenon, but often is transnational
in nature. It is further complicated by the increasing technological
sophistication of these criminals.

The sustainability of our success against crime will largely depend on the
way we strengthen and enhance the capacity of our intelligence agencies. We
concur with the Minister that he has done so much for so long from so
little. Honouring this undertaking does not necessarily qualify the
Minister to do everything from nothing. The budget of the services is
stretched to the limit.

Within our national Budget constraints, we should also agree that no amount
of budget increase will, on its own, result in a sustained victory over
criminals. We need to go beyond the mere allocation of more money to other
measures which will enhance efficiency, co-ordination and effective
utilisation of our limited resources.

The interministerial committee on security, or the Minister for
Intelligence, in particular, has the responsibility of promoting joint
approaches and co-operation of all services in our efforts to combat crime.
We strongly believe that the relationship between agencies should be based
on co-operation rather than on competition. This will eliminate the
possibility of any contradictions between various agencies or departments.

The strategic intelligence provided by the NIA is crucial to the sustained
success of our strategy. The technical intelligence of the South Africa
Police Service and the Scorpions is also vital to the succesful
investigation and prosecution of our common enemy, the criminals. The co-
operation agreements on the memorandum of understanding are of paramount
importance as the Minister indicated yesterday.

Our budget must be allocated in a manner that will enhance the capacity at
all levels, and more so, at operational levels. The police in particular
should go beyond planning and move swiftly in ensuring effective
intelligence at the station or area level.

Sources continue to provide vital information to our services. We should on
the other hand tighten the mechanism which will eliminate the duplication
of payment of sources by different services for the same information to the
state. We welcome the efforts for setting up the National Communication
Centre announced by the Minister yesterday. It will certainly help us also
to be on top of these technologically advanced criminals.

Our intelligence services are operating under stringent confines of our
legislation and Constitution. The mushrooming of private security
companies, some of which have the unrestricted potential to collect and
process information, may pose a threat to our national human security and
development. It is our responsibility to tighten or to come up with
legislation and regulations which will ensure effective control of the
formation and activities of these private security companies.

In conclusion, the role of the public and the community in the fight
against crime or criminals can never be more emphasised. We as publicly
elected representatives have the obligation to mobilise our communities to
adopt a culture of vigilance and to voluntarily provide information on the
criminal activities in their localities. We dream of a day when the SAPS
adverts for information rewards will be a thing of the past. It is this
partnership which will ultimately ensure the safety of all our citizens,
deepen our democracy and sustain human development in our country.

We would like to congratulate our Minister on providing political guidance
to our services. We thank the management of the services for their
leadership through these turbulent times. We are also indebted to thousands
of ordinary members of our intelligence community who remain loyal to our
cause. It is through their collective efforts that our democracy is
deepening. We owe it to them that we can today publicly say: Yes, we are on
course for a better life for all. [Applause.]

Mr L T LANDERS: Madam Speaker, we may agree with the hon Martha Olckers
that the Auditor-General's report is cause for concern. And we need to say
at the outset that the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence remains
vigilant and determined to root out any signs of corruption or fraud within
the intelligence services. However, what we should also focus on in this
debate are those steps that had already been put in place prior to the
publication of the Auditor-General's report.

In his introductory address to this debate, the hon the Minister referred
to money-laundering as one of the major threats facing this country. I am
aware that the Government should have introduced a Bill called the
financial intelligence centre Bill, which was supposed to help trace all
money-laundering efforts or, at least, certainly to keep tabs on them. We
do not know where this Bill is at this moment or what its status is, but we
would appreciate either the Minister for Intelligence or the Minister of
Finance, who I am informed is supposed to be sponsoring the Bill, to
provide this House with an answer in this regard.

It must be noted that the SA Police Service has achieved successes in its
operational crackdowns which were conducted in various parts of the country
in the recent past. It is hoped that these crackdowns not only continue,
but that they become joint operational activities backed by the
intelligence community. Corruption, particularly within the Public Service,
remains a blight on our society. It must also be noted that the Joint
Standing Committee on Intelligence - our chairperson in her address this
afternoon made mention of this - is especially concerned that to date
protective and preventive security measures and processes that help secure
documentation and sensitive information in these departments may not have
been adequately implemented in most Government departments.

One of these measures would be to appoint security officers in every state
and provincial department whose responsibility it would be to help ensure
that these protective measures are put in place and properly implemented.
In this regard, we want to take issue with all directors-general, heads of
departments and, indeed, even with Ministers whose departments have not
appointed security officers in their respective departments. We also take
issue with those departments and their heads who as yet do not even have
approved security policies.

The security officer whose position would be pegged at the level of a
director would preferably be located in the office of the head of that
department and would help ensure that an adequate security policy is drawn
up and carried out. I am not for a moment suggesting that the appointment
of security officers is the panacea to the problems within our departments,
including corruption, but this would certainly go a long way towards
dealing with the problems in this sector.

In his introduction to this debate the hon the Minister stated, amongst
other things, that Intelligence should be treated as a national asset.
Further, that Intelligence is a critical policy-making support function and
that the national security perspective has shifted to the threat to human
security, and finally, that a shortage of essential equipment is being
brought about by the diminishing Intelligence budget.

Other hon members have addressed this point and I wish to throw my little
bit into the pot. In order to meet and address the threats facing South
Africa, current and appropriate technological aids are necessary for our
Intelligence Services. Without these, our services face the risk of
slipping behind the rest of the world. Indeed, they face the risk of
slipping behind the technological capacity of even some African countries.
The extent to which information technology is used internationally has
become such a dominant feature of modern intelligence services that it
cannot be ignored.

If we do so, we ignore the maintenance and development of the technological
capacity of our services at our peril. To this end I want to also welcome
the hon the Minister's announcement about the establishment of the National
Communication Centre and the task team responsible for this. At this stage
I want to add my good wishes and congratulations to the newly appointed
Director-General of the SA Secret Service, Mr Tim Denis, and the newly
appointed Director-General and Deputy Director-General of the National
Intelligence Agency, Mr Vusi Mavimbela and Ms Pikoli respectively.

Notwithstanding the problems raised by the Auditor-General in his report,
and notwithstanding the actions by individual members of our Intelligence
Services as reported by the media, we are proud of the achievements of our
services. Like our hon the Minister, we therefore call on this House and on
the people of South Africa - if I am able to do so - to look upon or regard
our Intelligence Services as a national asset, as we in the Joint Standing
Committee on Intelligence do. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, in our
Constitution we say that national security must reflect the resolve of
South Africans, as individuals and as a nation, to live as equals, to live
in peace and harmony, to be free from fear and want and to seek a better
life. National security is subject to the authority of Parliament and the
executive, and is conducted in keeping with the law.

This budget debate has steered us closer to this vision. I therefore would
like to thank all members for their positive contributions and to assure
them that we will neither undermine our commitment towards making
Intellingence a national asset nor steer away from our search for a
national consensus. I will look closely at hon members' suggestions and
take aboard their concerns. Their contributions have been well received and
will be given the necessary attention.

I would like to say that we took into consideration many of the questions
that have been raised by colleagues. There are, maybe, only a few that need
attention, for example the issue of avoiding coming out in terms of cases
and inquiry boards. I think we answered that yesterday too, by saying that
we have actually brought in magistrates and prosecutors from outside to
ensure that there are no behind-the-scenes activities. It is in this spirit
that we look forward to the full participation of the Offical Opposition in
the affairs of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence. We are
definitely poorer without their involvement and participation.

A special word of gratitude goes to the chairperson of the Joint Standing
Committee on Intelligence, Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, and all members of the
committee. Their work as the eyes and ears of the legislature in the
affairs of Intelligence Services is vital. It is my wish that they soar to
greater heights in the oversight of our services.
Notwithstanding comments made yesterday about the Intelligence Services
budget, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for this year's
national Budget. This is one of the best budgets we have had as a nation
and we would like to congratulate him, and the Deputy Minister of Finance,
the director-general and the Department of Finance and its staff as a whole
for a job well done. Nangomso. [Applause.]

I would like to touch on three important issues before I resume my seat.
These are: the General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill, the transformation
of the Intelligence Academy, the audit committee and Africa Unity Day. The
General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill was introduced last night. This
Bill is part of the legislative changes that we spoke about previously and
is aimed at improving the intelligence administrative dispensation.

The Bill will help to put our disciplinary system in line with the latest
trends in labour law and to ensure fair labour practice. It will also
regulate the activities of former members, and will provide for the
Minister to issue regulations. To this end, I intend consulting widely so
as to ensure that concerns of the former members and those of the general
public can be taken into account before we promulgate these regulations.
Furthermore, the Bill will allow the Minister, in the interests of our
country, to issue regulations to protect sensitive information in
government departments and parastatals in keeping with the Minimum
Information Security Standards Guidelines that were adopted by Cabinet in
1997.

As a cluster, we have announced that steps will be taken to ensure that the
security services are well-equipped and armed with the necessary skills and
expertise. In pursuance of this, I have set up a working group to ensure
that the intelligence academy is a national centre of excellence that
specialises in intelligence. Its mission will be the production of
intelligence officers of international standing, and upgrading the existing
personnel to the same international standard in order to ensure that
intelligence in our country can meet the challenges of the 21st century.
This working group will report to me by the end of the year and a progress
report will be presented during the 2001-02 budget.

In preparation for the Public Finance Management Act, I would like to
report that an audit committee has been appointed to oversee the internal
audit structures of both the National Intelligence Agency and SA Secret
Service. Ms Zodwa Manase will chair the committee. The first meeting is
scheduled for tomorrow.

It is imposible for me to resume my seat without saying something about the
marvellous Africa Unity Day. Today is a special day for all of us on the
African continent: Africa Unity Day. As I was thinking about what to say
today, the words of Nelson Mandela, our former President, at the 1994 OAU
Summit seemed appropriate. I feel that, on this day, it is crucial that we
pay tribute to the role played by the continent in our struggle for
freedom, and our ultimate success resulting in a South African miracle. He
said:


  When the history of our struggle is written, it will tell a glorious tale
  of African solidarity, of Africa's adherence to principles. It will tell
  a moving story of the sacrifices that the peoples of our continent made,
  to ensure that the intolerable insult to human dignity, the apartheid
  crime against humanity, became a thing of the past. It will speak of the
  contributions of freedom - whose value is as measureless as the gold
  beneath the soil of our country - the contribution which all of Africa
  made, from the shores of the Mediterranean Sea in the north, to the
  confluence of the Indian and Atlantic oceans in the south.

  Africa shed her blood and surrendered the lives of her children so that
  all her children could be free. She gave of her limited wealth and
  resources so that all of Africa should be liberated. She opened her heart
  of hospitality and her head of wise counsel, so that we should emerge
  victorious. A million times, she put her hand to the plough that has now
  dug up the encrusted burden of oppression accumulated for centuries.

  One epoch with its historic tasks has come to an end. Surely, another
  must commence with its own challenges. Africa cries out for a new birth
  ...

It needs a new birth directed towards good governance, peace, stability,
human rights and democracy within the continent; a new birth in the quest
to rebuild African economies, have sustained economic development and a
better life for all our peoples; and a new birth that will help us deal
with hunger, unemployment and the deteriorating terms of trade and the
burden of debt.
I pay tribute to the President of the Republic and to the Deputy President
for their role in promoting peace and stability, in assisting with the
resolution of disputes and conflicts, and in guiding our intelligence
services in the quest to renew our continent. It is their visionary
leadership and their foresightedness that continues to make us a people
proud of being South African. May they continue walking in the footsteps of
African giants who, by their deeds and titanic efforts, led us to a
liberated Africa.

I am positive that our intelligence services are ready to play their
important statutory role and to fulfil their mandate in support of their
efforts. May we see the new birth of our continent in our lifetime! Happy
day, Africa! [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 10 - Finance, Vote No 10 - Finance(SA Revenue Service),
Vote No 31 - Statistics South Africa and Vote No 30 - State Expenditure:

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, I move to tell you
about the four departments' Votes we want to discuss here this afternoon.

The morning after the last Budget Speech, I was pleasantly surprised. I
opened the papers and saw accolades: ``Well done, Trev'' said one headline.
A cartoon showed people walking on air - ``Everything seems lighter now''
said the caption. Why was I surprised? It is because Finance Ministers soon
get used to not being popular. When we say think about tomorrow, it is a
problem, because tomorrow's children speak more softly than today's.

Four years ago, we gritted our teeth and took the pain of tightening our
belts - a pain that has allowed us more latitude today. But the problem in
our country, crippled as it is by our legacy of inequality and poverty, is
that we have constantly to think about today too. We have to think about
stilling the hunger of today, yet also vanquishing it from our society
tomorrow and of sowing at least some of the seed for tomorrow, while
distributing bread to the hungry today.

Our task is to fulfil our mandate to the people of this country, spelt out
by the President last June in his state of the nation address:


  This society must guarantee the dignity of every citizen on the basis of
  a good quality of life for every woman, man and child, without regard to
  race, colour or disability. It must be sustained by a growing economy
  capable of extending sustainable and equitable benefits to all our
  people.

  We seek to replace a society which, in many instances, has been and
  continues to be brutal and brutish in the extreme.

The Finance Ministry's task is to make that vision of creating a better
life for all, possible. We have found a new place in the world too, which
involves us raising our voice on behalf of the poor, not only in our
country, but certainly on the African continent. It is important to call
these issues to mind on Africa Unity Day, too.

One of our key tasks, as the Ministry, is to play a constructive part in
the world through deepening and broadening relations with international
financial institutions and bodies. This is not only to enhance our own
image as an attractive country for investors. There is a moral authority
and responsibility that rests with us too. In a world where about 1,3
billion people live on less than one dollar a day, where 1,5 billion people
do not have access to clean water, where the gap between rich countries and
the poor has never been wider, we need to use our voice to move the
conscience of the world to put poverty at the top of the agenda.

Our moral authority is closely related to what we can achieve here in this
country. In fact, we would argue that there is a dialectical relationship
between what we can help achieve in the world and what we achieve at home.
Each impacts on the other. We are increasingly being accepted as an
influential voice in debates on the issues such as highly indebted poor
countries, and the international financial architecture. We are the only
African country participating in the G20 and the Financial Stability Forum.
As the current chair of the IMF Board of Governors, we are playing a key
role in pushing for reform in that body, so that poorer countries should
have a greater voice and so that leaders from countries other than those in
Europe or North America get a look-in at the leadership of these
institutions.

We will continue to use our voice to push for more resources for the poor
countries of the world, and particularly, support to alleviate the plight
of our neighbours, such as Mozambique. After a vicious war, our neighbour
struggled hard to establish a legitimate government. The Mozambican
government and people set out an ambitious and an impressive path to
growth. Then that country was knocked right off course by the recent
floods. There is a sign now that the world's richer countries are beginning
to listen to the voices of those who have asked for the cancellation of
Mozambique's debt. But even this has come after our struggle. At a donor
conference earlier this month, the signs looked hopeful that our neighbour
will be given a headstart to get back on track.

In our own neighbourhood, we have successfully co-ordinated efforts by SADC
Finance Ministers to stop the envisaged IMF gold sales on the open market
last year as well as the revision of the Hipc initiative. We will continue
working with other governments in the region to develop policies that will
make easier the flow of economic goods between our countries. I believe
that this is a positive response to the challenge that Africa Day presents
us but every day must be Africa Day, every year Africa Year, and indeed the
century must be the African century.

At home we are trying to turn our Ministry into a dynamic force for
delivery and change. The four distinct departments that fall under the
Ministry - Finance, State Expenditure, the SA Revenue Service and
Statistics SA may be all about numbers on the surface, but fundamentally
they are about much more than numbers. We are driven by the creed of hope
that this Government has adopted - Batho Pele, people first. Put the people
first. The way this Ministry does that is by better management of our
resources; better and more transparent spending that has measurable
outputs; a fairer, more efficient tax-collection; and providing better
information that helps us plan our future.

It is not about numbers, but I must speak a little about numbers. First of
all the number four. Parliament is faced with four Votes this week on each
of the departments that fall under the Finance Ministry. But this is the
last year in which there will be two separate Votes for Finance and State
Expenditure.
Earlier this year the President agreed to the formation of a single
national Treasury from these two departments. I believe that this presents
us all with an opportunity to focus and streamline the work presently
undertaken by the two separate departments. But the new Treasury is not
only about streamlining. We want the Treasury to put in place the human and
institutional capacity to deliver services to our people, to watch over the
public purse, to ensure that money is well spent, and to rapidly create an
environment that will spur on the growth that will provide each and every
citizen with a dignified place in our country.

When the National Treasury is formed, a process that we imagine will take
between 18 to 24 months, it will be important to understand that this is
not simply a bureaucratic process. Since 1992, when the Treasury was split,
we have had the two departments - one focusing on financial management, and
the other making fiscal and economic policy. The fact that the two
functions are separated has undermined the effectiveness of our delivery.
Why? Because there is weak integration of economic and fiscal policy
considerations in expenditure management, because there is sometimes
duplication in communications with departments, and because, when we need
to spend every cent wisely, we need systems of financial regulation and
macroeconomic policy-making that draw on both sets of professional skills
that reside in the department - accounting and economics.

The new Treasury will expand the challenges facing us. I will outline those
later. But before doing that, I would like to reflect on some of the
benchmarks that the departments under this Ministry have met in the past
year. Firstly, in the MTEF, we have worked hard to ensure that we are now
well down the road of Budget reform, which includes the MTEF. The Budget
Office will be a key area of the new Treasury. Managing the domestic
economy is critical to put in place policies that will stimulate growth,
manage our debt, and ensure delivery of services to those who most need
them.

The Budget Office with continue to work with all Government departments and
the provinces to ensure that the MTEF works to get real value for money in
every sphere of Government. We have come a long way since the days when the
Budget was like a kind of pie that could be sliced up in very surprising
ways. The MTEF has introduced a level of transparency, predictability and
certainty.
Our key aim now is to produce output-based Budgets. The MTEF allows us
greater predictability over revenues, it enhances political oversight of
the Budget process, it increases transparency and accountability, it aligns
spending with Government's policy priorities, and it allows parliamentary
oversight over a major part of the process. In short, it establishes a
tradition of good governance and of good financial management.

I would like to repeat the appeal to Parliament to engage with the MTEF,
and for this Parliament to be the receptacle of the ideas of all the people
in our country, to advise us on the baseline allocations for the years that
lie ahead. The Budget is about prioritising policy. It is about ensuring
that we remain focused on shifting our expenditure towards the poorest of
the poor in our country.

Turning then to assets and liability management, our assets and liability
management has also been enhanced this year. Soon after the Budget, the
country's international investment rating was upgraded by Standard and
Poor. This, in part, has improved the successful execution of foreign debt
issues in difficult market conditions. We have also introduced new
borrowing instruments such as the inflation-linked bond. Because of our
upgraded status, the interest we pay now on a bond such as the Global US
dollar bond, which was reissued this year, is significantly lower than when
it was issued a year ago.

All of this culminated in a further reduction of debt-servicing costs in
1999-2000 to 5,5% of GDP, which has meant further resources available to us
for developemnt and reconstruction. For every R1 billion that we do not
borrow, we have R150 million more to spend on such things as education, on
improving health care, and on infrastructure.

This is a challenge that constantly faces us. We need to borrow less, but
we need to borrow. So when we borrow, we need to do so at the best possible
rates to ensure that what we need today does not cost us or our children
too heavily tomorrow. On the asset side, the exchequer benefited to an
amount of R7,7 billion representing the proceeds from the restructuring of
state assets. This was some R3,7 billion more than the amount budgeted for.

On financial management, both the departments of State Expenditure and of
Finance play a critical role in financial management. In the past year,
State Expenditure has focused on improving financial management in the
public sector and has continued to provide support to various provincial
and national departments.

On the expenditure control side, State Expenditure has developed a more
professional approach using business-oriented principles of sound financial
analysis. Parliament, through Scopa, as well as the Auditor-General, has
added considerable value to Government in this respect. Perhaps our most
important milestone this year is the coming into law of the Public Finance
Managment Act.

It is absolutely intrinsic to the way in which we manage the public
finances. The Act now requires that all departments table their budgets
with details of what they expect to spend, and on what, as well as what
they have spent during the past financial year. So, in fact, accounting
officers are made more accountable to this Parliament for how they have
used public resources. It requires departments to develop output-based
results. Both Finance and State Expenditure have invested considerable
energy into making this Act work, because it is so important to our future.

In respect of staffing, all four departments have shown significant shifts
in high levels of representivity and their annual reports spell that out.
It is important that transformation is not focused only on race and gender,
but also on the upgrading of skills in our departments, so that we can
continuously tackle issues of the future much better. Transformation is a
process without an end. It is ongoing and will remain the key performance
indicator for the management of the department.

The exciting challenges our country presents, the opportunity we have of
creating something new, a society premised on humane values that work for
its citizens and plays a constructive role in the world, has meant we
attracted some of the very best professional skills from the private sector
to our department. Some of our officials have come to work for us on
contracts, and some have gone back to the private sector. All have left a
mark on the Public Service and we, I hope, on them. They have made a
valuable contribution to the diligence and vision that has gone into the
extensive Budget reform we have undertaken over the past two years.

Turning to some of the challenges facing the new Treasury, firstly, we
recognise that in the process of transformation, the only constant is
change. The key focal areas in the period ahead are continuing Budget
reform, including the integration of the white book and the National
Expenditure Survey, the implementation of the Public Finance Management
Act, even greater improvements to risk management, the management of state
assets, the restructuring of the public investment commissioners, and the
Government employees' pension fund, and to work for the democratization of
the Bretton Woods institutions, to ensure more equitable spreading of the
benefits of globalisation and much faster progress on debt relief and
poverty reduction. Finally, in respect of challenges on the Treasury side,
by this time next year, when we report to Parliament, we will be well down
the road of creating a single national Treasury.

In respect of the revenue service, I think it is important to recognise
that freedom carries responsibilities as well as joys. Democracy is about
good citizenship, and the responsibility of a good citizen is to pay taxes.
Only then can we move in the direction of a better life for all. The
capacity of Government to deliver is crucially dependent on Government's
ability to collect revenue. In this regard, the SA Revenue Service plays a
key role.

There are still momentous challenges in South Africa in relation to
economic and social transformation. Much more still remains to be done, and
one of the central goals of Government policy is to reduce the very high
level of income inequality in South Africa. In order to achieve this,
Government focuses on redistribution and development.

A transfer of income through tax and state expenditure is our main
instrument for redistribution and development. However, such improvement
cannot only come from redistribution. It must also flow from sustained
economic growth. The Government needs to make investments in human capital
and public infrastructure, to support such growth; but for this, it needs
money, and lots of it. So, raising revenue is vital for the survival of the
nation.

Much change is in evidence in Sars since 1994. It has exceeded revenue
collections by a combined R25 billion over the past five years. In the last
financial year, Sars surpassed its collection target of R193 billion by
over R6 billion. It is exciting to report that, for the first time, we
have, in fact, broken through the R200 billion mark for revenue. This has
been achieved at the cost of less than 1% of the total revenue collected.
However, it is not just about revenue collection, but also about making tax
fair. Five years ago, we abolished discrimination against married women.

We have continued on that road to equity. This year, more than 40% of the
R10 billion benefit we gave to taxpayers, went to those earning less than
R70 000 a year. A further 38% went to those earning between R70 000 and
R150 000. We have increased the interest exemption for the elderly, and we
have reduced taxes for individuals across the board. We have introduced
capital gains tax as a backstop, but also as a means for further equity. We
have made tax fairer, but, at the same time, we have tried to gear it
towards stimulating economic growth.

One of the problems that does confront us is that South Africa has too many
business people, small and large, who demand that Government must deliver
on its undertakings, but effectively sabotage good governance and foster
the lawlessness they decry, by not paying their taxes and engaging in
questionable activities. South Africa has too many professionals in tax
matters, who build their fortunes by concocting one scheme or another to
reduce flows to the fiscus. We also have too many syndicates whose primary
aim is conspiring to steal millions of rands from the fiscus through VAT
and customs fraud. We have too many citizens who either do not understand
the importance of tax, and yet others who do not care that they are
participating in tax evasion by not registering.

All in all, we have too many citizens who chose to ignore the full extent
of their tax obligations. Perhaps hon members can apply their minds as to
how far that extra R20 billion would have gone to eliminate poverty and
financing things like intelligence, and so on. We need to raise the revenue
in order to spend it wisely.

Very importantly, the infrastructure that this country needs, and the vast
social needs, can only be financed through better tax revenues, and we all
have an interest in securing that. The hon President Mbeki has given his
full support to this, and he said, in his state of the nation address:
``Tax criminality feeds other forms of criminality, and will not be
tolerated.'' We respond to that challenge he has set for us.

Sars will, within days, launch an intensive investigation into major
industries in this country that we suspect of being awash in customs and
VAT-related fraud, and I think the House should applaud that. [Applause.]
Sars is also in the process of rapid and far-reaching internal change, not
only in accounting systems, but also in the skills and technology
operational within the organisation.

Overall, it is staffed by honest, dedicated professionals who are committed
to change and improvement, but there are still lacunae of inefficiency, of
lack of skill, and sometimes they are unhelpful to the public in some
offices. This must and will change. Today, I would also like to advise this
House that sometimes Government is criticised for being too soft on
corruption, but at Sars, this will not be tolerated amongst the officials.
Just recently, 20 officials were dismissed for bribery and corruption, and
we will continue to embark on a campaign to ensure that we can rid Sars of
corrupt staff.

Turning then to Statistics SA, getting it right is the only task. Part of
getting it right is to have the right data to work with, and this is the
role of Statistics SA. As Dr Orkin says, ``If we cannot measure it, we
cannot manage it.'' Hon members may remember that after the last census, we
temporarily lost some three million people from our population. A Zapiro
cartoon, at the time, showed two statisticians standing outside the door of
the Minister of Finance with a coin. One says to the other: ``Heads, you
tell him we are missing three million people.'' It did not sound funny at
the time. However, in retrospect, it was a salutary lesson in how
important, but also how difficult, it is to get things right. We have to
count correctly in a country where nearly half of our population do not
have formal addresses, where many settlements do not even have roads to
them or through them and where the statistics we have inherited from the
past government were just hopelessly inadequate.

Now Statistics SA has been overhauled. In the past year, we have become one
of the first developing countries to comply with the special data
dissemination standard, a factor which contributes greatly to our
legitimacy, also in international capital markets. Government's priority,
as we have said before, is to create the conditions under which the formal
and informal sectors can provide jobs for people. So, an understanding of
how our labour markets are working is very crucial to us, especially given
the powerful impact of globalisation. Accordingly, the first new activity
which Statistics SA will undertake, at a cost of about R14 million, is a
twice-yearly labour force survey. This will allow a dynamic understanding
of shifts between formal and informal employment, and the increasing use of
subcontracting and outsourcing in the economy.

The new labour force survey involves repeat visits to the sample
households. There are enormous difficulties in attempting this in a country
such as ours, where, as we have said, so many millions do not even have an
address. Statistics SA is also refining our economic statistics to provide
us with detailed knowledge of the regions and provinces of our country. We
are developing a measure for gross regional product that will quantify and
qualify economic activity province by province. This will be of invaluable
assistance to economic planners in Government and in the private sector.

Sometimes Statistics SA tells us what we do not want to hear but must hear.
It plays a role akin to the messenger in that searing play Antigone by
Sophocles. When the messenger goes to King Creon to tell him that, in
defiance of his orders, Antigone intends burying her brother, the messenger
decries his own fate, and I quote:


  And me, poor wretch, the lot condemns to get
  This piece of luck. I come a post unwilling, I well believe it, to
  unwilling ears;
  None love the messenger who brings bad news.

But without the messenger of Statistics SA, our planning would be to no
avail.

Already we have discovered new truths in the latest October Household
Survey, notably that total employment has remained constant despite some
fierce international economic pressures, with jobs lost in the formal
sector largely matched by informal sector job creation. But, notably too,
that new entrants to the labour market, mainly the youth and women, are not
finding the jobs they need.

Statistics SA's main focus in the next year will be on planning for the
2001 census. Let me just say, because I am running out of time, that Census
2001 is going to be an important challenge. It will be undertaken in 11
official languages, but it needs a mammoth public campaign to maximise
awareness and participation across the length and breadth of this country.
I must appeal to hon members to use constituency offices to the best effect
in spreading the message of Census 2001. Let everyone be counted and let
our people know that they count.

In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the
professional staff of the four departments, the Director-General of Finance
- and she is also acting Director-General of State Expenditure - Maria
Ramos, and her staff; the Commissioner of SA Revenue Service, Pravin
Gordhan, and his staff; Dr Mark Orkin, the head of Statistics SA; Barbara
Hogan, the chairperson of the portfolio committee, and to all the members;
and, of course, also to Deputy Minister Mpahlwa who will be addressing the
members in a few minutes.

Our democracy is young, but we believe that it is strong and supple. To
grow, it needs roots of accountability, of delivery and of an environment
for economic growth. We must take our place in Africa and in the world. We
believe that the Finance Ministry, working closely with our colleagues in
Government, can become the engine of growth and the instrument for our
delivery. [Applause.]

Ms B A HOGAN: Mr Chairperson, yesterday the Director-General of Finance,
who is also the acting Director-General of State Expenditure, was commended
by the Ministry of the Public Service and Administration for the quality of
work which she delivers as a director-general. I would like to congratulate
her, not simply because of the commendation, but because we, as the
Portfolio Committee on Finance, have watched her, over these past five to
six years, run the department with unequalled skill, capacity and
professionalism. I think she has, in many ways, driven the changes in that
department more than most of us can appreciate. So I would like to
congratulate her. [Applause.]

I would also like to congratulate the staff who have given her support.
Those of us who have had interaction with the staff have realised the high
level of professionalism of this staff. It is a bit difficult when we have
the portfolio committee hearings on the Budget, because the staff arrives
en masse and presents a highly professional view of what they have achieved
over the year.

An interesting fact about what they present is that it is a department that
is continually in motion, continually in transformation and continually
reaching out for new objectives. Scarcely have they completed one
transformation project when they are already moving on to the next
transformation project. I think that they are an example of a commendable
department who have secured their place in the financial systems of this
country in a very commendable way. [Applause.]

I do not merely say this to congratulate a good department. I would like to
refer to the comments made by Thomas Friedman in his very interesting book
The Lexicon and the Olive Tree, in which he says that if a country is to
sustain the brutalities, and often the effects, of globalisation, it has to
ensure that its institutions are properly in place. Friedman goes on to say
that for instance a country like Russia, which had to do major
institutional transformation and deal with the effects of globalisation,
could hardly have been expected to survive the ravages of globalisation and
the challenges of transformation at the same time.

We, in South Africa, have been singularly lucky. We inherited a very good
financial management system, and we have a department that has overseen
fundamental changes in financial management which have contributed to the
stability of this country. The way this country was able to withstand the
1998 slow down in the world economy is a tribute to the economic and
financial management of this country.

What we also need to look at as Parliament, and something that we have not
been keeping pace with, is the increasingly important role that the Finance
Ministry and this Goverment are playing in international financial
developments. We have not had a formal report to our committee yet of the
spring meetings of the IMF. But, let us pause a while and look at the role
that the Finance Ministry has been playing in international financial
issues and realise how seriously and how importantly this country is being
taken in terms of its voice in that arena. For instance, our Minister now
chairs the board of the World Bank and the IMF and will chair the annual
meetings of both these bodies in Prague later this year. He chairs the
committee which examines the remuneration of the executives of the World
Bank and the IMF. He is the sole representative of the Africa I
constituency, that is the English-speaking African countries. He will
shortly hold the chair in the international monetary and financial
committee of the IMF. He participates in the G20, that is the meetings of
emerging and industrialised countries whose job is to promote international
financial stability; and South Africa is the only African representative.

Besides the IMF and the World Bank, South Africa co-ordinates the finance
and investment sector of the Southern Africa Development Community and
participates fully in the work of the African Development Bank, and so and
so on. This international role is incredibly important, and I think the
important role that South Africa is accorded is in recognition of the
reforms that we have been able to achieve.

We have already achieved certain successes. For instance, the very serious
lobbying that we undertook regarding the intended gold sales of the IMF,
and how we were able to influence them to change their direction to off-
market sales, is an indication of that. So, we look forward, as Parliament,
to engage in a much more sustained way in the way that we are participating
and are being accorded a very important role in these international
institutions. I would like to congratulate the Minister and his team for
playing such a vital role in these institutions.
But the excellence of this Finance Ministry does not relate only to its
international financial work. For instance, the Public Investment
Commissioners and the Government Employees Pension Fund received
unqualified audit reports. In fact, the Government Employees Pension Fund
received the Golden Arrow Award from the professional management review for
the quality of its management and its transformation.

We are also aware of the massive changes being undertaken by Sars and
Statistics SA. As the Minister has pointed out, we are gaining much, much
more in terms of our revenue than we have ever received before. This is an
indication of increasing professionalism of Sars, and we have seen
Statistics SA transforming itself into an agency which is commendable for
the kinds of statistics which it is producing that are relevant to our
country as a developing country.

Finally, South Africa was one of the four middle-income countries which
were investigated by the IMF in terms of financial sustainability. The
report of the IMF is very interesting because, in terms of the legal
framework, it says that the quality and scope of the financial sector's
legal framework are most impressive. The laws are well drafted and
comprehensive in their coverage, they are kept up to date through regular
amendments and, periodically, new laws have consolidated the various
amendments. The IMF goes on to comment on the soundness of our financial
management systems in this country and commends the country for it. Once
again, this department needs its due regard.

With that, I would then like to move on to the budget itself. The
department's budget has increased by approximately R915 million. The major
increases are R325 million, which goes to Sars, and R300 million which will
go towards infrastructural development and which will be used by four
provinces to correct the ravages incurred by the disaster management fund.
Then there is a very important item which, I think, has been overlooked in
a lot of commentaries, and that is the R246 million which goes to increased
medical aid payments for those people who have left the civil service and
Government's contribution to continuing medical aid.

Those of us who have looked at the graphs will recognise that Government's
contribution to medical aid for retired civil servants has shot up from
R250 million in about 1994 and will hit about R900 million, nearly a R1
billion, in about a year to 18 months. We are decreasing our public debt
service costs, but at the same time this is an increasing spiral of growth.

As regards the allocation to Sars, we are concerned that it is still
inadequate. Sars has an 18-month programme for restructuring and there is
no significant increase in that period to cover those restructuring costs.
Last year, we voted for more money in the adjustments estimate. I certainly
hope that this year we will be able to do so in the same way.

The infrastructural spending is going to be vital to this country and I
would hope, as has happened in the Budget Council, that a lot of discussion
takes place as to why we are not able to deliver on infrastructure in an
appropriately expedient manner. We certainly have blockages which need to
be cleared. An infrastructural investment plays a critical part in
Government's contribution to growth.

The other issue which we would like to raise with the Ministry is
procurement reform. We would like to see a paper on procurement reform. A
Green Paper is there, but it is not yet completed. On retirement funding,
the national consultative forum on retirement funding wound down and it
needs to be revitalised, or at least an overall look at what we are doing
in retirement funding needs to be instituted because it has major
implications for all South Africans.

About the money laundering Bill, we understand that it is going to be
coming through shortly, and we look forward to this eagerly awaited Bill,
because it is absolutely necessary as one of the last set of Bills to
counter economic corruption. The NDA, the National Development Agency, has
been slow to take off and its work is critical to NGOs and for civil
society. We see that a board has been established, and we look forward to
this agency now beginning to operate with the due urgency which is
required. We also look forward to reports about the Umsobomvu Trust and the
Isibaya Fund to hear what is happening there, and to further reforms of the
PIC and the pension fund.

We also look forward to reforms of the Special Pensions Board as they are
necessary and the department is going to make submissions to us in about a
couple of weeks' time on this, and we look forward to further debate on the
regulation of the microlending industry. The Department of Trade and
Industry has already taken tentative steps forward, but we feel that it
needs a more fundamental approach than merely what has been put forward at
this stage. So, we look forward to a debate on that.

Finally, we look forward to getting rid of this great white book that we
get on budget statistics. It is completely incomprehensible and illegible.
We welcome the Minister's promise to us that from next year we will not get
it. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Chairperson, during his speech, the hon the Minister
referred to the very favourable post-Budget newspaper headlines.
Unfortunately, things do not look as rosy today as they did then. But, let
us hope that the recent disappointing figures over the last week or two are
just temporary hiccups in economic developments. I would like to join the
Minister and the chair of the portfolio committee in congratulating the
director-general and her staff on the quality of their work and, in
particular, on the very high quality of the documentation produced.

The Minister also deserves credit for the good sense and determination
which he has displayed in adhering to firm fiscal discipline. One is aware
that it is often not easy to do so in the face of numerous pressures, but
so far he has been admirably steadfast, which is surely in the interest of
all South Africans. The view that service delivery problems have more to do
with serious management deficiencies than with a shortage of money has been
vindicated time and again by reports of the auditor-general. These reports
have demonstrated, sadly but clearly, that we have major management
deficiencies in very many of our Government departments at both national
and provincial level.

I wish to raise two areas of concern this afternoon. Firstly, the Finance
Ministry needs to rid itself of a tendency to allow justified satisfaction
with some achievements to translate itself into complacency on other
issues. Most of South Africa's economic fundamentals are good or at least
reasonable, yet economic growth is unsatisfactory. Domestic and foreign
fixed investment is sluggish, and unemployment continues to rise to
dangerous levels. Most of these problems are outside the immediate area of
responsibility of the Minister of Finance. However, there is no excuse for
reality denial, being rude to one's opponents when they criticise, or for
disparaging foreign investors or noninvestors, to be more precise. It does
not help.

The Minister can go off the deep end like he did in question time last
week, but it will not help. The Government can call reluctant foreign
investors white racists, imperialists, greedy capitalists and/or Afro-
pessimists, or whichever derogatory terms take their fancy from time to
time. But, this will not shame people into investing in South Africa. We
need to be telling South African's not how unfair the world is or how how
hard done by we are, but that the world does not owe us a living. Our
destiny is in our own hands and investors and job creators can choose to go
anywhere in the world. We have to make our country attractive as an
investment destination for locals and foreigners.

Moving in the right direction is not good enough. We have to accelerate to
catch up with our competitors for trade and investment if we are to
prosper. Good economic fundamentals are necessary, but are not a sufficient
condition to attract investment and create jobs. Like all countries, we
have our pluses and minuses. The fact is, however, we are not at present
succeeding in attracting the foreign direct investment which we need to
achieve high economic growth rates and substantial reductions in
unemployment.

In these circumstances, we dare not add to the negatives. Let me give
members a few examples. The secretary-general of the governing party in
South Africa advises his party's alliance partner to, I quote,
``intensively hate capitalism'', and, I quote again, ``to understand the
working system of the capitalist in order to defeat it''. Secondly, we have
labour laws that are so onerous and unworkable that Government departments
and parastatals themselves apply to be exempted or to have their
implementation postponed.

We have a number of Cabinet Ministers in key economic portfolios who chose
to be members of the SACP. [Interjections.] We have confused, inept and
reluctant privatisation, and we are planning to introduce a capital gains
tax, recognised internationally as one of the most complex taxes ever
invented. We can mock, brush aside or laugh at foreigners who do not
understand our history or our particular circumstances. That may make us
feel good, but we will not get the investors here. Every actual or
perceived negative is another hassle factor which encourages investors to
go elsewhere.

Good economic fundamentals are a major plus for South Africa, but they are
not enough. The Government must stop being complacent. We must do what is
necessary to create a climate in which we can attract substantial fixed
investment, and so achieve economic growth rates of 6% or more, and
thereby, provide jobs for the millions of desperate and unemployed people
in our country.

My second concern also relates to a justified overconfidence. This time, it
is in relation to the SA Revenue Service. In reply to a parliamentary
question about capital gains tax, the Minister said: ``Considerable
progress has been made to improve the administrative capacity of Sars,
providing a stable administrative platform from which to undertake the far-
reaching tax reform initiatives announced in this year's Budget.''

There is no doubt that Sars has made commendable progress in many areas
over the past few years, and deserves to be congratulated. This does not,
however, mean that it is already functioning at high levels of efficiency,
or that it will have the capacity to handle a complex tax, such the capital
gains tax, in just nine or ten months' time.

Let me illustrate by giving a few recent examples of Sars' remaining
problems. We have been told for the last three or four years that a
simplified income tax was in the process of being produced. Sars has not
managed to do so; we are still waiting. Early this year, there were massive
errors at Sars, resulting in widely inaccurate tax assessments being sent
out by their thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, and giving rise to
headlines, such as ``Huge tax bills botch-up'', and ``Taxman's thousands of
mistakes''. These errors ranged from massive overassessments to the
distribution of refund cheques, sometimes very large, to which the taxpayer
was not entitled. One example was the Johannesburg manager, Mr Joy
Rabotapi, who was told by Sars that he would receive over R100 000 as a
refund, when he was not entitled to a refund at all.

The frequency of errors in assessments seems to vary, but tax consultants
and accountants who have been quoted in newspaper reports, or have
contacted me personally, indicated that the erroneous assessments amounted
to 10% to 50% of returns lodged. And then just last month, the Receiver of
Revenue was unable to issue the first monthly return forms for the skills
development levy to employers on time. So, even if they were registered,
they were unable, in Cape Town at least, to comply with the law.

A further example of the limited capacity of Sars was demonstrated earlier
this week when the Portfolio Committee on Finance was informed that, at
that stage, it was not possible for Sars to impose a minimum penalty for
late VAT returns, because the computer program was no able to handle it,
and that it would take some time for it to be feasible to make the
necessary adjustments.

I say these things not to belittle the commendable efforts made by Sars and
the considerable achievements that have been recorded today. Nevertheless,
irrespective of the other merits and demerits of a capital gains tax for
South Africa, there is little doubt in my mind that we would be foolish to
try to start implementing it in April next year. It also fills me with
alarm that it seems quite likely that Parliament will only see the relevant
Bill early next year, just weeks, or, at best, a couple of months, before
it is due to come into effect. I believe that if the portfolio committee is
expected to do its job properly, we must, at the latest, get the proposed
law by the end of October this year.

In conclusion, let me say that we need to build on the very real
achievements that Finance, State Expenditure, Sars and Statistics SA have
made. But we also need to beware of complacency. Every action must be
measured against the yardsticks of fixed investment, economic growth, and
most of all, job creation. We cannot indulge ourselves by looking at our
own history and trying to explain away things that we do that are
inexplicable to potential investors.

One need only meet with them, and they are looking at the whole world as to
where they put their investments. When one has to start trying to explain
the background, why it is not so bad, and why they do not have to worry
about this or that factor, we end up not getting the investments; and that
has to be our top priority, if we are going to help the desperately poor
and the unemployed in this country. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Chairperson, over the past four years, the Department of
Finance has achieved an aura of professionalism and competence, which is
very reassuring. Along with this, the department has gained the reputation
of being a department which actually does, in most instances, what it sets
out to do. In other words, it delivers. With this in mind, it is rather
difficult to express any serious misgivings about the department's Vote,
about that money we want to afford them for the current financial year - a
Vote which, when ignoring or putting aside the allocations concerning
transfers and state pensions, amounts to less than R100 million.

As with most successful organisations, the department has structured itself
in a way which optimises its functionality by way of seemingly logical
branches and subcomponents thereof. And perhaps more important to its
successfulness, are the individuals, the people, that the department has
placed in positions across these branches. The department's ability to
secure the services of talented and hard-working officials is a secret they
ought to share with certain other departments.

Of all these valuable people in the Department of Finance - and I would
agree with the hon Barbara Hogan and Ken Andrew - there is none more so
than Maria Ramos. Her all-round ability as a technocrat, and as an
administrator, has made her an exceptional director-general. But I suppose
it is when we pause to acknowledge her value that we are reminded that she
is in the final year of her contract, and that there must be much reason
within her to seek out more tranquil pastures at the end of her term.

Certainly, no one is indispensable, and there will always be someone who
can do the job, but for many of us who know of the special qualities Maria
brings to her position, there is a feeling of anxiety as to what her future
plans might be. And I think it is also an anxiety that certain markets will
reflect, should she vacate the director-general's chair at the end of her
term.

Turning to the Department of State Expenditure and the decision the
Minister referred to to amalgamate this department with the Department of
Finance, I think, on the balance of considerations, this change seems to
make good sense. This is besides it being an implicit requirement of the
new Public Finance Management Act, wherein the responsibilities spelt out
for the new Treasury, I think, more or less dictate a coming together of
the two departments. So, there will be one department - I suppose known as
the Department of Finance - but which some will refer to as the Treasury.

I look forward to seeing the new expanded organogram - its arrangement of
the various functions and the locality of officials from the Department of
State Expenditure, in particular, and how they will be factored into the
bigger department. I think there are some very dedicated individuals in
that department who, I believe, will thrive in the new integrated setting.

The Department of State Expenditure's recent history, however, has been
somewhat chequered - strong and reliable in some areas of its work, but
particularly weak, almost to a point of being a nonplayer, in key areas of
financial management across Government. This has frustrated the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts, on occasion, as it has the Auditor-General.
We do acknowledge, however, the recently appointed Deputy Director-General
of State Expenditure and his indications that he intends to rectify and
correct some of these shortcomings. And of course we acknowledge the
possibility that the new Treasury, once that comes into being, will also
play an active role in introducing these types of corrections.

Remaining with the financial responsibilities of the new Treasury, its
regulations - which recently saw the light of day - do give rise to some
questions, if not to some concern, this, in the main, being the significant
number of regulatory requirements of the very many accounting officers to
have to seek rulings and decisions from the Treasury before acting. Some of
these decisions even include frequent incidents of unauthorised
expenditure.

From my experience - and I am sure that of a number of my colleagues on the
public accounts committee - I think the nature and incidence of some
decisions will impact very heavily on the Treasury's capacity. In addition,
we might ask, if the extent of this involvement by Treasury is consistent
with the Minister's let-managers-manage approach, I am aware that there is
at least some concurrence with my concern within the department.

Looking ahead to the combined department, we can see the established well-
functioning branches, most of which concern the broader macroeconomic
managenemt responsibilities. We can then see the re-establishing of
branches, most of which concern broader financial management
responsibilities. Together, these will comprise a formidable range of
responsibilities, so formidable, in fact, that one could question its
viability. However, I think, knowing the Minister's established ability to
surround himself with the right people with the right skills and attitudes,
and his ability to motivate them in the right direction, we can be
confident that the new department will gel and will work effectively.

With regard to Sars, there are a number of observations worth making. I
think the first and most important is that which has been made by previous
speakers, ie its collection performance, where, once again, even in the
current year - the one to which this Vote that we are talking about relates
- budget overruns on the revenue side seem very likely.

Without detracting from Sars' great effort in this regard, I think it would
be informative to see an analysis of these overruns, showing both the
positive and the negative influences which should cover influences such as
the GDP and CPI movements, new taxes, changes in tax rates and, of course,
the actual Sars efficiency gain - perhaps even a breakdown of those gains,
how they came about. I think such an analysis could well, at the end of the
day, show Sars to be deserving of even greater applause.

In his introduction of Nits, the new computerised income tax system - this
is a big issue too - the full implementation of which also features in
Sars' current Vote, Nits is clearly the second stage of the revolution, the
improved collection revolution. Once the system is fully operational, with
its tentacles checking out key areas' relevant information, Sars will be in
a position to circumvent many instances of tax evasion, many of these for
the first time.

Then there is a third issue, and this regards the supposed new attitude of
Sars - I think it was first alluded to by a senior member of the Katz
commission, describing Sars' over-zealous approach. It is of some concern
to note the more recent emergence of a chorus of voices now criticising
Sars as becoming arrogant and even thuggish. We see in the latest
Accountancy South Africa - which is South Africa's leading accountancy
journal, produced by the chartered accountants' organisations - similar
reservations expressed in that direction. Is this all just the carping of
people who resent Sars' new effectiveness, or is there a growing behaviour
or tendency within Sars which is inappropriate?

A final Sars-related observation I wish to make is that which suggests
inadequate co-ordination between Sars and the Department of Finance
concerning tax policy and practice matters. Much of what Sars does impacts
on the economy, specifically investment, job creation and savings, things
that Sars does not always consult the department on. The department does,
of course, have a tax policy unit. Examples of this include the numerous
double taxation agreements which this country signs with other countries,
and which are negotiated purely by Sars and then put up for ratification or
signature. They are not processed by the Department of Finance. I think
there are other examples we saw even this week in the form of the current
Taxation Laws Amendment Bill which is before the Portfolio Committee on
Finance, where there are clear inconsistencies with the broad tax policy
aims made public by the Minister and certain tax modifications that we see
in this Bill.

Maybe a small process change could rectify the situation and thereby give
us the reassurance that any new legal and other important tax arrangements
are always considered in the larger policy context, prior to their
introduction. All and all, Sars is making an important progress, but still
faces significant challenges. However, knowing the commissioner, as a
number of us do, I have no doubt that these challenges will be overcome.
The commissioner is one of those people, I think, who never even considers
failure. And I suppose with his skills and particular band of resolve he
does not have to consider failure.

Finally, a few words on Statistics SA: there is very little to comment on
here other than to acknowledge that Dr Orkin and his team seem to have
silenced the detractors with a growing integrity and reliability of their
products. I think especially critical here are the CPI and the GDP areas,
and I am aware of a number of economists, both in the public and the
private sectors, who are highly appreciative of the factual and useful
qualities of the numbers that Statistics SA is producing.

Perhaps I can also use this occasion to express and convey an appreciation
to Statistics SA from the Standing Committee on Public Accounts; to Dr
Orkin and his staff - in particular his financial management staff - for
the much-improved state of financial management in his section. This was
clearly evidenced in the recently produced Auditor-General's report.

With that - and, I think, as must be obvious from the remarks I have made
this afternoon - my party is happy to support each of the four Votes before
us.

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, hon members, it is a pleasure to be part of this
debate today. I think it would be proper to mention that I am going to
focus on the Department of State Expenditure. But it would also be improper
not to applaud the hon member from the DP who, in his search to discredit
this Vote, was unable to do so within the confines of the Vote before us
and chose to look outside of the Vote, quoting the secretary-general of the
ANC on issues which are not part of this debate.

With regard to the Department of State Expenditure, Dr Gavin Woods, in
fact, captured it very clearly when he said, this is one department where
one finds very little misgivings to espouse on this podium. The Department
of State Expenditure is charged with a mammoth task. Its aim is to produce
controlled, accurate and timely financial results of the highest
professional standards by developing norms, standards and consultative
capacity systems for monitoring financial performance, as well as
professionally qualified financial managers in all spheres of government
through integrated financial systems, effective management of information
resources and professionally trained personnel.

One of the key performance areas of this department is to manage, account
and report on the national revenue and the Reconstruction and Development
Programme funds. In the light of these, an increase of 18% is quite fair
and appropriate, if not just adequate.

The total budget is R1,3 billion, and 19,1% of this represents personnel
expenditure, hence fulfilling its mission of people development and
professionalism. The strategic mandate of the department involves, firstly,
the promotion of public accountability and economic efficiency in the
management of state finances; secondly, advising on the allocation of
financial resources, in accordance with Government policies; thirdly,
ensuring continuous development of financial administration of Government;
fourthly, ensuring that total expenditure remains within approved levels;
fifthly, managing procurement and logistics in Government; sixthly,
developing appropriate support systems; and, lastly, building financial
management capacity in Government.

In order to fulfil its mandate, this department has four branches. The
first one is expenditure control, which is responsible for the monitoring
of budgetary allocated expenditure to each national department, provincial
government and state institution. The second one is the Office of the State
Tender Board which is responsible for administering procurement and for
monitoring and disposing state-movable assets. The third one is the Office
of the Accountant-General which is responsible for the policy and financial
management systems within the department, and the last one is planning and
corporate services which deal with the matters relating to the budget,
research and planning, whilst corporate services deal with internal,
departmental, financial and human resource management.

The structure of both the Department of Finance and this department is
under revision, as has been mentioned by the Minister and previous
speakers, to give effect to the establishment of the national Treasury as
required in terms of the Public Finance Management Act of 1999. The ANC-led
Government does this in order to improve sector financial management in the
public sector and to transform and to modernise public finance management
as quickly as possible. As I have indicated that one of the key performance
areas of this department is to manage and report on the national revenue
and RDP funds, let me turn to the National Development Agency and the
Umsobomvu Fund.

The National Development Agency was established through the National
Development Agency Act of 1998, with the primary aim of promoting an
appropriate and sustainable partnership between the Government and civil
society organisations in order to eradicate poverty and its causes.
Although having to take over from the Transitional National Development
Trust was quite a mammoth task, this task has since been completed. A
vision and a mission have been developed and a strategic plan is in place.
The NDA has received a R100 million from the Government for the financial
year 1999-2000 and awaits an additional contribution of R100 million from
the IDT and a further R92 million from the European Union in June 2000.

More than 4 000 projects have already been pre-assessed and, of these, 209
have been approved. About 1 187 have been recommended for rejection, 2 657
have been prioritised and are awaiting assessment, and 212 are also
awaiting prioritisation. This is what our President means by the nation at
work for a better life for all.

The Umsobomvu Fund was established to invest in the country's young people
to develop their skills and invigorate job creation. This fund is currency
financed through a special demutualisation levy, which attracted R855
million, as we all know, from Old Mutual and Sanlam. This money has been
deposited with the Corporation for Public Deposits and is currently earning
interest. Once the Minister has finalised the guidelines under which the
fund should operate, the fund will be operational. The ANC supports this
Vote. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairman, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
the Department of Finance produced four key documents, namely the annual
Budget Review, the annual Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, the National
Expenditure Survey and the Intergovernmental Fiscal Review. In studying
these documents it is possible to view the medium-term expenditure plans of
Government for a three-year cycle. It is important that all spheres of
government and provinces receive an equitable share of Government
expenditure.

The importance of the three-year cycle of expenditure is that economic
policy can be formulated and debated regarding matters such as growth
strategy, budget reform, taxation, exchange controls, the consolidated
national deficit, etc. If the 2000-2001 budget is taken as a point of
departure, it is clear that social services, education, housing and welfare
are emphasised. A total of R109 billion is earmarked for this category.
Protection services received R33 billion, and economic services R21
billion.

The New NP agrees with the inflation targeting approach and agrees that the
CPIX 3% to 6% range to be achieved by 2001, measured as an annual average,
is necessary and should be taken seriously into account. It is of the
utmost importance that inflation targeting be recognised to provide
stability in the value of money which, in turn, improves economic growth,
and that capital markets become more predictable which, in turn, makes
asset prices less volatile.

The past year has seen an improvement in Government debt. The securities
market showed growth and the bond market matured. Our credit rating
improved, and the fact that Moody's gave us a positive rating and Standard
and Poor's an investment rating shows the importance of fiscal discipline.
Allow me to give credit to the Director-General, Ms Maria Ramos. I think
the manner in which the present debt portfolio is managed must be
mentioned.

Allow me to congratulate the hon the Minister on the constructive role he
is playing within international monetary circles. His articulation of the
plight of Third World countries regarding foreign debt, the World Bank, the
Commonwealth Ministry and the G20 is to the benefit of SADC and the
Southern African Customs Union.

The process of globalisation is a phenomenon which is affecting universal
economic trends. A number of South African companies have applied for
foreign listings. We welcome this, and it is important that South African
companies participate in the global economy. The New NP is of the opinion
that the present regulating monetary framework implemented by the
Department of Finance is adequate.
The rand has recently weekened substantially against the US dollar. The New
NP disagrees with the hon the Minister of Finance in the sense that the
gross violations of human rights by supporters of the Zanu-PF government in
Zimbabwe has had a negative effect on the perception of business sentiment
in South Africa.

Dit het beslis 'n invloed gehad op die persepsie van buite- en binnelandse
beleggers in Suid-Afrika, wat op sy beurt die sterkte van die rand
beïnvloed het. Vergun my die geleentheid om te meld dat die Goewerneur van
die Reserwebank, mnr Tito Mboweni, se erkenning voor die Portefeuljekomitee
oor Finansies dat die negatiewe gebeure in Zimbabwe die sterkte van die
rand kan beïnvloed, en President Mbeki se veroordeling van die besetting
van landbougrond in die Nasionale Vergadering wel veroorsaak het dat die
rand met 'n aantal persentasiepunte verstewig het.

As Suid-Afrika sy posisie as 'n opkomende nywerheidsland wil verbeter, sal
die bestaande valutamaatreëls verder verslap moet word. 'n Verdere
verslapping sal die vertroue in die rand verstewig en die huidige onsekere
houding van afwagting rakende buitelandse belegging in Suid-Afrika laat
verbeter. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This has definitely had an effect on the perception of foreign and
domestic investors in South Africa, which in turn affected the strength of
the rand. Allow me to say that the admission by the President of the
Reserve Bank, Mr Tito Mboweni, before the Portfolio Committee on Finance
that the negative events in Zimbabwe can influence the strength of the
rand, and President Mbeki's condemnation of the occupation of agricultural
land in the National Assembly, have in fact resulted in the rand
strengthening by a few percentage points.

If South Africa wishes to improve its position as an emerging industrial
country, the existing currency measures will have to be relaxed further. A
further relaxation will strengthen confidence in the rand and bring about
an improvement in the present uncertain attitude of expectation concerning
foreign investment in South Africa.]

The New NP welcomes the investigation, in conjuction with the Department of
Trade and Industry, into the microlending industry. This sector
accommodates the needs of the materially poor, and it is important that the
rights of all respective participants within this sector be protected.

Dit is gebiedend noodsaaklik dat daar opgetree word teen individue wat
buite voorgeskrewe aanbevole leenpraktyke figureer. [It is absolutely
essential that action be taken against individuals who figure outside the
prescribed recommended loan practices.]

The New NP is of the opinion that the present overall tax burden must be
further reduced. We take note and we commend Sars for collecting a total
additional R9 billion more than was budgeted for, for the period 1995-96 to
1999. This figure is again commendable and showed a marked improvement in
revenue collected in taxes and customs duties.

The New NP deplores the alarmingly low tax morality regarding tax fraud and
criminality. It was mentioned in the Portfolio Committee on Finance that
there was an estimated R20 billion annual loss of revenue in the country.
This state of affairs is untenable. It was also mentioned that out of a
total population of 42,5 million, only 6,5 million could be categorised as
taxpayers. It is estimated that this can be doubled, and we feel that we
must really try to look into this. It is a very serious matter. We call
upon Sars and the hon the Minister really to rectify this deplorable
situation.

The New NP is aware of and deplores the illegal mixing of petroleum
products. The figure of revenue loss is estimated to be something like R400
to R500 million. The New NP welcomes the fuel rebate for the fishing and
shipping industries. I know that the Minister is aware of the plight of the
commercial and emerging farming sectors. The recent floods in parts of the
country have caused extensive damage.

Die landbousektor versoek, indien moontlik, dat hulle gelykwaardige
behandeling aan dié van die vis- en verskepingsektore kry en dat die
leweransiers van petrol moontlik reëlings kan tref om hierdie verskille
moontlik te maak. Brandstof vir landboudoeleindes is besig om baie duur te
word, en ek vra dat daar met groot deernis na hierdie mense se behoeftes
gekyk word.

Die Nuwe NP het die beoogde wetgewing oor kapitaalwinsbelasting, soos deur
die agb Minister van Finansies gedurende sy Begrotingsrede aangekondig en
van krag op 1 April 2000, aanvanklik met versigtigheid bejeën. Nadat 'n
deeglike studie van die belasting gedoen is, is ons oortuig dat die kool
die sous nie werd is nie. Dit skyn asof internasionale tendense vandag die
neiging openbaar om van hierdie uiters gesofistikeerde belasting weg te
beweeg.

Die vraag ontstaan ook of die SA Inkomstediens oor die kapasiteit beskik om
kapitaalwinsbelasting sinvol toe te pas. Of hierdie kapitaalwinsbelasting
moontlik buitelandse beleggers kan ontmoedig, is 'n ope vraag wat nie
genegeer kan word nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The agricultural sector requests, if possible, that they be treated the
same as the fishing and shipping sectors and that the suppliers of
petroleum could possibly make arrangements to make these differences
possible. Fuel for agricultural purposes is becoming very expensive, and I
want to ask that the needs of these people should be considered with great
empathy.

The New NP initially regarded with caution the envisaged legislation in
respect of capital gains tax as announced during the Budget speech of the
hon the Minister of Finance, which came into effect on 1 April 2000. After
studying the tax thoroughly, we are convinced that the game is not worth
the candle. It would seem that international trends today are to move away
from this extremely sophisticated tax.

The question also arises whether the SA Revenue Service has the capacity to
apply the capital gains tax in a meaningful way. Whether this capital gains
tax may discourage foreign investors is an open question that cannot be
negated.]

The SA Revenue Service operates in an economy which is characterised by
rising unemployment, e-commerce trade, a relatively sophisticated financial
market, liberalized trade policies that favour a reduction of tariff
barriers with an erosion of our tax base by HIV/Aids, and an increasing
demand on Government expenditure arising from Aids.

Statistics SA is of key importance as a reliable source of empirical data
for Government, business and society. It is indispensable for planning,
decision-making and assessing policies.

Dit is waarom Statistieke SA so 'n sleutelrol speel. Die voorgenome sensus
waarvoor begroot is, is bitter belangrik en die Nuwe NP neem kennis dat
daar voldoende fondse hiervoor begroot is. Vergun my ook die geleentheid om
vir dr Orkin baie dankie te sê. Ek dink dat daardie departement
voortreflike werk lewer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[That is why Statistics SA plays such a key role. The envisaged census,
which has been budgeted for, is vitally important and the New NP takes note
that adequate funds have been appropriated for this. Afford me the
opportunity also to say thank you very much to Dr Orkin. I think that
department renders excellent work.]

I do not want to conclude on a negative note. However, I read an article
written by Jessica Spratt in Fastfacts SA Race Relations May 2000, which
shows that HIV/Aids will lead to a substantial decline in productivity,
skills and available expertise in the immediate future. It is, in fact, a
very serious threat to the South African economy, and to all South
Africans.

Of all African countries, South Africa is expected to have the highest
number of deaths attributed to HIV/Aids between 1995 and 2015. The
estimated number of Aids-related deaths during this period ranges between
7,3 million and 10,6 million. Life expectancy in South Africa is expected
to decline from 60 to 40 years by 2008 because of HIV/Aids. Owing to the
HIV/Aids, only 50% of South Africans currently alive are likely to reach
the age of 60. Around half of all people who acquire HIV in South Africa
before they turn 25, die of Aids before their 35th birthday. For every ten
men infected with HIV, between 12 and 13 women are infected in South
Africa.

South Africa currently has an estimated 200 000 Aids orphans. According to
the hon Minister of Welfare and Population Development, Dr Zola Skweyiya,
some 1,5 million children will have lost their mothers by 2005 because of
HIV/Aids. This portrays a particular situation of extreme concern, and I
call upon all respective role-players to give their undivided attention to
this.

Mrs R R JOEMAT: Mr Chairperson, hon members, information is power. That is
why so much emphasis is placed on education. As the Minister of Finance has
said: ``If you cannot measure it, we cannot manage it.'' We wish to
congratulate the new management, under Dr Mark Orkin and his team, for its
visionary management that has transformed Statistics SA.

The role of Statistics SA is to provide our country with indicators that
inform us where we are at, how we are progressing, how we are distributed
as a nation, what our priorities should be, and how we should distribute
our resources when formulating policies to ensure a better life for all.

Statistics is information of a static period of time that reflects specific
moments of a condition. Although it indicates trends, it does not take into
account some of the factors like rapid development in rural and urban areas
or migration of people. People move constantly. Development is an ongoing
process, especially in developing countries like South Africa, but it does
give one the indicators of trends in a specific period.

With a democratic government in place, Statistics SA also had to rapidly
transform the organisation, including the creation of several new
components and representivity in terms of population groups, gender and
disability.

The mission statement of Statistics SA, which is referred to as the four Rs
- relevant, reliable, responsive and representative - includes: Relevant to
policy making for growth and development, reliable in producing timely and
accurate statistics, responsive to the statistical needs of users and
representative in staffing and advisory committees; and they would aim to
achieve the vision by better statistics, better access and better
management.

The total budget for the financial year 2000-2001 for Statistics SA is
R239,155 million. This is a 69,1% increase in the budget. The increase is
due to the accelerated planning and preparation involved in Census 2001. A
full census of the country will be taken in 2001.

An amount of R96,897 million is included in the budget and is essential for
the 2001 population census. These funds are allocated mainly to labour
force surveys, local government census, a survey to establish gross
geographical product in the provinces, a rural survey, an income and
expenditure survey and an informal sector survey. In addition, provision
has been made to acquire a management information system.

The population census process is a very labour-intensive process. The
question is: If we spend so much money on producing the statistics for
South Africa, what relevance is this to the taxpayer? The importance of the
census is not a new phenomenon. We read in the Bible, in Luke 1:2, at the
birth of Jesus:


  At that time, the Emperor Augustus ordered a census to be taken
  throughout the Roman Empire. Everyone then went to register himself, each
  to his own town.

If the Roman Empire saw the importance of the need of having population
census, even if it was only for tax purposes, how much more must this
information not mean to us in the 21st century?

Today we do not just count our population, but we have a broader statistics
base available. Any country needs to have fairly accurate records and data
on the fundamental aspects of its society, such as education, health and
social security, etc. Therefore, this budget can be justified.

During the 1994 elections, we noted that the population data was not so
accurate because the majority of our people in our townships were not
recognised as citizens of our country. To establish the information for
area boundaries, a helicopter took aerial photographs and estimated the
population in our townships. A thumb-suck figure was used.

The majority of our people were not regarded as being part of the country's
statistics. We were allocated homelands. To add to the problem, in the
past, to give any personal information to anyone who knocked on one's door,
was perceived as suspicious. There was all kinds of disinformation given,
with justification.

The ANC supports the Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M M S LEKGORO: Mr Chairperson, Ministers and hon members, I rise here on
behalf of the ANC to support this Appropriation Bill. This Appropriation
Bill is designed to add strength and value to the institutions that lay the
foundation for development. This is so because there cannot be development
without money. This, for me, sounds like a very happy story for the poor.

The Minister, in his Budget speech, introduced a new taxation policy aimed
at closing the loopholes in our tax system, and at putting our tax system
in line with international best practice. These changes are of a profound
nature and can only be implemented to the fullest by an effective and
efficient tax-collecting agency.

It is for this reason that we need to allocate adequate resources to Sars.
This is also necessary because Sars is going through a major transformation
process to tailor-make itself to its legislative mandate. To date, Sars has
made enormous progress. It has exceeded its revenue targets and has also
improved on the previous financial years' revenue collection. Sars spent
only R1,8 billion to collect R184 billion. Put differently, the amount
spent in collecting the R184 billion was only less than 1%. These figures
compare favourably with international standards of revenue collection.

For Sars to continue with the good work, its more than 600 staff members
must be fully skilled for the task at hand, and its offices throughout the
country must be fully equipped with modern information technology. Sars
should be adequately financed to be in a position to improve the working
conditions and the remuneration packages of its employees. This will help
it to retain and to attract quality skills to the organisation. This is
particularly important because a significant number of highly skilled
people must still be recruited into the organisation to work on the newly
introduced taxes.

The Auditor-General has raised certain concerns with Sars. It is important
that these concerns should not be read out of context. In actual fact, Sars
has started to address some of these concerns. A process of changing from a
cash-based method of accounting to the accrual method of accounting has
been initiated and Sars has also made an undertaking to accelerate the
process of replacing the old systems and procedures. It should be noted,
however, that this is a demanding and complex task which might take a few
years.

Tax systems are very complex things. They are forever riddled with
loopholes and administrative inefficiencies. These weaknesses are exploited
and, as a result, the tax base becomes weaker. The implications of a weak
tax base is that there will be less revenue at hand to address the needs of
society. It is therefore urgent for Government to close all the loopholes
in the tax system. An example of such loopholes are when some individuals
establish companies to render personal services to their employers with the
intention to use the company rate for tax purposes.

Such practices make the state forego serious revenue. There is no
alternative other than to levy personal income tax rates to persons who
rendered such services. If this is not done,, the low tax rates of
companies will continue to be an incentive in the hands of taxpayers to
restructure their incomes which could otherwise have been taxed as personal
income.

All efforts by Sars to broaden the tax base should be supported by all
parties and role-players in our society. Small businesses and individuals
who have not paid their share of tax must be encouraged to comply with the
tax system. This is important because, if this is not done, the tax burden
on the other taxpayers increases.

Our tax system is currently a source-based system. This system of taxation
is open to abuse. Sophisticated taxpayers find ways to route their income
through zero-to-low tax income countries. The source-based system of
taxation is very ineffective and must be changed as a matter of urgency.
The ANC supports the change to a residence-based system of taxation and its
phased way of being introduced.

Equity and justice are the key principles of a good tax system. A tax
system that lacks equity is not sustainable. It will easily lead to
noncompliance and tax avoidance. The taxation of hard-earned income on the
one hand and failure to tax capital gains says a lot about the absence of
equity in our system. This situation cannot be intelligently justified, as
capital gains are equivalent to income and are used in the same way.

The introduction of capital gains tax will help to minimise tax avoidance
and also bring about equity in our system. Once more, on behalf of the ANC,
we support the Vote.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson and hon members, the UDM will support the
Votes before us in this debate. We would, however, like to address an
extremely important aspect, namely a new economic vision for our country,
based on structural economic growth and the creation of appropriate skills
for our economy.
The South African economy finds itself in a very peculiar situation. There
is general agreement that all the economic fundamentals are sound and in
place, as confirmed by our favourable international ratings, but yet jobs
continue to be shed, long-term foreign investors stay away, and the gap
between the ``haves'' and the ``have-nots'' widens.

Clearly, something is wrong, and therefore we must ask ourselves: What do
we need to do? Few people would disagree that we need sustainable, real
economic growth that would create new employment opportunities. The
question is: How do we achieve it, and where do we start?

Nearly a decade ago people from different backgrounds and groupings in
South Africa started negotiations about a vision for our political future.
In 1994, that vision materialised with our first democratic elections and,
two years later, the adoption of our Constitution.

What we need now is to start developing a vision for our economic future,
which Government, labour, the private sector and ordinary citizens commit
themselves to attain. This commitment must then be communicated with
passion and sincerity on every possible occasion. It will mean that
stakeholders should not keep blinkers on and stick at all cost to their own
line of thinking or argument.

We are in desperate need to develop such a vision for our economic future.
Some people ask for it in the form of a national accord or consensus. The
Financial Mail calls for a new deal on the economic front. Such a unifying
vision must be the starting point for the economic dilemma that we face
currently.

In the South African situation, it is simply no longer possible to provide
sufficient jobs through conventional policies involving Government and big
business. It is furthermore clear that we need an integrated approach,
which means that if people live in a crime-ridden society, have no access
to capital, have no basic education or skills training, live with the
constant threat of HIV/Aids infection, and do not own land or other
productive resources, then they will have very little chance to become
economically active.

To address the chronic unemployment problem, we need a sound database on
the labour force, preferably on a monthly basis. Such labour market
information should direct and support policy decisions to create the
circumstances within which jobs can be created.

Similarly, it is important that we should create the skills for the 21st
century economy. Our education system must provide the skills needed to
build the South African economy. The previous government destroyed the
wider skills base in our country and turned many schools into battlefields,
while the present Government encouraged highly qualified teachers to take
generous retrenchment packages and replaced them with unqualified teachers.
We simply cannot afford any compromises between political and economic
priorities. We need to improve the country's skills.

Flowing from the above remarks, such a vision for our economic future can
possibly be initiated and formulated by the Minister of Finance, Mr Manuel,
and the Minister of Education, Prof Asmal. The time for a new deal for our
economic future is now.

With reference to the Budget Vote in front of us, we would like to
encourage Statistics SA to further develop the proposed bi-annual labour
force survey. Secondly, we want to commend Sars, under the able leadership
of Mr Pravin Gordhan, for the additional collection of R25 billion during
the past five years. We have full confidence in Sars that they will utilise
their capacity and budget to implement all the Budget proposals.

We agree with the proposed merger of the departments of Finance and of
State Expenditure. In a way, it is funny that the Minister of Finance, who
has become the champion of financial transparency and openness, will now
become the Minister responsible financially for the SA Secret Service. He
is indeed becoming a very powerful Minister. We will support the Votes.
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Mr Chairperson and hon members, any one of
us who looks back over the past six years, and any one of us who has
examined and examines the very documents that are placed before this House
from time to time, would acknowledge that this Ministry and the cluster of
departments that it has responsibility for, have come a long way and have
made very substantial progress, be it on macroeconomic management, tax
policy and revenue collection, intergovernmental fiscal relations and
division of revenue issues, expenditure control, monitoring and financial
management or improved data on which critical decisions regarding the
allocation of resources are based.

What may not be so obvious, however, is the extent to which we will
continue to be challenged by some important policy and other issues. It
seems opportune to share with this House, some of those issues. Members
will be aware that the question of procurement reform has been the subject
of many debates and at some point a Green Paper was published which, it
would have been reasonably expected, would lead to a White paper. Indeed,
this is a matter that we continue to be seized with, and on which a lot of
work is being done.

What must be understood, however, is that this is work that was being done
in the context of changing Budget reform processes and evolving
intergovernmental fiscal relations and structures. Furthermore, over the
past two years, a process of creating a new financial management framework
in Government was in progress and has, as of 1 April 2000, come into legal
force. It is important to make these points because procurement is central
to budgets and expenditures of Government departments and agencies, thus
making alignment with the Budget and financial management processes
important.

We are, therefore, grappling with some very fundamental questions about the
model for a procurement system, in the light of the more mature provincial
government structures and systems and in the light of the existence of the
Public Finance Management Act, which devolves and gives more managerial
flexibility to heads of departments. Do we, then, still retain a highly
centralised and process-driven system as our model for procurement? In
doing so, we also have to take stock of the past few years, to examine
whether the current system has assisted Government to meet some of its
important socioeconomic objectives, such as the promotion of small, medium
and microenterprises and the participation of historically disadvantaged
individuals and groups in the economy.

We are also examining the procurement system in the context of the need for
accelerated service delivery. A related and equally important matter, as we
undertake procurement reform, is that of asset management and stock
control, because there has to be a link between these processes. So, as we
undertake the work referred to by the Minister, regarding the Departments
of Finance and of State Expenditure, we need to make a decision as to how
best to position and manage procurement. Do we manage it within the
Treasury, on a decentralised basis or on an agency basis? These are all
questions that we are grappling with.

We hope to come to Parliament in the not too distant future, with a
progress report or even a product of these processes. In similar vein, as
we undertake the work of creating a single Treasury, we have to review and
determine how best to position the Government Employees Pension Fund and
the Public Investment Commissioners. As we speak, the Government Employees
Pension Fund has grown into a huge fund, while the Public Investment
Commissioners have become a huge player in the financial markets, with just
under R200 billion under management on behalf of the Government Employees
Pension Fund.

This results in the activities and decisions of the Public Investment
Commissioners having a significant weight in the financial markets, with
the potential to influence them positively or negatively. Against this
background, questions of capacity, competence and the skills base of the
Public Investment Commissioners and the Government Employees Pension Fund
assume great importance, given the level of participation in the financial
markets.

However, as we do so, we continue to grapple, as well, with how best we can
meet the provisions introduced last year as amendments to the Public
Investment Commissioners Act, which, for the first time, allow the Public
Investment Commissioners to invest in social responsibility programmes and
infrastructure. Again, we shall, in due course, come to Parliament in this
regard.

In the financial sector, as the chairperson of the committee said, South
Africa subjected itself to a joint IMF and World Bank financial sector
assessment programme, through which our financial sector was rigorously
tested for soundness and standards. I must say that we did this of our own
volition, not for the sake of it, but because it had the potential to
highlight areas and gaps which need attention from a policy point of view.

As it turned out, our financial sector was given a clean bill of health, as
the director-general would say, with some pointers to certain gaps and
deficiencies. In general we, however, continue to be challenged by the need
to streamline and consolidate financial regulation in South Africa. This
arises because, historically, our regulatory environment has tended to be
disjointed and located in different institutions, with some aspects in the
Department of Trade and Industry, some in the Financial Services Board and
yet others in the SA Reserve Bank.

In the context of globalisation and our integration into the global
environment, there are huge attendant risks which require more rigorous
regulation in some respects. In this environment, there is a trend towards
mergers of huge corporate entities that result in massive corporations. In
the South African context, however, you also have cross holdings and
ownerships that straddle banks, insurance and other companies. It is in
this sense that consolidation of financial regulation becomes important in
South Africa.

On a matter that is related to the fight against crime, but has a bearing
on the country's financial system in part, the Department of Finance is
piloting legislation to create capacity to monitor and to detect money-
laundering in our country, so as to enable law-enforcement agencies to take
the necessary steps towards investigating, apprehending and prosecuting
those involved. This process was initiated when the Minister established a
task team which, over an 18-month period, consulted widely with various
stakeholders and presented a report to us in July last year. Upon giving a
progress report to Cabinet, we then initiated more detailed interaction
with the law-enforcement agencies, intelligence and the SA Reserve Bank. We
are on the point of finalising the draft Bill for presentation to Cabinet,
and Parliament will, in the course of this year, have an opportunity to
process that Bill.

One of the matters that we are dealing with is the question of surplus
funds that are generated in pension funds. Such surplus funds would,
depending on the approach used, either be excess funds after liabilities of
the pension fund have been catered for, or excess funds after liabilities
and a reserve for risk management have been taken into account.

We are faced with the position, on the one hand, that pension funds are
created separately from companies to cater for the retirement needs of
employees. From this position, the interpretation has been that such funds
belong to employees. Over time, however, companies have been able to take
contribution holidays when excess funds have been found to have built up in
the pension funds.

Recently, employers have sought directly to access such surplus funds and
to draw cash from them. In this situation, workers' organisations have
raised the matter of principle as to whether employers have a right to
access such funds. On the other hand, the Financial Services Board, which
is responsible for pension funds on behalf of Government, resisted the
attempts by employers directly to access surplus cash and had the courts
rule against it, thus refusing employers access to such funds.

In that scenario, there is the real danger that pension funds may be raided
by employers, especially in the absence of a legal framework that can deal
with this problem. This is a risk. We are therefore challenged to work
through these issues, that is the principle of whether employers should
access surplus funds and the reality that some court rulings have gone in
favour of employers. We shall therefore come back to Parliament on this
matter which is currently at Nedlac.

While it may not be obvious, we also have a responsibility regarding the
accountancy profession. In this connection, there has been a long, drawn-
out process, which started in 1994, to rewrite the accountancy profession
Act which is latterly driven by the National Accountancy Forum which is co-
chaired by Justice Corbett and the Public Protector, Adv Selby Baqwa. This
has been a rigorous process with participation by a number of accountancy
associations and organisations, which has also seen a number of public
forums to solicit views also from those who are outside the profession.

While this process has taken long to reach finalisation, it should be
testimony to both the centrality of the accountancy profession in the life
of the institutions and the organisations of society and the many
challenges facing it, such as the question of access to and mobility within
the profession and the question of regulation and its coverage. In other
words, who is regulated? Is it the accountant, the auditor or both? There
is also the question of the liability of auditors and fraud that involves
members of the profession, but, more importantly, the representivity of the
profession. Perhaps, members will realise this when they look at figures,
because out of 18 000 chartered accountants in South Africa today only 178
are Africans, 138 are coloured people and 734 are of Indian origin.

But there are a host of other challenges that face the accounting
profession. We shall, in the period ahead, try to ensure that the process
of rewriting the accountancy profession Act is speeded up, but we will also
ensure that it addresses the transformation of the profession given the
challenges in this field. Perhaps it is opportune at this point to
congratulate the first-ever black executive president of the SA Institute
of Chartered Accountants, Mr Ignatius Sehoole, who, we are sure, is alive
to and will tackle these challenges. To that extent, he will need the
support of all of us and, on our side, he will get it.

The hon Nhlanhla Nene did make reference to the National Development Agency
and to the Umsobomvu Fund. I would not want to add to what he said, except
to say that there will be an opportunity for both of these organisations to
come to Parliament with progress reports.

These are just some of the areas for which we have responsibility. There is
a host of others, some of which it is probably not wise to speak about in
any detail. For example, companies that want to list in foreign stock
exchanges approached the Ministry, while there is also the question of bank
mergers as is the case currently with the Nedcor-Stanbic case. What we
would like to assure this House of is that we will apply rigour and come up
with the best policies in dealing with these issues, because South Africa
is not and shall not be a second-rate country.

Lastly, we are not armchair critics in this Ministry and in these
departments, but we are doers who are dealing with real situations, unlike
some members of this House. To the hon Koornof of the UDM, I think it is
important to point out that, while all of the things he pointed out are
desirable and perhaps right, what we must realise is that they will not
come from our wishes but from hard work. All of the things that he
mentioned - human resource development, labour market issues and criminal
justice issues - are being attended to. But the lessons from history are,
that for all successful economies, it takes time, hard work and
consistency. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K A MOLOTO: Chairperson, hon members and boNgqongqoshe [Ministers],
recent developments in the international financial system with particular
attention to the dominance of rapid capital flows that plagued the Asian
and other emerging markets, demand of us to evaluate critically the funding
instruments we employ to address the Budget deficits and the general
orientation of debt management. Therefore, it is imperative that we adopt
robust risk-management techniques, as empirical evidence flowing from the
experiences of emerging markets indicates.

The Departments of Finance and of State Expenditure need to be commended
for the sterling work done in introducing new, efficient funding
instruments or bonds to finance the Budget deficit. The department has
introduced two types of bonds in the domestic bond market, a market which
has matured quite tremendously, proving once more the robustness of our
domestic financial system. These bonds have also been introduced in the
international markets.

The inflation-linked bonds protect investors or bondholders from the
negative impact of inflation on the principal amount invested. The
department is quite confident that inflation will go down in the medium
term, as reflected in the inflation targets set, thus reducing our debt-
servicing costs. The inflation-linked bond will be adjusted every six
months based on the consumer price index. The floating-rate bond is
adjusted every three months and a valid assumption is made that interest
made will continue to be favourable.
Internationally, the seven-year bond issued in the European market was a
success. This bond was declared the emerging Europe, Middle East and Africa
bond deal of the year for 1999 by the international Finance Review. This
view is further confirmed by the latest upgrading of South Africa's credit
rating to an investment grade by Standard and Poor and other credit-rating
agencies. Participants in the South African bond market have indicated
greater confidence in our bond auction system. They find the new auction
system inspiring confidence, because of the new predetermined weekly
auctions, with the amounts and instruments to be issued publicised in the
week before.

The building of confidence plays a pivotal role to ensure stability when
dealing with the institutional investors. Our economic fundamentals are
sound and there is no reason for panic. The inflation targets have been
debated openly. The monetary policy is known. So there are no secrets.
Obviously, there are inherent risks in these funding instruments or bonds
and prudent risk-management techniques need to be employed to limit our
exposure. The department has diversified by issuing these bonds across
Europe to hedge against foreign exchange risks. This diversification is
quite necessary, owing to the common occurrence of volatility in foreign
exchange across the globe. The department has performed quite well in this
regard.

In my introduction I alluded to financial turmoil that once engulfed the
Asian tigers and other emerging markets and the need to evaluate the
correctness of the funding instrument we use to finance the deficit. We are
not immune to these attacks. Even though we have taken reasonable measures
to protect ourselves, we have to look at the heart of the problem and
address it.

The Minister recently made a firm statement on the need to reform the
International Monetary Fund. The current international finance system or
architecture is not adequate to deal with some of these crises. It is
important to continually remind ourselves that the founders of the Bretton
Woods institutions wanted order in the financial system, given the
aftermath of the Second World War and the Great Depression. It is important
to note that the flow of capital assisted the reconstruction of Europe and
in no way ushered in a destabilisation of their financial system.

The developing countries equally need this capital inflow into national
economies to speed up economic growth and development. Therefore, it is
important to inquire unceasingly whether the original intentions of the
founders of this institution are carried out and why, then, every time
there are capital inflows and outflows into developing countries, we
experience this awesome financial destabilisation. The central question
remains: Is the current international financial architecture or system
adequate and relevant to the new conditions? For us to begin to understand
this question, it is important to make an exposition of the revolution of
this architecture, throughout time, to support the need for the reform of
this institution. This might sound like tedious and boring economic
history, but it serves to eliminate the source of the crisis.

This is very important, especially if one takes very seriously the
statement made by Gavaljit Singh in his book The Globalisation of Finance,
in which he stated, and I quote:


  The volume and mobility of global finance capital has surprised many
  observers. In 1986, about $188 billion passed through the hands of
  currency traders in New York, London and Tokyo every day. By 1995, the
  daily turnover reached almost $1,2 trillion. Historically, most trading
  in foreign exchange was a result of international trade as buyers and
  sellers of foreign goods needed another currency to settle their
  transactions. But, now, the trading currency has very little to do with
  international trade which accounts for just 2% of the global movements.

  In the current phase, financial flows are rarely associated with the
  flows of real resources and long-term productive investments. These flows
  are largely liquid and are attracted by short-term speculative gains and
  can leave the country in the same way as they came.

Prior to the Bretton Woods institutions, gold was a store of value and a
means of payments. This was the error of merchants and chartered companies
commissioned by kings and queens to conduct trade. This system proved to be
a fetter to efficient trade and had to be abandoned. The post-World War II
era, termed the gold standard era, required money in circulation to be
backed by gold. The system was rendered obsolete by further complex
developments in international trade.

In the 1970s, the United States of America withdrew from the gold standard
and the dollar became the main organising currency, and various currencies
were pegged against the dollar. This presented major problems because the
devaluation of the dollar at certain stages meant the devaluation of these
emerging markets.

In recent times, various convertible currencies emerged as key trading
currencies: the yen, the pound and the American dollar. The sophistication
of capital markets with their wide international coverage further deepened
the process of globalisation of finance. The role of information
technology, in particular, the Internet, facilitates the quick transfer of
money across the globe in search of good returns. These are capital flows
that are the subject of much debate and the cause of fireworks.

In conclusion, I have no doubt that, given the recent pronouncement by the
Minister and the need for the reform of the Bretton Woods institutions, the
department is on top of these issues and that the financing of our deficits
will continue on favourable terms. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Chairperson ... [Interjections.] That is an interesting
comment! [Laughter.] Chairperson, hon members, the Minister outdid me in
antiquity terms by quoting from Sophocles. But, Junius aptly said in the
18th century: ``To be acquainted with the merit of a Ministry, we need only
observe the condition of the people''. Today, we debate what is arguably
the most important of all the Votes we will debate in this Assembly. We
must remember that public finance and the rules and institutions that
govern, underpin and chart the direction thereof remain centre stage in any
assessment of the condition of the people of South Africa.

I say to the Minister that it is in this respect that the key challenge
before his department will continue to be the reconciliation of market-
driven economic growth with equal opportunity as the touchstone of the
condition of our people. South Africa's own homegrown third way must
replace ideological zero-sum games that end in a dead-end street. Our
public finance institutions need to underpin a healthy mix of balanced
budgets, steady growth, welfare reform and job creation. Only then will an
assessment of our performance hail an improvement in the living conditions
of our people.

This policy mix must be our third way - a third way that has community as
its core value and yet retains its global outlook; a third way that
embraces the fostering of private sector economic growth as the modern
means and prerequisite for opportunity for all; a third way that puts
Government in a position where it is able to equip its citizens with the
tools they need to get ahead in the new economy - the knowledge economy;
and a third way that pragmatically marries economic economic
entrepreneurship with social justice in the context of the rules of the
globalisation game.

We must be willing to make the political concessions and ideological
sacrifices such a third way will require of us. We must move away from
staid and stifling positions on the left and the right with an equal
measure of intellectual vigour and rigour. Only then will we alter our
economic reality. South Africa desperately needs this pragmatism if we are
to move away from the ideological zero-sum games that simmer under the
surface of utterances such as those by the ANC secretary-general.

The same Economist, an interlocutor of the investment sentiment which the
Minister berated last week for its Afro-pessimism, reported the cold hard
facts in its focus on Africa. According to Paul Collier of the World Bank,
only 15% of Africans today live in an environment considered minimally
adequate for sustainable growth and development. The harsh reality is that
at least 45% of Africans live in poverty, and African countries need growth
rates of 7% or more to cut that figure in half in 15 years.

In South Africa, according to Southern African Statistics 2000, close to
57% of our people live in the vice-grip of the poverty trap. But,
tragically, our Ministry of Finance does not project growth rates of 6% or
more. Instead, we muddle in the middle with projections nipping over 3%,
faced with an immense task of job creation and poverty alleviation which
are dual challenges.

Indeed, the GDP figures for the first quarter of 2000 released by
Statistics SA just this week were met with a degree of disbelief and dismay
when questions arose about whether we would be revising our growth
projections for 2000 downward. This is a heartwrenching prospect for the
millions of unemployed. We cannot expect our people to chase phantoms of
hope when they need the real prospect of accelerated economic growth.

Statistics SA and the invaluable work done by this agency came under the
spotlight in recent days, not only because of the GDP and PPI figures, but
also because of the latest employment statistics it released. The DP
welcomes the budgetary increase for Statistics SA as a sound investment
that is bound to have an attractive return in policy planning terms. We
believe that Statistics SA will have an invaluable role to play in
continuing to produce the empirical bedrock that policy-making in a rapidly
changing world requires.

The results of Census `96 and the data that will be generated by the
upcoming Census 2001 will strengthen the tools and sharpen the focus of
policy-makers. Given the key challenge of job creation that our economy
faces and the need for better indicators of what is happening in the
informal and SMME sector in terms of job creation, Statistics SA's
ambitious new labour force survey will fill a critical gap which currently
exists.

The DP reiterates its call on Statistics SA and the Ministry of Finance, in
conjunction with the Minister of Labour and Sars, to ensure that Statistics
SA includes data on the implementation of the Skills Development Act in the
scope of the new labour force survey. Skills development will determine
movements across the informal/formal sector divide and these movements must
be tracked.

In addition to the challenges posed by Census 2001 and the labour force
survey, Statistics SA indicated in the hearings on their Vote that they
were in the process of compiling a comprehensive new matrix of poverty
indicators that would be invaluable in altering the living conditions of
the 57% of South Africans in the social exclusion trap, and will be used in
the SADC region to focus poverty alleviation efforts. Future budgetary
allocations must assist in this new area of activity.

Census 2001, the labour force survey and continued work on poverty
indicators will be enhanced by a further dissaggregation of data into
provincial and local profiles which will allow Statistics SA to give policy-
makers at all three levels of government the requisite data to draft
responsive policy for poverty alleviation and job creation. The DP believes
that it is critically important to ensure close co-operation between
Statistics SA, the National Development Agency and the Industrial
Development Corporation, both in terms of Statistics SA's new comprehensive
survey of the labour force and its new work on poverty indicators to ensure
that policy is properly targeted.

The debate on the Vote before us today would be incomplete without a brief
reference to the silent revolution in State Expenditure, which is bound to
follow in the wake of the implementation of the Public Finance Management
Act and some unfinished business in the Budget reform process. The PFMA's
silent revolution started on 1 April 2000, and the Minister of Finance must
be congratulated on not flinching in the face of pressure from Cabinet
colleagues with reservations around this date.

The Public Finance Management Act will not only act as an important tool in
ensuring sound financial management, but will act as a dynamic tool, in
addition, in the fight against corruption, alongside new legislation
recently passed in this House, namely the Protected Disclosures Bill. The
DP believes that the Bill's focus on outputs and the dovetailing with this
Bill and the codes of conduct in new performance-related agreements with
the public sector, has a potential to act as a bulwark against unspent
funds and roll-overs, such as the roll-overs we have seen recently in the
Departments of Health, of Welfare, and of Trade and Industry.

It is in this regard that the Department of Health's pilot status will
render valuable lessons over the coming months in terms of the feedback on
the implementation of this legislation. There is little doubt that the
Public Finance Management Act will enhance the transparency and role of,
and data contained in, the National Expenditure Survey and place Parliament
in a much better position to assess specific programmes of the departments
and movements of funds between programmes within a department, as opposed
to merely considering the Vote as an integrated whole.

As Parliament increasingly carves out and enhances its oversight role, this
Public Finance Management Act's shift in focus will play a significant
role. However, the increased role for Parliament, which becomes possible
under this Act's provisions, remains contingent on the expansion of
Parliament's role and impact in the budgetary process as a whole. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr T R MOFOKENG: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister and hon
members, we are once more convened in this House of Parliament today to
democratically debate and give consideration to the Vote on both the SA
Revenue Service and Statistics SA.

Let me deal much more with Statistics SA, because much more has been
covered on the SA Revenue Service by some members who came before me here.
The Vote under focus today is very fundamental to the process of change
taking place in our country. President Thabo Mbeki proclaimed, on the
occasion of the opening of the present Parliament, that we were on course.
Yes, of course, it proves that we are on course. If one looks at this
Budget of the people, it shows that it is being driven by the preparations
for action. First of all, all comes up with a programme of action, and
after that one comes up with the money.

One of the key challenges is our capacity to build and transform the state
to effectively respond to our developmental challenge. The other key
challenge in this regard, is the ability to capture information and data.
Statistics SA is one of the key institutions in this regard. I would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate the head of Statistics SA, Mr Mark
Orkin, for yet another trailblazing feat in his already illustrious career.
Many of us will remember, in the mid-1980s, when our opponents tried to
undermine the disinvestment campaign, how much of an intervention Mark
Orkin's work was. His book on the attitude of black people to the
disinvestment campaign remains an important point of reference.

The annual report for 1999 indicates that a lot of transformation and
refocusing is taking place. The geographical information system, together
with the Department of Land Affairs, will improve voting structures, and
was useful to the process of local government demarcation.

Similarly, the information that Statistics SA has made available is being
utilised by the Post Office, to work on a national street address project.
Accurate, relevant and timely data is crucial for the formulation and
evaluation of policy. That is why we keep on saying to the institutions
that working within the maximum speed limit required as legislators is our
watchword.

Legislators and policy makers need to be able to assess the current state
of affairs, to identify and to prioritise problems, and later to monitor
the effects of laws and policies. Given the unemployment crisis facing
South Africa, accurate and regular data on employment, in particular, is a
crucial tool in policy evaluation and adjustment. This is one area where
Statistics SA needs to improve. This should be possible, in part, through a
R14 million allocation to the new bi-annual labour force survey.

The other challenge facing Statistics SA, and for which it needs to be
allocated resources, is to improve its agricultural statistics; to gain
better information on social issues, including rural development and the
position of women; to increase the availability and affordability of
statistical information to the public; and to continue its internal
transformation.

As the ANC, we therefore accept this Vote because it has no qualifications
in it, according to transactions of books. It is wholeheartedly accepted. I
think the hon member who spoke before me, Comrade Joemat, has already given
a figure of R239,155 million as being the total budget. I will not delve
into that much, but I think, in dealing with the figures in this
department, one has to make a short breakdown of those figures that have
already been given for the sake of those who are not in the portfolio
committee. There are only four items which will show the breakdown as
follows. I think administration will be allocated R39,2 million out of that
figure. Statistical services will be allocated R103,9 million, the
population census will be allocated R95,9 million, and the associated
services statistics council will be allocated R151 000.

If one analyses the figures mathematically and scientifically, one will
realise that, out of that figure, certain amounts, approximately R27
million, will only focus on the labour force survey for the year 2000-2001.
We thus motivate for the Vote to enable us to meet these challenges and to
equip us, as legislators, with a sound basis for policy formulation and
evaluation. [Applause.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Chairman, if Jannie would listen, I would tell him that it
is quite positive and worth listening to.

When the Minister addressed the House a little earlier this afternoon, he
raised a very important point. He said: Let every day, let every week, and
let every year be an African day, an African week, and an African year. An
African century would be the cumulative, sum total of what would happen if
we made each day an African day. Now, why is it so important that we should
make each day an African day? It is very simple. There is the old saying:
Give a dog a bad name and then hang him.

The President of our country has been saying on the international platforms
that when people think of Africa, they think of Africa as being just one
big mess, whichever part of Africa it is. They make no distinction between
the fact that South Africa is quite different from the rest of Africa. The
problem that we suffer from, that many countries that were colonised suffer
from, is the fact that we are all branded as nonperformers, as dangerous,
as places where it is not worthwhile putting investments.

We therefore need to do something. We need to rebrand ourselves. We need to
make an investment in order that people begin to see us differently. I am
quite certain that if one asks people in some other part of the world to
think of Africa and what would they think, they would still probably think
of wild animals. They would still think of people here in derogatory terms.

When the IFP chose to be the constructive opposition, people have
misunderstood the role of the IFP. Unlike the DP, which is like a giraffe
that feeds on the tops of the trees ... [Interjections] ... we in the IFP
wish to able to say to the rest of the world that we should show, in intent
and in deed, how we can combine to say to the world investors: We will make
things safe for you in this country. We will make it safe via the ANC, but
we will also make it safe via the IFP. [Applause.] Therefore, we give you
two good reasons to invest in our country.

We wish to do as my hon colleague Dr Gavin Woods has done over the past six
years. He has been able, conscientiously, meticulously and through hard
work, to add value to the good policies that have come up from Government,
to make them better. We have not come to this platform to complain, to
complain and to complain. [Applause.] But we have come to say that we want
to help, that we want to help and that we want to help. We reserve the
right to fight and we can fight, but we chose not to do so now. We chose to
be constructive and to help, so that our economy builds and we become
secure.

We also need to look at what happened in India. India decided that if it
really wanted to get out of the morass, it would have to lift itself by its
own bootstraps. That is why today the Indian economy is not shaken when
something happens in the rest of the world economy. It is self-sustaining
and it continues to grow because of its own internal resources.

Inasmuch as we want investments from the rest of the world, we also need to
find a way in which we can make the small capital of the small people in
our land into big capital. We need to be able to find a way in which we can
get small and microenterprises going, because that is where jobs will be
created. That is where the fixed investments that we are seeking will come.
That is where future prosperity has to be laid.

We would need to look at how this economy can become a heritage-led
economy, because we have one of the most exciting heritages of all nations
in the world. We have physical beauty that is beyond compare. We have
people whose diversity and culture is such a rich mix that we are really
the microcosm of the world in this tiny little part of the world. We have
plants here - 24% or 30% of the plants which exist nowhere else on the
planet. We have these unique, wonderful attributes which we need to build
on.

So while this massive building needs to go on, why should we be carping and
criticising, when we need to build and make that building the foremost
intention of the our purpose in this House? We need to find ways in which
the Minister can unpack the declaration that he made here that tax
concessions would be given to NGOs, to the arts industry, to culture, and
to crafts. If this is unpacked, and more can be done in these areas, that
is where phenomenal growth will come.

We recognise that it is important for every country to have a goose that
lays the golden egg. And the goose that lays the golden egg for us here is
our culture. South Africa has made itself unique in the annals of history
by being able to do what no other nation has done, and that is to negotiate
a path, without violence, through to this day when we can be a flourishing
democracy.

We should be able to show to the rest of the world how we did it. We should
be able to celebrate this, because it is a curiosity in the whole world.
How did the South African nation manage to do something that has defeated
and escaped every other nation? So we have the opportunity of bringing
people to our shores. They would like to know who we are, because we have
this unique characteristic of being able to rise above the vicissitudes
which we face, to be able to show just who we are - a great and successful
nation. We support these Votes. [Time expired.]

Mr A J FEINSTEIN: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, I was
going to go straight into a few points on each of the Votes that have been
covered, but just a couple of comments might be necessary beforehand.

Firstly, I cannot but comment with respect to the issue of the SACP that
was raised by the hon Andrew. I must confess that, in the myriad of
meetings that I have with investment bankers from both the UK and the US on
an almost weekly basis, the issue of membership of the communist party of
members of our Cabinet is something that has never been raised.
[Interjections.] To raise it now, I have to confess, reminds me of my
earliest experience in this House, when, in giving my second speech,
somebody asked me whether I was a communist. On my reply that I was not, he
reminded me that I was Jewish, which I, indeed, am. It speaks of a mindset
that I think, perhaps, has seen its age, and I was a little disappointed
that it seems to have reappeared.

Another interesting point to make is in the notion of the third way, which
I believe, intellectually and theorectically, is a notion that we all need
to be exploring for many of the obvious reasons that have been given.
However, I would be interested to hear, at some point in the future, the
hon Taljaard's response to a comment made by one of perhaps the two most
eminent thinkers on third way theory in a recent book. He says: Great
change sits side by side with enduring truth'', and he says further: ``I
will counsel you to be careful about calling for any major structural
reform of labour markets. I do not believe the third way stands for making
work more insecure.''

Finally, I have simply a comment on the interesting comparison with the
Indian economic experience. I think that we must critically realise that
what differentiates our economy from its Indian equivalent is the fact that
we are talking, in the Indian case, of a domestic market of almost a
billion people.
If I may briefly raise a few points on each of the Votes that are under
consideration, I feel that it is extremely gratifying to see that every
year Statistics SA improves the quality and the scope of the information
they make available to South Africa. The budget that has been tabled with
respect to Statistics SA, with its increased allocation to labour-market
information, the upgrading of inflation figures, a wider coverage of all
economic sectors and, perhaps most importantly, a budget that allows for
preparation for a full, rather than a sample census in 2001 over the medium-
term period, is certainly to be welcomed. My only disappointment is that I
thought we were going to see a statistician-general in uniform here today,
but I believe that there have been delays in that process.

With respect to the SA Revenue Service, I think that within Government
generally and perhaps in Parliament - in the finance committee and the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts in particular - we espouse the
virtues correctly of output budgeting. In the case of Sars, given certain
of the issues that have been raised, we need to look at the outputs. In a
word, over the past few years the outputs have been remarkable. Yes, there
have been problems recently related to the shift to an accrual accounting
system, but the bottom line is that Sars has delivered significantly beyond
the expectations over the past few years and as a result of this we can be
confident that, as in the past few years, Sars will rise to whatever
challenges are put before it, and to that we must pay credit to the new
commissioner and his staff. [Applause.]

Turning to the Departments of Finance and State Expenditure, the plaudits
for exchequer financing, macroeconomic management, intergovernmental
financial relations and international financial relations are, indeed, well
deserved. It is important to note that the Public Investment Commissioners
seem to have stabilised, although, as the Deputy Minister intimated, work
still remains. With respect to exchequer financing, the medium-term outlook
for debt costs - which sees a significant slowing in the increase in such
costs - is a tribute to the department and the Ministry that has positive
material implications for all South Africans.

The restructuring of Finance and State Expenditure into one national
Treasury is to be welcomed and it is here that the greatest challenge lies,
not only for those departments, but for Government as a whole. We are
seeing improvements in financial management, but from a low base. From the
perspective of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, the improvement
is too slow. Clearly, the Public Finance Management Act is the key window
of opportunity to be firmly grasped if we are to achieve our policy
ambitions as a Government and as a nation. I would also request of the
Minister clarity over the medium-term period as to what specifically has
been budgeted for implementation of the Public Finance Management Act. From
the otherwise excellent documents, it is quite difficult to gauge that
explicitly.

A key challenge with respect to improving financial management relates to
the attraction and retention of skilled, committed financial managers. As
the Minister suggested to us in the committee, the movement of personnel
between the private and public sectors in both directions is important and
is positive. However, the reality is that, while we have a core of highly
skilled and committed financial managers - not only nationally, but also in
many of the provinces - we are going to require far more of them in terms
of the requirements of the PFMA. We have to ask ourselves the question as
to what we can do to attract them and what we can do to keep them. The new
national Treasury and the Department of the Public Service and
Administration must put their heads together on this matter urgently.

In conclusion, may I commend the Minister, the Deputy Minister, the heads
of departments and all their staff. Their commitment, quality and
competence is unparalleled. May I also take the opportunity to commend the
chairperson of the finance committee, Barbara Hogan, who has led the
committee with innovation and insight. It is my belief that we have a
network of departments, together with this Ministry, which compete with the
very best in the world. We can rightfully be proud of them, and it is in
this light that I call on all members to support these Votes. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, let me thank all of the contributors
to this debate, both for their contributions and the manner in which this
was rendered. I think that we have got the basis for a very lively debate,
going forward.

Perhaps the one pity that we should express - and I think between the
Deputy Minister and myself, we try to do it unsatisfactorily - is that it
is necessary to give the work of the four departments - together with the
work we undertake in the financial sector, both as a link for the Reserve
Bank, the relationship with the Financial Services Board, the Development
Bank of Southern Africa and into that the intergovernmental relations, as
well as both the wider international responsibilities we have and the
regional issues - a perspective and provide something against which we can
understand and test both the policy coherence, as well as the degree and
rate of change in respect of implementation. It is necessary. It is not the
kind of discussion we have frequently in this House, but a very necessary
one, I would submit.

In respect of the issue raised by the hon Dr Woods about the term of office
of the director-general, we have indentured labour outside of a contract,
so those norms would apply as well. Let us abstract a few issues. The first
of these is the capital gains tax. The former Governor of the Reserve Bank
used to say on many issues that where one stands on an issue depends on
where one sits. I think, largely, the voice against capital gains tax
proves that the statement by Dr Stals was a truism.

There is an article in the Business Report this morning by Dr Lyn Olivier
of RAU, where she says:
  Taking the history and demographics of South Africa into account,
  everyone who thinks capital gains tax will not be introduced is living in
  a fools paradise. The discrepancy between the haves and the have-nots is
  just too big for capital gains tax, or alternatively an annual wealth
  tax, not to be introduced. It is also unlikely that the implementation
  date would be postponed, because that would reflect badly on the Finance
  Minister and the SA Revenue Service.

It was well said of Prof Olivier, because that is what we have responded
to, and I think that, for us, remains the impetus in what we need to
undertake.

In respect of Sars and the issues raised, clearly in the implementation of
the new income tax system there were genuine teething problems. Some checks
should have been a bit more rigorously applied, but I think even after the
first difficulties, the SA Institute of Chartered Accountants have
indicated that their members are concerned with the speed with which this
whole system will work, because they have never worked at quite this rate.

In respect of the issues of overzealousness, I want to tell Dr Woods, as we
said earlier, that tomorrow's children speak more softly than today's. And
I think in transformation challenges it is largely that. The insiders have
had the voice, they have had the access and they have had the ear, and I
think part of the challenge of transformation is to take an organisation
and break it out of the reigns of those who have held it in captivity. So
one seems to generate that kind of response when one transforms an
organisation.

I would like to refer the hon Mnu Ken Andrew to an old Xhosa saying that
goes like this: Izinja zikhonkotha imoto ehambayo. It means that dogs will
not bark at a car that is standing still. They will lie in the shade of the
car, and the minute one drives off, the dogs will bark. Now, it is a bit
like that with the kind of criticisms coming from members who have been in
this House for the length of time that the hon Andrew has. But I think it
is, in part, because he needs to find the dark side of the moon, and
because what we need at some point in this House, is a full ideological
debate.

I think there is a paradigm difference that is so vast, that goes to core
values and that deals with the fundamental question that we all need to
answer. That question is: What does democracy mean to the poorest South
Africans? If it means that one will be cast aside, that one will tremble on
one's rights, that we will ensure that the rich get richer, that workers
have no rights in South Africa, and that it is apartheid in a different
guise, with the same inequalities, the same inhumanity and the same
injustices now run by a different government, then it is not something that
many of us in this House will have any truck with. [Interjections.] But
that is their paradigm, and what they cannot get themselves out of.
[Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Please continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER: I just want to say to the hon Taljaard that I value her
contribution. At the same time, I wish I could be a fly on the wall in the
economics caucus of the DP. However, on her 6% growth rate, if, indeed, we
had taken her advice earlier, I think we would now be revising the figures
downwards on the basis of first quarter figures. This is not science. In
the work of economic management there is a fair amount of art. One has to
feel these issues, apply them and continue to drive.

However, the issues that she and the hon Dr Koornhof raised are important.
Of course we have to raise the level of growth, but in doing so - in
structuring that debate - we have to ensure that we do not sacrifice
certain core values of what democracy should be to the lives of ordinary
people. That is a big challenge; there must be certain things that we put
at centre stage as the elements for consensus-building, in the same way as
the Germans have structured something around what they call ``Die Sozial
Marktekonomie''. One must have the market, but must also take account of
the needs of the people. In the same way, democracy in South Africa
challenges us to find something that becomes the centre stage, and around
that, we can have our differences. Perhaps what this afternoon's debate
does raise is precisely that.

Yes, indeed, if we want the third way, we need to take account of the stage
of development in South Africa, which is not like the United Kingdom. We
need to take the need for intervention in respect of human resource
development, infrastructural development, social development and a series
of other challenges very seriously. As we do that, we may then come to
understand that whereas a balanced budget becomes a preoccupation in a
developed country, we may have a slightly longer horizon to face the
developmental challenges that arise as a consequence of our determination
to meet the needs of our people. However, I think we have opened the debate
which, hopefully, this House will rise to, and something that will see us
developing a consensus around what we need to do.

Let me conclude by again appealing that Census 2001 will be exceedingly
important to all of us. Each one of us, where we find ourselves, will need
to be involved in communicating its importance and ensuring that all of our
people are counted. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:54.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 25 May 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)     Firearms Control Bill [B 34 - 2000] (National Assembly -
                  sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security -
                  National Assembly).

         (ii)    Local Government: Municipal Electoral Bill [B 35 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Home Affairs - National Assembly).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant committees as mentioned below:


         (1)     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee
              on Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred to the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, the
              Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and to the Select
              Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs for
              information:

         Report of the Auditor-General on the Secret Services Account, the
          Related Departmental Accounts and the Security Services Special
          Account for 1998-99 [RP 125-99].


         (2)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology and to the
              Select Committee on Education and Recreation:


              (1) Government Notice No 1466 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20692 dated 10 December 1999, Amendment of
                  Item 8 of Government Notice No 1584 of 4 October 1996,
                  made in terms of section 10(2)(a) of the National
                  Monuments Act, 1969 (Act No 28 of 1969).

              (2) Government Notice No 127 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20705 dated 10 December 1999, Board Notice No
                  127 of 1999, made in terms of section 11(7) of the Pan
                  South African Language Board Act, 1995 (Act No 59 of
                  1995).

              (3) Government Notice No 128 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20705 dated 10 December 1999, Designation of a
                  Provincial Language Committee: KwaZulu-Natal, made in
                  terms of section 8(8) of the Pan South African Language
                  Board Act, 1995 (Act No 59 of 1995).

              (4) Government Notice No 52 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20820 dated 28 January 2000, Designation as a
                  conservation area: The Air Force Base Swartkop in
                  Pretoria, made in terms of section 5(9) of the National
                  Monuments Act, 1969 (Act No 28 of 1969).
              (5) Government Notice No 83 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20837 dated 4 February 2000, Approval of
                  official place names by the National Place Names
                  Committee.

              (6) Government Notice No 158 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20877 dated 18 February 2000, Application for
                  registration of heraldic representations and objections
                  thereto, made in terms of section 7A and B of the
                  Heraldry Act, 1962 (Act No 18 of 1962).

              (7) Government Notice No 159 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20877 dated 18 February 2000, Registration of
                  heraldic representations, made in terms of section 10 of
                  the Heraldry Act, 1962 (Act No 18 of 1962).

              (8) Government Notice No 160 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20877 dated 18 February 2000, Registration of
                  heraldic representations, made in terms of section 10 of
                  the Heraldry Act, 1962 (Act No 18 of 1962).


         (3)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Housing and to the Select Committee on Public Services:


              The Report of the Department of Housing for 1999 [RP 74-2000].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
     Administration on Draft Code of Ethics for Members of the Cabinet and
     Executive Councils, dated 23 May 2000:


     The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration, having
     considered the Draft Code of Ethics for Members of the Cabinet and
     Executive Councils, referred to it, reports as follows:


     A.     Requirements of Constitution


         The Constitution requires the State to be open, accountable and
         responsive (sec 1). In terms of the doctrine of separation of
         powers, the legislature exercises oversight of the executive,
         while another branch, the judiciary, has the power to review both
         the laws of the legislature and administrative acts of the
         executive. All three branches must act in accordance with the
         Constitution, which is the supreme law.

         In terms of the Constitution, the national Cabinet is accountable
         collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of
         their powers and the performance of their functions. Members of
         the Cabinet are further required to act in accordance with the
         Constitution, and must provide Parliament with "full and regular
         reports" concerning matters under their control (sec 92). Members
         of the Executive Council of a province are similarly accountable
         to the relevant legislature (sec 133).

         Related provisions confer powers upon the legislatures that
         correspond with the executive's duty of accountability. Oversight
         powers are conferred on the National Assembly (sec 55), the
         National Council of Provinces (sec 66) and provincial legislatures
         (sec 114).

         Within this framework of executive accountability to the
         legislature, the Constitution also contains provisions regarding
         the conduct of Members of the Cabinet and Deputy Ministers (sec
         96) and Members of the Executive Council of a province (sec 136).
         Members of Cabinet, Deputy Ministers and Members of Executive
         Councils are required "to act in accordance with a code of ethics
         prescribed by national legislation".

         By specifically proscribing certain conduct, the Constitution
         provides a minimum content for the envisaged code of ethics.
         Executive members are prohibited from -


         1. undertaking any other paid work;


         2. acting in a manner inconsistent with their office, or exposing
              themselves to any situation involving the risk of a conflict
              of interest between their official responsibilities and their
              private interests; or


         3. using their position or information entrusted to them to enrich
              themselves or improperly benefit any other person (sec 96(2)
              and 136(2) of the Constitution).


         The Constitution contains several instructions requiring
         Parliament to pass legislation to give effect to its provisions.
         For example, in February 2000 Parliament passed four such Acts:
         Two aimed at the promotion of equality, namely the Preferential
         Procurement Framework Policy Act, in terms of sec 217(3), and the
         Prevention of Discrimination and the Promotion of Equality Act, in
         terms of sec 9(4); and two that give legal force and effect to
         constitutionally protected rights (the Promotion of Access to
         Information Act, in terms of sec 32(2), and the Promotion of
         Administrative Justice Act, in terms of sec 33(3).

         These four Acts were passed in terms of three-year deadlines
         imposed in terms of the constitutional transitional arrangements.
         No such deadline was in place for the passage of the Executive
         Members' Ethics Act, which was passed by Parliament and assented
         to by the President, and came into operation on 20 October 1998.
         This Act gives effect to the constitutional requirements outlined
         in sec 96 and 136.


     B.     Enabling legislation


         The Executive Members' Ethics Act is located within the context of
         the accountability of the executive to the legislature, and the
         national and provincial legislatures' power and duty of oversight
         of the exercise of national and provincial executive authority
         (sec 55(2) and 114(2), respectively). The Act permits only members
         of the national and provincial legislatures and the President to
         submit complaints for investigation (sec 4(1) of the Act).
         In terms of the Act, complaints are to be investigated by the
         Public Protector, who is required to submit a report to the
         President, if the complaint is against a Member of Cabinet or a
         Deputy Minister, or the relevant Premier, if the complaint is
         against the MEC of a province. The President or Premier is then
         obliged to report to the legislature (to Parliament if a Member of
         Cabinet has been investigated, to the National Council of
         Provinces in the case of a Premier and to the legislature in the
         case of a Member of an Executive Council). Stringent time-frames
         and deadlines apply.

         The Act requires that the code of ethics contain positive
         exhortations (such as the requirement of good faith), and further
         requires that the code contain the proscriptions listed in the
         Constitution (sec 96(2) and 136(2)). The Act also requires the
         disclosure of financial interests, citing the existing code for
         Members of Parliament as a minimum standard.


     C.     Reports 11 and 12 of Public Protector
         Two special reports of the Public Protector, published during 1999
         (No 11 - Report on the Investigation of Allegations of Nepotism in
         Government [RP98-99], and No 12 - Report on the Investigation of a
         Public Statement made by the Premier of Mpumalanga, Mr N Mahlangu,
         on 22 June 1999 [RP121-99]) alluded to the fact that although the
         enabling legislation for a code of ethics, the Executive Members
         Ethics Act, was in place, the code itself had not been compiled
         and published.

         Report 11 was tabled on 26 April 1999, after Parliament had
         dissolved for the June 1999 elections. The Public Protector, in
         addition to investigating the specific complaints referred to him,
         made some general observations and recommendations. He noted in
         his report that a Code of Conduct for Public Servants was in
         place, that an Executive Members' Ethics Act was also in place,
         but that the code of ethics enabled by the Act and required by the
         Constitution had not yet been promulgated. He further noted that
         no general code of conduct for members of Parliament was in place,
         only a Code of Conduct in Regard to Financial Interests. He
         therefore recommended that -


         1. the code of ethics as envisaged in the Executive Members'
              Ethics Act be promulgated "as soon as possible";


         2. public office-bearers and officials raise awareness of the Code
              of Conduct for Public Servants; and


         3. the Rules Committees of Parliament develop a general code of
              conduct for members of Parliament.


         Before Report 11 was formally considered by a committee of the
         National Assembly, Report 12, an "own initiative" investigation of
         the Public Protector in terms of section 7(1) of the Public
         Protector Act, was tabled. The subject of the investigation was a
         statement made by the Premier of Mpumalanga. The report was tabled
         in the National Assembly, the National Council of Provinces and
         the Provincial Legislature of Mpumalanga. The Public Protector
         again bemoaned the absence of the code of ethics:


           "The importance of the code of ethics being finalised and
           promulgated without any delay has again been emphasised by this
           matter. The Act seeks to ensure public accountability on the
           part of those holding office. Such accountability can, however,
           only be properly enforced where there are clearly defined
           ethical prescripts". (Page 3 of the Report.)


         The Public Protector was of the view that "further delay will
         cause unnecessary uncertainty in the minds of those affected by
         the provisions of the Act as to what is expected from them and/or
         of them" (Ibid.). This report was not well received in the
         Mpumalanga legislature, where members alleged that the Public
         Protector was on "a frolic of his own".

         He responded to his detractors in the legislature in an article in
         the Sunday Times of 10 October 1999, entitled "Intemperance in the
         House Bodes Ill for the Rule of Law", drawing attention to the
         constitutional obligation on organs of state to assist and protect
         Chapter 9 institutions (sec 181(3) of the Constitution).
         Soon after the commencement of the Second Parliament in August
         1999, the Speaker referred Report 11 to the, at the time recently
         constituted, Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
         Administration. The Committee requested a special briefing on the
         Report by the Public Protector, which took place on 27 October
         1999. The Committee requested additional information on the
         measures in place to combat nepotism and on the extent to which
         the Public Protector's recommendations had been implemented. That
         Report of the Committee was published in the Announcements,
         Tablings and Committee Reports, dated 17 November 1999.


     D.     Findings and recommendations in respect of Report 11


         The Committee supported the Public Protector's call for the
         promulgation of the code of ethics, as required by sec 2(1) of the
         Executive Members' Ethics Act and sec 96 and 136 of the
         Constitution. The Committee also noted that public servants and
         officials elected to local government were covered by codes of
         conduct, but that non-executive members of Parliament, members of
         provincial legislatures and local government officials were
         excluded from the operation of the existing codes.

         The Committee accordingly recommended that the President publish a
         code of ethics, as envisaged in sec 2 of the Executive Members'
         Ethics Act, by 1 June 2000. The Committee also made
         recommendations that the relevant authorities develop codes for
         non-executive members of Parliament and legislatures and for local
         government employees (pp 486-487 of that Report).


     E.     Parliamentary consideration of Draft Code


         The Draft Code for Members of the Cabinet and Members of Executive
         Councils was tabled in the National Assembly and the National
         Council of Provinces by the Committee of Ministers convened by the
         Minister of Education, Prof A K Asmal, on 13 April 2000. The
         Minister opened a debate on the Draft Code in the National Council
         of Provinces on 16 May, which was also addressed by senior
         representatives of the provinces, including the Premier of
         Mpumalanga.

         During the debate, the following points, inter alia, were raised
         by provincial delegates:


         1. The Northern Cape delegate expressed his appreciation for the
              referral of the Draft Code to the legislatures for their
              consideration.


         2. The Western Cape delegate asked whether a Minister appointed in
              terms of sec 91 of the Constitution would be covered by the
              Draft Code. He added that the NNP supported the Draft Code,
              but wanted the time-frames to be shorter.


         3. The Free State delegate said that the requirement of disclosure
              of financial interests should be extended to the Public
              Service.


         4. The Speaker of the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature raised a concern
              regarding the Draft Code's impact on gifts of a cultural or
              customary nature. He also asked whether the President and
              Premiers were covered by the provisions of the Draft Code,
              since in places it referred to a "Member of the Cabinet" or
              "member of Executive Council", without specifically including
              the President or the Premier, as the case may be. He also
              indicated that the Draft Code prescribed no sanctions for
              breaches thereof, and felt that a tribunal should be
              established to adjudicate such matters. He also called for the
              establishment of a national hotline for reporting allegations
              against elected officials and public servants.


         5. The Premier of Mpumalanga said that professional bodies have
              codes of conduct and that it was therefore fitting for public
              representatives to adopt and enforce similar codes. He added
              that public representatives' every word and action are closely
              scrutinised.


         6. The Gauteng delegate indicated that the legislature had also
              drawn up a code for its members, which had been adopted
              recently by the legislature. The post of Integrity
              Commissioner had been created in the legislature to enforce
              the code. A "cooling-off" period had been activated for
              "outside-remunerated" work currently undertaken by members.


         7. The Eastern Cape delegate gave an undertaking the Eastern Cape
              legislature would follow suit.


         The Minister, in his reply to the debate, gave the assurance that
         Ministers appointed in terms of sec 91 would also be covered by
         the Code, and that the definitional concerns of members were
         unwarranted. Nonetheless, he said, "out of an abundance of
         caution" the President and Premier could be explicitly included in
         the provisions.

         The Speaker of the National Assembly referred the report to the
         Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration on 9 May.
         The Committee was briefed by Mr Allan Taylor, Special Adviser to
         the Minister of Education, on 19 May. At the briefing, members of
         the Committee made the following remarks:


         (1)     Mr Modisenyane (ANC) pointed out that paragraphs 2.3(d)
              and (i) contained the same provision and that one should be
              deleted.

         (2)     Mr De Beer (UDM) raised the question of sanctions to be
              applied in the case of a breach.

         (3)     Adv Madasa (ACDP) said that such a code was appropriate
              because executive members have far more power and therefore
              far more opportunities to abuse that power.

         (4)     Mr Sithole (ANC) said that the moral aspect of the code
              did not come through clearly enough. He and Mr Mfundisi (UCDP)
              enquired regarding the distinction between a code of ethics
              and a code of conduct.

         (5)     Mr Da Camara (DP) asked whether the term "inconsistent"
              was not too vague.

         (6)     Several members were of the view that such a code should
              apply to senior civil servants as well.


     F.     Observations


         1. The Committee congratulates Minister Asmal and the Committee of
              Ministers on the work they have done in developing the Draft
              Code. The Committee is also cognisant that the tabling of the
              Draft Code on 13 April is demonstrative of a willingness on
              the part of the executive to be bound by, and to act in
              accordance with, resolutions of the legislature - in this
              instance a resolution of the National Assembly in respect of
              the promulgation of the code by 1 June 2000 - and accordingly
              commends the executive for the spirit in which it has complied
              with the Assembly's resolution.


         2. The Committee is of the view that the Draft Code is in
              compliance with, and gives full effect to, the provisions of
              sec 96 and 136 of the Constitution and of the Executive
              Members Ethics Act. The Committee is, however, of the view
              that Parliament, specifically the Joint Subcommittee on Ethics
              and Members' Interests, should review both the enabling
              legislation and the code one year after the promulgation of
              the code in the Gazette.


         3. Such a review by the joint subcommittee might incorporate the
              following issues:


              (1) The number and nature of complaints submitted by members
                  of legislatures.


              (2) The efficacy of procedures provided for in the Act and the
                  Code.


              (3) Any technical problems which may have arisen.


              (4) An evaluation of the manner in which the relevant
                  legislatures have dealt with the reports of the Public
                  Protector investigating such complaints.


              (5) Any other matter that it deems fit to incorporate.
         4. The Committee is further of the view that the Code should have
              the title and name provided for in paragraph 8.4 of the Draft
              Code ("Executive Ethics Code"), since the working title "Draft
              Code for Members of the Cabinet and Members of Executive
              Councils" does not expressly include Deputy Ministers, who are
              required to be subject to the Code in terms of the
              Constitution, and are in fact subject to it in terms of the
              definitions contained in the Draft Code.


         5. The Committee believes it is important that there be greater
              awareness of the provisions of the Code and the procedures by
              which the conduct of executive members may be brought under
              the scrutiny of the relevant legislature. It therefore
              believes that Parliament should consider producing an
              information pamphlet on executive members' accountability for
              their conduct, including the kinds of sanctions that may be
              imposed, as this was an issue of concern for members in both
              Houses.


         6. The Committee remains of the view, expressed in its Report on
              report 11 of the Public Protector, that the application of the
              Code should be extended to all members of Parliament, with
              such modifications as may be appropriate, that the Code should
              be adopted by the Joint Rules Committee of Parliament, and
              that the application of the Code should likewise be extended
              by the appropriate structures in the legislatures to all
              members of provincial legislatures.


         7. The Committee notes further that it has already made a
              recommendation in respect of the development by the provincial
              and local government Minmec of a Code of Conduct for Local
              Government employees by 1 January 2001.


         8. The Committee supports the extension of a requirement of
              disclosure of financial interests to senior public servants,
              and takes note of the fact that the Department of Public
              Service and Administration (DPSA) and the Public Service
              Commission (PSC) are working on the introduction of an assets
              register for senior civil servants.


     G.     Recommendations


         The Committee therefore recommends as follows:


         1. That the National Assembly endorse the Draft Code tabled by the
              Committee of Ministers.


         2. That the Joint Subcommittee on Ethics and Members' Interests
              conduct a review, as outlined above, one year after the
              promulgation of the Draft Code.


         3. That Parliament, specifically the Joint Subcommittee on Ethics
              and Members' Interests, assume responsibility for the
              production of an information pamphlet for the general public
              on the ways in which the public can hold executive members
              accountable for their conduct, and the kinds of sanctions
              which may be applied by the relevant executive head and the
              relevant legislature.
         4. That Parliament extend the application of the Code to all
              members of Parliament, with such modifications as may be
              appropriate, and that such Code be adopted by the Joint Rules
              Committee of Parliament by the end of the year.


         5. That provincial legislatures, through their appropriate
              structures, similarly extend the application of the Code to
              all members of provincial legislatures, with such
              modifications as may be appropriate, by the end of the year.


         6. That a Code of Conduct for local government employees be put in
              place by 1 January 2001, in accordance with the earlier
              recommendation of the Committee in this regard.


         7. That the DPSA and the PSC report to the Committee on progress
              made in respect of the development of an asset register for
              senior civil servants during the third quarter of 2000.


     Report to be considered.


