---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 March 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-03-16
---

THURSDAY, 16 MARCH 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Miss M N MAGAZI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that this week is Human Rights Week;


  (2) further notes that South Africa, by virtue of its being a member of
       the United Nations, is a member of the International Labour
       Organisation;


  (3) recognises that South Africa is one of a few countries to lead the
       process of the ratification of ILO conventions aimed at protecting
       workers' rights;


  (4) further recognises that section 23 of the Constitution and the aims
       and objectives of the Labour Relations Act, the Basic Conditions of
       Employment Act and the Employment Equity Act are concrete examples of
       our commitment to the principles of the ILO conventions;


  (5) supports the activities of the Department of Labour towards achieving
       workers' rights; and


  (6) calls on all South Africans to celebrate Human Rights Week with its
       theme of ``Workers' rights are human rights''.
[Applause.]

Mr D K MALULEKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the racist, anti-Semitic statements made by an ANC member in
       the KwaZulu-Natal legislature;


  (2) further notes the delight of ANC members of the legislature in these
       intolerant remarks and the failure of the ANC leadership to condemn
       both these words and the behaviour of its members;


  (3) unreservedly condemns this overt racism; and


  (4) calls on -


       (a)  the individual involved to apologise to the people of South
           Africa; and


       (b)  the ANC to act against racism in its ranks.

[Applause.]

Chief M W HLENGWA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock the incident in which a number of teachers were
       robbed of their possessions in broad daylight at the Nathaniel Sabelo
       school in the Umbumbulu district, KwaZulu-Natal;


  (2) notes with shock that such incidents are happening at schools where
       our learners and educators are supposed to be safe and protected;


  (3) calls on the Department of Education to come up with a mechanism that
       will ensure the protection of educators and learners; and


  (4) calls on big local industries to help by donating fencing material to
       those schools that are not fenced in.

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that South Africa is a member state of the United Nations;


  (2) notes that the Declaration of Human Rights is a product of this body;


  (3) further notes that South Africa, by virtue of its being a member of
       the United Nations, is a member of the International Labour
       Organisation and subscribes to fundamental human rights;


  (4) believes that South Africa is among a few member states to lead the
       process of the ratification of ILO conventions aimed at protecting
       workers' rights;


  (5) further believes that section 23 of the Constitution and the aims and
       objectives of the Labour Relations Act, the Basic Conditions of
       Employment Act and the Employment Equity Act bear testimony to the
       above commitments;
  (6) resolves that we celebrate Human Rights Week from 15 March to 17
       March 2000;


  (7) resolves that the theme ``Workers' rights are human rights'' be
       adopted; and


  (8) further resolves that the activities of the Department of Labour ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is the hon member
allowed to give notice of a motion which is identical to one given by his
colleague just three minutes ago?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I actually think that that point of order is
correct. That needs to be corrected.

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that although the ANC Government assures us, on paper and in
       the House, that the alleviation of poverty is one of its first
       priorities, the situation in the Department of Welfare and Population
       Development indicates the contrary;


  (2) further notes that the Minister blames the officials at management
       level for their negative attitude towards the transformation of the
       department, but there are no officials to blame and the department
       does not have the capacity to drive the process, as it is
       understaffed by 37%, with many vacancies at management level; and


  (3) calls on the Minister, as the political head of the department, to
       assist its sixth director-general in six years to embark on a process
       to recruit suitably trained officials to fill the 147 vacant posts in
       the department, since this should enable the department to run at
       full capacity and manage the process of poverty relief.

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:
  That the House -


  (1) highly commends His Excellency the President for recognising that the
       traditional leaders had not been properly consulted before the
       demarcation process began and for consequently visiting the North
       West and the Northern Province with a view to correcting this
       omission; and


  (2) in consideration of the fact that the issue of demarcation affects
       all traditional structures throughout South Africa in the same way
       because of the commonality of their interests and concerns, submits
       that the President should convene a meeting of all traditional
       leaders and/or their representatives for the purpose of discussing
       these concerns, arriving at a common decision and avoiding confusion.

Ms N N MAPISA-NQAKULA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next
sitting of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the announcement of the Paris Club of creditor nations that it
       will defer all Mozambique's debt-serving payments until a global
       accord cancelling the country's debt has been agreed on;


  (2) commends the creditor nations for their humanitarian approach in
       assisting Mozambique to recover from the devastating floods that have
       plagued the country; and


  (3) calls upon the IMF and the World Bank to do all in their power to
       reach a speedy conclusion of the international debt accord, which
       will bring much-needed relief to the heavily indebted poor countries.

[Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHITELO: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a train carrying commuters from Mabopane to the city of
       Pretoria on Tuesday morning, 14 March 2000, had no fatalities, thanks
       to providence, when a passenger bridge collapsed on it, but that 12
       passengers were injured;


  (2) wishes all those who suffered injuries a speedy recovery; and


  (3) challenges Metrorail to mount a full-scale investigation into the
       cause of the accident as a matter of urgency.

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) observes that the progress of transformation in SA Airways, which saw
       a lot of black hostesses and check-in clerks serving at our major
       airports, seems to have slowed down or been put into reverse gear;
       and


  (2) calls on the relevant administrative authority to check if this trend
       is true, and if true, to remedy a situation that this House would
       clearly regard as being unacceptable and retrogressive.

Ms E GANDHI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the tremendous response to the Portfolio Committee on Arts,
       Culture, Science and Technology's Year of Science and Technology in
       1999 and the enthusiasm with which the department carried this
       forward;


  (2) acknowledges that emphasis needs to be placed on explaining intricate
       scientific and technology issues in simple everyday terms;


  (3) therefore congratulates the Minister on building on this achievement
       through launching a Week of Science and Technology, to be implemented
       on a rotational basis in the various provinces; and


  (4) calls on the department to ensure that the mass of our people are not
       left behind in the field of science and technology.

[Applause.]

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) urges all South Africans to support National Water Week; and


  (2) commends Mr Tony Leon, MP, for visiting -


       (a)  the Kyasands landfill site, which is one of only 16 licensed
           sites out of the 116 in Gauteng, and shares his shock at seeing
           the dumping of hazardous waste and the lack of enforcement and
           monitoring of water quality by the Department of Water Affairs
           and Forestry; and


       (b)  the Bloubosrand sewerage pumping station where poor maintenance
           has seen raw sewerage being pumped into the Klein Jukskei River
           on regular occasions. Viva, water pure and clean!

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr B H VILAKAZI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Israeli government plans to withdraw all troops from
       occupied parts of Lebanon by the end of July;


  (2) recognises that this will bring an end to 18 years of occupation of
       Southern Lebanon by Israeli troops;


  (3) believes that this move will contribute greatly towards peace in the
       Middle East and is an indication that Israel now realises that
       occupation of another country does not solve any country's security
       concerns;


  (4) hopes that this example will serve as a lesson to parts of the world
       where similar situations exist;


  (5) welcomes the decision of the Israeli government; and


  (6) applauds the sections of Israeli civil society who continue to
       campaign against the occupation and put pressure on their government
       to withdraw troops from Lebanon and other occupied territories.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move:


  That the House notes -


  (1) the irregularities during the recent election in Mozambique and
       particularly during the counting process, which led to one million
       votes not being counted;


  (2) that the result of these irregularities was that Mr Alfonso Dhlakama
       was effectively cheated out of the presidency;


  (3) that the politically biased judge of the Mozambican supreme court
       denied Renamo's urgent application for a recount of votes;


  (4) that Renamo should be congratulated for victories in six of
       Mozambique's 11 provinces; and


  (5) that, despite these circumstances, Renamo admirably decided to remain
       part of the democratic process.

[Interjections.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today is the culmination of the five days of Hajj, which
       millions of Muslim pilgrims will be celebrating in the holy city of
       Mecca ...

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I would like the Chair
to make a ruling on whether it is proper for a member of this Parliament to
cast aspersions on the judicial system of another country. Mr Geldenhuys
said that the judge was biased.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! That is not a point of order. The Rules of this
House provide for this House.

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today is the culmination of the five days of Hajj, which
       millions of Muslim pilgrims will be celebrating in the holy city of
       Mecca after spending the past few days in meditation and prayer at
       Mina, Mount Arafat and Muzdalifah;


  (2) expresses the wish that this day, which demonstrates the Prophet
       Abraham's willingness to make the supreme sacrifice and is marked by
       a spirit of love, brotherhood, tolerance and sacrifice, will be
       enjoyed by all in Mecca and throughout the world today and tomorrow;
  (3) wishes the Muslim community in our country a joyous Eid-Ul-Adha
       tomorrow and expresses the hope that the sacrifice of animals, which
       are meant to feed the poor, the destitute and the ``miskeen'', will
       be hassle-free; and


  (4) wishes the pilgrims Haj Mubarak, and may Almighty God make their
       travels back to their homes and dear ones a pleasant  experience ...

[Time expired.]

               MEMBERS DESIGNATED FOR SADC PARLIAMENTARY FORUM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:


  That the following members be designated to represent Parliament in the
  Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum in terms of
  article 6(3) of the constitution of the said Forum:


     Eglin, C W; Ntlabati, S N; Yengeni, T S.

Agreed to.

 EXTENSION OF PERIOD OF OPERATION OF SECTIONS OF CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam
Speaker, on behalf of the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, I move the draft resolution printed in his name on the Order
Paper, as follows:


  That the House gives its consent that the President by proclamation in
  the Gazette extend the period of operation of sections 51 and 52 of the
  Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1997 (Act No 105 of 1997), in terms of
  section 53(2) of the said Act for a further period of one year, with
  effect from 1 May 2000.

Agreed to.

              INTERPELLATIONS AND QUESTIONS: INTERIM PROCEDURE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move the draft resolution printed in his name on the Order Paper,
as follows:


  That -


  (1) with effect from 5 April until 23 June 2000, the provisions of the
       Rules insofar as they relate to interpellations be suspended and
       that, notwithstanding the provisions of the Rules that apply to
       questions for oral reply, the procedure for questions for oral reply
       be dealt with in accordance with guidelines published in the
       Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports and in compliance with
       the following requirements:


       (a)  question time to be increased to 2 hours per week;

       (b)  questions to have precedence on Wednesdays from 15:00;

       (c)  clusters of Ministers to take turns to answer questions on a
           weekly rotation basis;

       (d)  each Minister may be asked a maximum of eight questions on any
           question day;

       (e)  each party be allocated a number of question opportunities as
           contained in the guidelines;

       (f)  a maximum of two urgent questions may be put on any question day
           to Ministers whose turn to answer questions is not due;

       (g)  time limits be set for the answering of questions and for
           supplementary questions; and

       (h)  questions to the President to be scheduled for once a quarter;
           and


  (2) notwithstanding the Rules, the Chief Whips' Forum develops a set of
       guidelines to govern the interim question procedure and adjust these
       guidelines as necessary from time to time on the basis of continuous
       monitoring of the system.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I rise to oppose the motion put by the hon
the Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party. The DP regards this as no more
and no less than a power grab by the ANC aimed at pumping itself up at the
expense of the opposition parties. [Interjections.]

The ANC appears not to understand that in a democracy one of the main
purposes of a parliament is for members to hold the government to account.
Because of the nature of our system where members have little or no
independence within their parties and where they can be thrown out as MPs
if they upset their parties, it is simply impossible to expect Government
MPs to put Ministers on the spot.

It is therefore up to the opposition parties to perform this function, and
perform it we have. The Government's Chief Whip admitted that the DP had
dominated question time and that this had to stop. He changed the Rules to
ensure this. I remind hon members that the present Rules regard all MPs as
equal and any party, including the ANC, had the opportunity of putting two
oral questions and three written questions per MP per week.

The ANC had only between 2% and 4% of the questions because ANC MPs failed
to ask questions. The Rules are now being changed to ensure that they do
not have to work any harder. All that will happen is that their few
questions will be inflated to about 50% of members' time and that, with
their Ministers joining in reply, something like 75% of question time will
go to a party with 62% of the vote and the combined opposition, with 34% of
the vote will, at most, have 25% of question time. [Interjections.]

Interpellations have been abolished because, to use the words of the hon Mr
Yengeni, they ``are boring''. I state categorically that interpellations
introduced by the DP have not been boring; they have never been boring.
[Interjections.] They were not boring yesterday or last week or any other
Wednesday. On the contrary, some of the most interesting, exciting, and
worthwhile debates in this Parliament have been on interpellations.
[Interjections.]

Boring interpellations have been sweetheart questions put by hon members of
the ANC. [Interjections.] The real reason for the abolition of
interpellations is that the Government had one each week and the combined
opposition had three. The ANC is determined to marginalise the opposition
parties and they rejected out of hand the DP proposal to shorten
interpellation debates to 10 minutes each and to have six of them in order
to empower the smaller opposition parties. Naturally, they did not even
consider that proposal. [Interjections.]

Our proposals for making question time more relevant, immediate and
topical, were similarly rejected. I want to say to hon members that
presidential question time, as proposed, is a pathetic travesty of
executive accountability. [Interjections.] Six questions, once a quarter at
three weeks' notice, sifted by the hon the Speaker, will ensure that the
hon the President is not called to account on anything topical or anything
relevant. The changes are not an improvement. They do not strengthen
parliamentary oversight or parliamentary democracy.

The DP will not commit suicide with a smile, and join the hon Tony
Yengeni's consensus about which he bragged in the press the other day. We
are opposing this measure as a retrograde step, and no one can persuade us
that we should do anything else other than that. What we are open to
persuasion about is improving it; making it more interesting and making it
more exciting. But that is not what the ANC is busy with. What the ANC is
busy with is muzzling the opposition, and pumping themselves up by simply
changing the Rules, because the Rules do not suit them, as they have been
for the past six years.

The DP will oppose this motion. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Speaker, hon members, conservatism as a political
ideology, has to do with conserving that which is good in any system, while
accepting change. When the proposal to scrap interpellations was put to the
Chief Whips' Forum for discussion, we were opposed, and still are, to their
scrapping.

Interpellations are an instrument which is available to the opposition to
hold the executive accountable to Parliament. With the scrapping of
interpellations, we see a further reduction of the right of opposition
parties to make party-political statements. The one minute given for follow-
up questions is, of course, a further reduction of that right. We are
aware, of course, that the right to make political statements, is now
embodied in the new system. This is a major concession.

We note also the majority party's reasons for wanting to scrap the
interpellations - that they are ``boring''. It must, however, be remembered
that there is no system which is better than the people serving under that
system. What must be improved, perhaps, are the skills of debate.

Lastly, as the IFP, we support the trial run with the above reservations.
[Applause.]

Mr D M BAKKER: Madam Speaker, since I first came to Parliament, question
and interpellation time on a Wednesday has always been a highlight of my
weekly programme, and I would never miss this session on a Wednesday
afternoon. However, over recent years, due to various circumstances which I
do not have time to discuss today, interpellations became less interesting,
and I can understand why the ANC wants to try a new system.

Reg van die begin, toe die ANC hul eerste voorstelle op die tafel geplaas
het, was daar groot ooreenstemming dat vrae en interpellasies in die
huidige vorm verbeter behoort te word. Hoewel die Nuwe NP ernstige
voorbehoude oor die ANC se oorspronklike voorstelle gehad het, is daar
reeds verskeie toegewings deur die ANC gemaak deur op konsensus-soekende
wyse opposisiepartye se voorstelle te akkommodeer. Hierdie toegewings het
ons in staat gestel om baie meer positief na 'n nuwe formaat vir vrae te
kyk. In dié verband wil ek my opregte dank uitspreek, spesifiek teenoor die
Hoofsweep van die Meerderheidsparty.

Van die belangrikste en ingrypendste veranderings behels onder meer 'n
proeftydperk vir hierdie voorstelle, die instelling van 'n deurlopende
moniteringsmeganisme, die wegbeweeg van 'n proporsionele grondslag vir die
stel van vrae na 'n rotasiegrondslag, gegrond op die mosie-prosedure, en
die onveranderde voortbestaan van alle skriftelike vrae aan Ministers.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Right from the outset, when the ANC laid their first proposals on the
table, there has been significant agreement that questions and
interpellations in their present form should be improved upon. Although the
New NP had serious reservations concerning the ANC's original proposals,
various concessions have already been made by the ANC in a consensus-
seeking manner so as to accommodate the proposals of opposition parties.
These concessions have enabled us to look at a new format for questions far
more positively. In this respect I want to convey my sincere appreciation,
specifically to the Chief Whip of the Majority Party.

The most important and radical changes entail, inter alia, a trial period
for these proposals, the introduction of an ongoing monitoring mechanism,
moving away from a proportional basis for posing questions to a rotation
basis, based on motion procedures, and the unchanged continuing of written
questions to Ministers.]

There are also several positive aspects in the new proposal. Firstly, it
once again confirms the right and duty of all members of the National
Assembly to ask questions to members of the executive. Secondly, question
time is considerably lengthened. The idea is that more questions should be
answered on a question day than is currently the situation, and in this
regard, parties will have to co-operate to see that it happens. Thirdly,
the new proposal now also provides for making political statements in the
time-slot for follow-up questions, which means that many of the questions
can become mini-debates.
The new proposal entails that the President will answer questions once a
quarter. Although we would have preferred this to happen at least once
every month, it is still a major improvement over the past five years,
during which the President answered no questions in Parliament at all.

Die groepering van Ministers vir vraetyd is ook 'n verbetering wat tot
gevolg sal hê dat Ministers beter beoordeel sal kan word en dat 'n meer
gefokusde debat sal kan plaasvind. Die Nuwe NP sal ook graag wil hê dat
daar voorsiening gemaak word vir enkele vrae waarvoor vooraf kennisgewing
nie nodig is nie om dringende aangeleenthede te hanteer. Met die voorbehoud
dat die stelsel deurgaans gemoniteer en geëvalueer moet word en die nodige
regstellings aangebring moet word, steun ons hierdie voorstel omdat ons glo
dat dit nuwe uitdagings aan ons sal stel. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The grouping of Ministers for question time is also an improvement that
will result in Ministers being better evaluated and a more focused debate
taking place. The New NP would also like to see provision being made for a
few questions that do not require prior notice for the purpose of dealing
with urgent matters. On condition that the system is monitored and
evaluated continuously and necessary improvements effected, we support this
proposal, because we believe that it will put new challenges to us.
[Applause.]]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Madam Speaker, the political system permitted by our
democratic Constitution fosters the existence of a diversity of political
organisations, each reflecting a political perspective that must be
expressed. In the main, however, the parliamentary procedures that are
being adhered to do not suit our changed political circumstances and at
times turn towards the incongruous. Hence the very real problem of its
inherent incongruity, giving the observing public the distorted idea that
to be a modern parliamentarian one has to be either a clown, a pompous
buffoon or simply a dullard.

The UDM holds the view that a revision of the procedures of Parliament has
become overdue. The basic principle of the old parliaments - that the time
allowed a party to express itself on an issue should be commensurate with
its numerical representation - renders parliamentary sittings tedious,
uninspiring and sometimes downright ridiculous. Thus, for example, the
Rules have allowed three parties to participate in interpellations
regularly every sitting week, while 10 parties have had to make do with
taking turns in the fourth slot.

The UDM will support the motion. We support it because of a very important
principle which is being introduced. The UDM hopes to see a return of the
interpellation in a different form. We fully support the revision mechanism
which was devised by the Whips' forum in seeking changes to the method of
questioning. The innovative idea of suspending the existing Rules, in order
to allow for a trial run before changing those Rules, is bound to work,
especially because it allows for regular monitoring and modification as we
go along. I believe that we should see how it runs. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, the idea of a trial run was the ACDP's idea.
[Interjections.] But - and this is a big but - the draft resolution, as it
stands, is not supported by the ACDP for the following reasons.
[Interjections.] The first important reason we are raising is the
comparison. If we compare the past position with the present position, we
believe that this model, as proposed, is being proposed, as the only model.
The other alternatives were not considered. [Interjections.]

Instead of doing away with interpellations altogether as a model, we as the
ACDP feel that we should also have the introduction of a system that would
allow the model of six interpellations on a trial basis. Giving us six
interpellations instead of four interpellations would allow political
parties, especially the opposition parties, more scope to make the debates
lively.

If we compare this, the ANC's position was that if we looked at
interpellations they were boring, they were not interesting and people read
their contributions to the debate. I would agree to a certain extent.
However, if we look at yesterday's debate, I doubt whether the
interpellations then were boring or uninteresting. Now, although this was
the ACDP's idea, we are not afraid of trial runs. We say that we must have
trial runs. But as the draft resolution stands at the moment, the idea we
are getting is that it is excluding all other trial runs. We believe that
we must give things a trial run, but this should not be the only other
trial run. We want to see a DP trial run, we want to see an ACDP-PAC trial
run, we want to see trial runs of all the other opposition parties.
[Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, the FF sees itself as a modern political
party. We are in favour of renewal, reform and change. We have no obsession
with the past or certain practices of the past. As a matter of fact, we
strongly believe that South Africa's Constitution also needs urgent
renewal, reform and change. But that is a different discussion for a
different topic.

Today we are discussing a proposal by the majority party to drastically
change the fundamental aspect of how parliamentary procedure works, namely
questions and interpellations. The question is: Why? Why do we need to
change the system? That is the basic question. The fact of the matter is
that the present system makes provision for one interpellation for the
Government and three for the opposition. With regard to the questions, the
governing party never really asked any questions. Why are we changing this?

The matter of fact is that opposition parties that are supporting this
proposal are making a major mistake. [Interjections.] One cannot, for one
moment, go into the technical detail. The principle is wrong. The principle
should be that question time should be opposition time. [Interjections.] It
is not for the Government to use those times for themselves. It is
opposition time.

When we came to this Parliament, after the June election, Madam Speaker
clearly asked: How do we manage a Parliament with 13 parties? Maybe, we
made a mistake. It is not a question of how we manage a Parliament with 13
parties. The question is: How do we manage a Parliament with 15 parties?
Thirteen of those parties are visible and two of them are invisible. The
two invisible ones are Mr Cronin's SA Communist Party and Cosatu.
[Interjections.] Those are the two. [Interjections.]

The fact is that the SA Communist Party and Cosatu want to use 50% of
question time to keep the ANC on its toes. [Interjections.] That is what it
is all about. It is not about true opposition. No party can support this
proposition. We will reject it. [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker and hon members, we have been on a
learning curve over the past nine months. We appreciate the magnanimity of
the ANC in giving some of their time to the opposition.

While we welcome change, such change should be for the better. The proposed
system of party questions, if followed as proposed, will hurt the
opposition parties the most. If such parties file questions to the
President, chances are that their questions may only be answered after some
three years or so. This is most unacceptable. While the current system
rewards hard work through the first-come, first-served principle, those who
bring in their questions in time get a chance to have them answered. But
where one has to follow a set pattern, one sits with the problem of always
having to stand at the back of the queue.

With the proposed new system, the parties cited above may have their
questions answered only after some 80 questions have been answered or filed
by some parties to the Ministers. That means that, for a whole month or so,
the said parties will be sitting here without anything to do. The proposal
may appear attractive on paper, but, in real practice, it is not as it
should be.

On that note, the UCDP will not align itself with this proposal.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mrs P DE LILLE: I have not even opened my mouth and there is a lot of noise
already. [Interjections.]

I want to put it on record that, in a meeting held on 8 March, I asked a
question, and deliberately so, because I wanted a clear answer. I said that
the PAC was in agreement with the view that interpellations should not be
scrapped permanently. This was the answer from the ANC. Mr Doidge said that
there was no permanent scrapping of interpellations. It was a trial run of
the proposal, and the abolition of interpellations was not a permanent
decision. That is our understanding.

But, I also want to add that it is a fact of life that the ANC, combined,
has only asked 2,5% of the questions in the past five years. The opposition
parties combined, have asked 97,5%. We understand that the ANC wants to use
this as a public relations exercise to improve their image. We will grant
them a couple of weeks to do so. [Interjections.]

I also want to agree with hon President Thabo Mbeki when he said that the
level of debate in this Parliament is so low, that members of Parliament
should read more.  I am sure that he was referring to his members of
Parliament, because they should read more. They should do some more
research and work so that we can have important debates in this House.
[Interjections.]

I hope that after this, we will take a final decision on whether we are
going to go ahead with it or not, but the PAC only supports the trial run.
[Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Madam Speaker, questions and ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Madam Speaker, questions and interpellations posed by
the opposition parties in Parliament are an important aspect of any
democratic parliament. In their present form they have became pale and
uninspiring to some extent. So a new experiment is before us, and the FA
supports the provisional changes of the Rules in this regard to make the
interaction between Government Ministers and opposition parties more
relevant.

The success of this experiment will depend not so much on the Rules before
us, but on the spirit in which the Ministers and questioners interact to
create a new convention in this regard. However, there are serious
limitations in the new proposals. They minimise the opportunity of smaller
parties to interact with Government. They also increase the opportunity for
members of the majority party to put sweetheart questions to their
Government. The support for the change by the FA is thus provisional, and a
final decision will be taken in time to assess how these changes facilitate
an effective, better interaction between Government and opposition parties.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, questions and interpellations are a
transparent method used to clarify doubts and enforce accountability on
important issues. The mechanism used at present to put forward questions
and interpellations is time consuming and most often, owing to unwarranted
circumstances, answers cannot be received timeously.

I therefore support the new guidelines for questions and interpellations.
The guidelines are reasonable and provide all role-players with the maximum
time to co-operate with each other. The new procedure should be given an
opportunity to be exercised on a trial-and-error basis. During the process
we should monitor and evaluate the advantages and disadvantages, which
should determine our final decision. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, the temptation is very great for me today to
congratulate the AEB and its candidate, Mr Leon Fick, on the AEB's first
win in a municipal by-election yesterday in Newcastle. [Applause.] And that
was against the mighty ANC! As the by-election has nothing in common with
the subject of questions and interpellations, I will refrain from doing
that. [Laughter.] May I, however, challenge any party in this House to
double its caucus of elected representatives within one day. [Laughter.]
With regard to the proposed change of the interpellation format in this
House, the AEB says no.

Interpellasies is die een werksaamheid van hierdie Huis wat die grootste
openbare belangstelling uitlok. Ja, daar was probleme met die stelsel, maar
nou wil ons die kind met die badwater uitgooi.

Ons kan eerstens 'n sommetjie gaan maak. Volgens die ou stelsel van
interpellasies het die ANC een uit elke vier beurte gehad; nou word dit een
uit drie. Verder het die ANC by monde van sy Ministers agt uit die 15
minute van elke interpellasie gehad; nou word dit 13 uit 18 minute.

Tweedens vereis die nuwe stelsel dat vrae ligjare voor die tyd reeds gestel
moet word. Teen die tyd dat die Minister dit moet beantwoord sodat dit
gedebatteer kan word, is dit dikwels al dood en begrawe.

Derdens maak vrae deur die ANC aan die ANC eenvoudig nie sin nie. In die
reël is dit regte Siembamba-vragies, en heel dikwels word dit gebruik as 'n
vooraf georkestreerde beeldbou-oefening vir die betrokke Minister. Nog nie
een keer in hierdie Huis moes 'n Minister behoorlik keer vir sy paaltjies
as die ANC 'n bal na hom geboul het nie.

Vierdens is die stelsel van rotasie en groepering van kabinetsposte
heeltemal te ingewikkeld. Ons sal later nie meer weet of dit Dinsdag of
Dingaansdag is nie. Vrae wat oorstaan, sal dan drie weke moet oorstaan tot
die volgende geleentheid vir die betrokke kabinetsgroep.

Die AEB is daarvan oortuig dat die nuwe stelsel nog minder reg sal laat
geskied aan die beginsel van verantwoording van die uitvoerende gesag aan
hierdie Parlement. Die AEB, met sy verdubbelde koukus, stem heelhartig
daarteen. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Interpellations are the one activity in this House that elicits the most
public interest. Yes, there were problems with the system, but now we want
to throw out the baby with the bathwater.

We can first make a quick calculation. According to the old system of
interpellations the ANC had one out of every four turns; now this becomes
one out of every three. Furthermore the ANC, through its Ministers, had
eight of the 15 minutes of each interpellation; now this becomes 13 out of
18 minutes.

Secondly, the new system requires questions to be posed light-years before
the time. By the time the Minister must answer it so that it can be
debated, it is often already dead and buried.

Thirdly, questions by the ANC to the ANC simply make no sense. As a rule
they are real Siembamba questions, and quite often this is used as a
previously orchestrated image-building exercise for the relevant Minister.
Not once has a Minister really had to defend his wickets when the ANC has
bowled to him in this House.

Fourthly, the system of rotation and grouping of Cabinet posts is far too
complicated. We will eventually not know what day of the week it is.
Questions that stand over will have to stand over for three weeks until the
next opportunity for that particular Cabinet group.

The AEB is convinced that the new system will do even less justice to the
principle of accounting to Parliament by the executive authority. The AEB,
with its doubled caucus, votes wholeheartedly against this.
[Interjections.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, it is our understanding that there is a
desire on the part of all of us to improve the interaction between members
of this House and the executive, and that the present arrangement is not
entirely satisfactory; and hence the need for all of us to search for other
effective ways of enriching the debates between the Government and the
legislature.

The suggested two-hour question time is such an attempt. Azapo supports a
trial run of the new system. Some among us doubt whether this will indeed
be an improvement; whether it will not disadvantage some parties; whether
it will not make Parliament dull. Azapo hopes that all of us will keep an
open mind during the trial run; that we will, as objectively as possible,
monitor and assess the new system; and that we will all come together soon
to refine or change the system until we have something that works. It
should not only work, but be fair, equitable, just and interesting.

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, we are a new Parliament in a new democracy.
Our new dispensation was forged out of a ground-breaking process of
negotiation and reconciliation. We came to this House recognising that we
had to transform the workings of Parliament. We set about this in a sober
and sensible way, not trying to change everything immediately, but taking a
long view; first understanding the system so that we could retain the good
and change what does not work.

One of the most complex issues is that of parliamentary questions. How do
we ensure that question time is lively, informative and meaningful? How do
we fulfil our constitutional obligation to hold the executive to account?
What does accountability mean particularly in terms of that section -
members of the Cabinet are accountable collectively and individually to
Parliament for the exercise of their powers and the performance of their
functions.

The Constitution is clear. The executive is accountable to Parliament. It
is Parliament to whom the executive must give an account of its activities.
It is Parliament that must hold the executive to account, ensuring that its
actions are in line with the stated aims, and for the benefit of the
people, not solely to the opposition, but to all of us as MPs.
[Interjections.]

The DP is the sole party that has not supported our plan to change
questions and interpellations - a plan for scrapping the lifeless
interpellations that were introduced by P W Botha. [Interjections.] And it
was an artificial platform to boost his government. We have devised a plan
ensuring that there is an even spread of questions between parties,
creating more lively and spontaneous interchange between Ministers and
backbenchers.

The DP has not been able to move out of its past as a party condemned to
eternal opposition. [Interjections.]  Mr Gibson speaks about a Government
Whip. What is a Government Whip? What is a Government Whip?
[Interjections.] It has failed to grasp the opportunities of participating
in a constructive collective to build a new society. The DP resists change
to the question system that does not work. The old system was unwieldy. The
ANC could have flooded the question paper, make no mistake.
[Interjections.] It allowed parties to flood the Question Paper by
employing researchers to come up with repetitive questions and used to
recycle questions, I tell hon members.

The ANC could simply have used our resources to flood the Question Paper,
squeezing the opposition out. But we wanted a system that works for all
parties and that promotes fairness. This is a fair system. We are not
insisting on proportionality. We are not saying that we should have two
questions out of every three. But we are saying that, as a party that has
the overwhelming support of the electorate, two thirds, we should not have
to resort to guerrilla tactics to get on to the Question Paper.
[Interjections.]

The DP believes that it is the sole agent of accountability. But what about
a legislature where the voters have voted so overwhelmingly for the
majority party that there are only one or two opposition members. Does
accountability fall away? [Interjections.] It is not a dangerous
assumption. [Laughter.]

We in the ANC come from a tradition of vigorous debate and not yelling like
the hon Mr Ellis. [Interjections.] We have perhaps been a little tentative
in asking our Ministers searching questions or a little intimidated by the
traditions of this often archaic and colonial institution. Is the hon
member listening? [Interjections.] We now have a different understanding of
our roles as parliamentarians. Maybe I should face this way. There is more
sense there. [Interjections.]

It is not our job, as the opposition thinks it is theirs, to seek to
embarrass Government. But we do know that as the voice of the people, as
this institution that holds Government to account, we are the foot soldiers
of Government and we will use this forum to get answers from Government and
to point out where the challenges lie. We believe that our committee
process and the way that we engage on issues of national importance has
paved the way for us to hold Government to account in a challenging yet
constructive way. [Interjections.]

There are those who like to paint the ANC as a docile group, bullied by the
leadership, compliant and submissive. Anyone who believes this, is ill
informed or uninformed. [Interjections.] We are a family, united in our
commitment to transformation, so that our differences are aired without
acrimony. It is in this spirit that we engage with Government.

The issue of questions to the President seems to get the opposition, and in
particular Mr Leon of the DP, very worked up. Our President is both the
head of state and the head of the executive. He is not, as the hon Gibson
thinks, a prime minister in the Westminster system. There is no
constitutional requirement for the President to answer questions in
Parliament. The President has chosen to answer questions in Parliament,
believing that this is an important aspect of accountability and
transparency. Questions put to him that he is unable to answer in person
will be answered by the Deputy President, himself the holder of an office
defined in the Constitution. [Interjections.] Mr Ellis should listen. No
question to the Presidency will be unanswered.

Some of our opposition members, such as Mr Gibson, are locked into the
Westminster mind-set that there should be a weekly debate between the
President and the Leader of the Opposition. We are not a parliament
dominated by two parties and our people are not obsessed with who has the
sharper tongue or more caustic wit. Our people have elected the ANC by an
overwhelming majority, choosing a party committed to delivery and
transformation over parties that make policy by sound bites. Our people are
concerned with improving their lives. Our Government's first priority is
the people. Yes, our President must account to Parliament, but he must also
fulfil his function as head of state and head of government and lead our
nation to its commitment to transformation.

To Mr Ellis's surprise, the ANC has taken on board the concerns of the
opposition parties. It has accommodated these and welcomes the sufficient
consensus reached by the majority of opposition parties. We look forward to
lively Wednesdays with focused questions, lively interaction and useful
information. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 241: Abrahams, L A; Abrahams, T; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D;
  Asmal, A K; Bakker, D M; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Belot,
  S T; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, G B; Blaas, A; Bloem, D
  V; Bogopane, H I; Botha, N G W; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
  Chiba, L; Chikane, M M; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P;
  Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
  Didiza, A T; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Dowry, J J;  Duma, N M; Durand,
  J; Du Toit, D C; Dyani, M M Z; Ebrahim, E I; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C;
  Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Gandhi,
  E; Gaum, A H; Gcina, C I; Gillwald, C E; Gininda, M S; Gogotya, N J;
  Goniwe, T M; Greyling, C H F; Grové, S P; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B;
  Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A;
  Holomisa, S P; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Kalako, M U;
  Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q
  J; Kgwele, L M; Khoza, T S; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Leeuw, S J; Lekgoro,
  M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Louw, S K;
  Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabudafhasi, T R; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, G L;
  Maimane, D S; Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P; Malebane, H F; Maloney, L;
  Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Maphalala, M A;
  Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Masala, M M;
  Mashimbye, J N; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo,
  P F; Mbuyazi, L R; Mgidi, J S; Middleton, N S; Mkhize, B R; Mlangeni, A;
  Mnandi, P N; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Moeketse, K M; Mofokeng, T R;
  Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G;
  Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
  Morobi, D M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D;
  Mpaka, H M; Mpehle, M; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D;
  Mthembu, B; Mzondeki, M J G; Naidoo, S; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncinane, I Z;
  Ncube, B; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Ngubane, H; Nel, A
  C; Nel, A H; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L
  V J; Ngwane, L B; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A
  S; Nkosi, D M; Nqakula, C; Ntshangase, I B; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B;
  Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, B M; Nzimande, L P M; Odendaal, W A; Olckers, M E;
  Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Omar, A M; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G;
  Phala, M J; Phantsi, N E; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Pretorius, I J;
  Rabie, P J; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo,
  K; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C M P; Rasmeni, S M; Rhoda, R T; Ripinga, S
  S; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Schoeman, R S; Scott, M I; Sekgobela,
  P S; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S
  N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sithole, D J;
  Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo,
  B M; Solomon, G; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L
  J; Tshivhase, T J; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z;
  Van der Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Deventer,
  F J; Van Jaarsveld, A Z A; Van Niekerk, A I; Van Wyk, A (Anna); Van Wyk,
  A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B H;
  Xingwana, L M T; Zondi, K M; Zondo, R P.

  NOES - 44: Andrew, K M; Baloi, G E; Bell, B G; Borman, G M; Botha, A J;
  Bruce, N S; Clelland, N J; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; De
  Vos, P J; Delport, J T; Ditshetelo, P H K; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J;
  Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Green, L M; Grobler, G A J; Heine,
  R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Leon, A J; Madasa, Z L; Maluleke, D K;
  Meshoe, K R J; Mfundisi, I S; Moorcroft, E K; Mulder, C P; Ntuli, R S;
  Opperman, S E; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J;
  Sigabi, N B; Singh, A; Smuts, M; Southgate, R M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N;
  Taljaard, R; Viljoen, C L.

Question agreed to.

Motion accordingly agreed to.

                               POINT OF ORDER

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before we proceed to the first Order of the Day,
I would first of all ... Order, hon members! I would like to recognise a
delegation from the agriculture department of the United States of America.
[Applause.] [Interjections.]

Order! May I have some order, hon members! During the debate on an
interpellation on Wednesday, 1 March, the hon De Lange raised a point of
order concerning a statement that was made by the hon the Leader of the
Opposition which, he contended, was in breach of Rule 66.

Rule 66 states that members shall not reflect upon the competence or honour
of the holder of an office whose removal from such office is dependent upon
a decision of this House, except upon a substantive motion.

In terms of the Human Rights Commission Act commissioners must serve
impartially and independently, and exercise or perform their  functions
without fear, favour, bias or prejudice. The Leader of the Opposition
stated that the chairperson of the Human Rights Commission had made, and I
quote:


  ... unsubstantiated accusations of racism, which I think have done great
  damage to the very cause of human rights which the commission itself is
  charged with.

I regard this statement as a reflection on the integrity of the chairperson
of the SA Human Rights Commission and in breach of Rule 66, and must
therefore ask the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw these remarks.

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I withdraw the remarks.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

           CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR - ELIMINATION OF
                           CHILD LABOUR CONVENTION

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

                         COMPETITION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.
 
Bill read a second time.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION - VISITS TO
                       EASTERN CAPE AND KWAZULU-NATAL

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WELFARE AND POPULATION
                    DEVELOPMENT - CENTRAL DRUG AUTHORITY
Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.
   CONSIDERATION OF FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

                     LAND AFFAIRS GENERAL AMENDMENT BILL

 (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Portfolio Committee on Agriculture
                          and Land Affairs thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill, as amended, agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 3 - Agriculture, and Vote No 20 - Land Affairs:

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOLIMO NEZEMIHLABA: Somlomo, malungu ahloniphekile
ePhalamende, zivakashi zethu ezikhona lapha ezivela emnyangweni wezolimo
waseMelika kanye namalungu esifunda, ikakhulukazi lawo amele uhlaka
lwezolimo, njengoMnu Makweya okhona lapha ovela eNtshonalanga Kapa nabantu
abakhona esibamemile ukuthi bazolalela lolu daba esikhuluma ngalo lokwabiwa
kwezimali zoMnyango wezoLimo nezemiHlaba, ngiyanibingelela.

Uma ngingathi qaphu-qaphu nje, ukusukela eminyakeni emihlanu edlule,
singasho ukuthi lokhu kuyisikhumbuzo sokuthi sivelaphi, siyaphi, sikuphi
futhi namhlanje. Okunye ngukuthi lolu hambo esiluhambile kule minyaka
emihlanu lusinikeza izikhumbuzo zokuthi sijabule kangakanani emsebenzini
wethu, kwaphinde kwaba nobunzima obungakanani. Kodwa okubalulekile kuyo
yonke le minyaka emihlanu, ngukuthi sifundile ukuthi uguquko kuseyilona
hlaka okufuneka silhambe ngalo. Awukapheli umsebenzi wokwakha kabusha leli
zwe lethu. Ngakho-ke mangisho ukuthi, uma sibheka, singasho ukuthi umgudu
esawuthatha ngo-1994, woHlelo loKwakha kaBusha nokuThuthukisa usasisiza
ukuthi sibheke phambili lapho sifuna ukuya khona.

Sithe uma silungiselela lo Hulumeni wesibili okhombisa ukuthi sesihambe
safikaphi, singamalungu amaningi ezinhlangano zombusazwe esilapha, sahamba
saya kubantu sayosho ukuthi thina sizobenzelani nokuthi sizoyenza kanjani
impilo yabo ibe ngcono. Abantu bona babe sebeyaziqokela. Baqoka kahle,
baqoaka inhlangano ka-ANC. Basho ngamavoti abo bathi: Nansi inhlangano
ezokwenza inpilo yethu ibe ngcono. Mangisho futhi ukuthi ababekusho
ngukuthi kule minyaka emihlanu nihambe kahle, niyazama. Senisibekile
isisekelo. Babesho futhi ukuthi manhe sesininikeza omunye umdlandla ukuze
niqhubeke phela nokwenza impilo yethu ibe ngcono. Thina, singu-ANC, savuma
sathi elethu. Impela sathi sizokwenza lokho abakufunayo simbambisene nabo.

Uma siwukhumbula kahle umyalezo kaMongameli eqala ukuvula le Ndlu
yomKhandlu, wathi masibambisane. Thina njengomNyango wezoLimo, kusukeka
ngoJuni, siye sahlangana nezinhlangano eziningi zalabo bantu esisebenzisana
nabo njengabalimi savumelana ukuthi ngempela kufanele sibambisane.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, hon members,
our distinguished guests who come from the Department of Agriculture in
America, hon members who are representing their provincial agricultural
departments, like Mr Makweya who is present today and who is representing
the Western Cape, people whom we invited to come and listen to the issues
that we will be discussing concerning the budget in the Department of
Agriculture and Land affairs, I take pleasure in saluting all of you.

If I briefly look at the past five years, we can say that this is a
reminder of where we come from, where we are going and where we are at the
moment. Another thing is that the journey we have been taking for the past
five years, has reminded us of our satisfaction with our work, and how
tough the problems were that we were facing. The important thing about the
last five-year period is that we have learnt that transformation is the
foundation that we should build upon. The task of developing our country is
not finished. Therefore I must say that if we look at where we come from,
we can say that the route that we took in 1994, the one that is about
reconstructing and developing our country, is still guiding us on our way
to achieve our objectives.

During our preparation for the second democratic government, which would
show how far we have come as members of different political parties, we
went to tell the people what we would do for them and how we would improve
their lives. People then made a choice and they chose well, because they
chose the ANC. Through their votes they said: ``This is the party that will
improve our lives.'' I must say that another thing that they said was:
``You have done well in the past five years. You are trying your best. You
have laid the foundation.'' They also said: ``Today we give you support so
that you will continue improving our lives.'' We, as the ANC, agreed. We
said we would cooperate with them and do what they would want us to do.

We remember well the message of the President when he opened Parliament,
and he said: "We need to work co-operatively". In the Department of
Agriculture and Land Affairs, since June, we have met with several farmers'
organisations and we have agreed that we will work co-operatively.]

Today is the start of what I hope will be a constructive political debate
on the Agriculture and Land Affairs budget for the year 2000-01. This
afternoon, we will have to debate about the allocations that have been
given to us by Parliament.

The first part of my input will be on agriculture. I have had the privilege
in the first democratic Government to serve as Deputy Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs, and opportunity which I hope will serve as a
basic building block to the challenges before me in my new capacity as the
Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs.

I am now charged with the responsibility to deliver land for development
and to change the structure of landownership in South Africa. At the same
time, I have the responsibility to provide leadership for the national
governance service in support of sustained agricultural economic growth,
equity and social development.

The challenges for Government in terms of developing South African
agriculture remains the need to deracialise the sector, promote and support
economic growth and to ensure that in our pursuit of these policies, we
attain a better life for our people and continuously nurture our natural
resources. This was articulated by the ANC in 1994 when we ushered our
first democracy. Various initiatives to respond to the legacy of apartheid
were put in place, and now, almost six years later, we are beginning to see
the results of those interventions.

One key initiative was the effort to broaden access to agricultural
services, particularly to those who did not have it before. As an outcome
of that process we have identified the constraints faced by the previously
disadvantaged farmers. We have prioritised their concerns and developed new
instruments for information dissemination amongst them.

Key to the new South Africa was the range of initiatives aimed at creating
a culture of inclusivity in the industry. We now no longer find it strange
to find black people, young people and women taking an active role in the
agricultural economy. Another major initiative was the deregulation of our
agricultural markets and the removal of the control boards. This has
positioned us well for participating as a country in the global markets,
while at the same time raising new challenges about the necessary elements
for a truly competitive economy.

At another level our changed approach to the conservation of our natural
resources has resulted in our people taking responsibility for caring for
our soils, water and biodiversity. We would like to express our gratitude
for the partnerships that we have had amongst our people as well as with
the Australian government and the United States in this programme of land
care. We are now placed as a fully fledged member of the international
economy. [Applause.] This experience has confirmed to all that agriculture
has a central role to play in building a strong economy whilst contributing
to increased income and employment opportunities for the poor.

The strategic emphasis on rural development further challenges us as a
sector to work for increases in production and income at farm level in
order to provide the necessary stimulus for the development of the economy.
We believe that a matter of critical significance is the benefit that
should come when the increases are generated by resource-limited small-
scale and black farmers. I think it is necessary to dwell for a moment on
the concept of small-scale agriculture in South Africa.

Past experience has shown that the term ``small-scale'' is laden with
subjectivity and has been associated for a long time with nonproductive
agriculture that is not commercially viable. The truth of the matter is
that black farmers are not exclusively small, nor would it be correct to
limit the definition of ``small-scale'' to those who are black. Small-scale
farmers in South Africa can be anyone, black or white, woman or youth. What
is of the essence now is that small-scale enterprises can become
commercially viable if correctly supported.

One of the realities of South Africa, however, is that most black farmers,
whether small-scale or not, have limited access to land and capital and
have received inadequate or inappropriate research extension and marketing
support. This has limited their ability to grow and is a direct result of
the legacy of apartheid and our history of land dispossession. This in turn
has resulted in an undue reliance, to a greater or lesser extent, on
subsistence production. As if to add insult to injury, this sad state of
affairs is used by some to justify the perpetual exclusion of black farmers
from large-scale and intensive commercial agriculture, by finding reasons
every time for using the expression ``poorest of the poor'' instead of
actually acknowledging the fact that our responsibility as Government and
as a society is to eradicate poverty in our midst.

Given the South African experience we have resolved to deal with all
farmers, recognising that they operate on different farm sizes. What
remains is to finalise the characterisation of small-scale, medium-scale
and large-scale farms using a combination of the size of the holding and
its capacity to generate income. Nonetheless, I wish to reiterate that the
challenge facing us in this second democracy with regard to the
deracialisation of the sector is to ensure that we increase the
participation of those who were previously disadvantaged.

Mangisho ukuthi uma sikhulma ngokushintsha ubuso kumbe isithombe sezolimo
kule ngabadi, kuzofanele siquale sibone oMaZondi, sibone noTshawe njalo
njalo, abazobe bengabalomi abasondlayo kule ngabadi yakithi. Ngalawo mazwi,
umsebenzi wethu kaHulumeni usho ukuthi kuzofanele siyeke ukucabanga ukuthi
uma sikhuluma ngomlimi sisuke sikhuluma ngalabo abamhlophe kuphela kumbe
ondlebe zikhanya ilanga. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[I would like to say that if we talk about changing the face or the picture
of farming in this country, we should first see black people from different
ethnic backgrounds, feeding us in this country. In other words, our work in
the Government demands that we should not think that if we are talking
about farmers we are only referring to white farmers.]
In October last year, we held an agricultural indaba with the aim of
establishing an annual forum for dialogue between Government, farmers and
labour where they could deliberate on those issues that are critical for
the sustainable development of agriculture. There was general agreement
that, in order to achieve economic growth and development, we would need to
address various challenges such as improving the competitiveness of
industries in this sector, implementing farmer settlement and dynamising
our trade promotion, as well as ensuring the creation of jobs in the
agricultural sector. In order to ensure that we attain these objectives, we
will dedicate resources towards the gathering and proper analysis of
statistics, the search for effective policies and development strategies
and the commercialisation of the subsistence sector, as well as interaction
with other countries to promote and protect our international trade
interests.

I must say that it has been heartening to look at the results of the
partnerships that we have with some of the organised agricultural
organisations such as Agri SA. The work that they did while they were still
Nampo, in those days, together with black commercial farmers in the North-
West region in particular, on how they could improve their maize yields and
also start to bring them into the commercial fold, has indicated to us that
if we work in partnership, and if we support one another, we can indeed
contribute to economic development in the agricultural sector.

I must say that working together with the Department of Trade and Industry,
we will continue to engage the World Trade Organisation, the EU and other
trading partners in order to achieve our trade interests in the
agricultural field. I must commend my colleague, Minister Alec Erwin, and
his team, together with the team in Agriculture, who fought fearlessly at
the World Trade Organisation meeting in Seattle and with the EU to ensure
that we continue the fight around grappa and ouzo, and they did that with
the interests of South African farmers at heart. I hope that, as we start
the round of negotiations with the WTO, we will firmly work as partners.
Clearly, this has shown the integration of government in practice.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

We will commence with efforts to increase the economic integration of the
Southern African region. We have agreed on the implementation of the SADC
protocol, and we are mindful of the challenges that this will pose in the
agricultural sector. In working with the industry, we will be able to find
synergy on how we can actually maximise this free-trade area, both for our
region and ourselves. As a Government department, we have been working
already with some of our member states to ensure that we remove some of the
sticky points that can actually cause unnecessary irritations when we
implement such a protocol.

I must say that for us to be successful in the Southern African development
integration, as well as in ensuring that we continue to improve our trade
opportunities, we have agreed that we would need to redirect our resources
in order to ensure that there is capacity for the promotion of both
domestic markets and international markets. We are also saying that it is
important to manage agricultural statistics if we are to do this correctly.
We also have to revisit our green box measures on how we can develop
defensive trade measures, not in a way that is obstructive to competition,
but will allow us actually to defend our farmers against the dangers that
are sometimes posed by those who are oversubsidised.

I know that this House will agree with me that growth must increasingly be
based on the ability to export and compete on the world markets in the
products that we produce. I also give the assurance that this will be done
with the full appreciation of the fact that the empowerment of historically
disadvantaged citizens has to continue to become our thrust in terms of our
economic programme.

One of the important issues that the agricultural indaba last year in
October deliberated on was job creation. For us, it is very clear that if
we are to be a country that can employ its citizens and ensure that we
effectively deal with issues of poverty, agriculture remains a key focus in
terms of employment creation. Our implementation of the Jobs Summit
commitments do attest to this. When we implemented our land care programme,
we were able to create about 3 046 jobs. But it was not just about job
creation. The results indicated to us, in terms of the projects that we
implemented, particularly in the Carolina district in Mpumalanga, where we
provided technical advice and resources to improve the quality of the soils
in order to reverse the acidity problem, that farmers in that district were
able to double their yields of maize production.

In this coming year, we will focus on supporting agricultural job creation
through labour-intensive agriculture, again within our land care projects
such as the livestock development programme among sheep farmers in the
Eastern Cape. I must also indicate that one of these programmes, in which
we will be working with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, is
that of improving water conservation and water quality in some of our
Government estates. One of those projects will be implemented at Arabie in
the Northern Province.

Linked to this rethinking about how we as Government can facilitate the
development of production and marketing infrastructure, particularly in the
former homelands, I have been engaged in discussions with my colleague, the
Minister of Public Works, to identify concrete initiatives where public
infrastructure can be developed or rehabilitated with the deliberate
objective of facilitating agricultural economic development. To this end we
have identified two projects in which we will be working together. One of
those is in my beautiful province of KwaZulu-Natal, at Ingwavuma in
Makhathini. The other will be in the Eastern Cape, particularly around the
Lambasi farms.

Madam Speaker, I am sorry, I did not see that you were in the House. I kept
on referring to you as Madam Deputy Speaker. I must say, Madam Speaker and
hon members, that all these things that we said had to be done, which are
so good, will actually remain dreams if we do not pay attention to some of
the important areas. I must indicate that in order for us to achieve our
objectives, access to appropriate information and services becomes
critical. All around us are rapid developments in the application of
information technology that require that we in agriculture also move with
the times. The content of information, however, remains a long-term
challenge.

I am pleased to announce that the department is in the process of setting
up an early-warning and information system for food security and natural
disasters as part of our national information system. To sustain these, we
need to attract and retain adequate numbers of statisticians, economists
and the link professions within Government. Agricultural research results
are critical for farmer development. I must say that the department, and
have noted the concerns raised in our budget review by members of the
portfolio committee about the decline of the agricultural research budget.
We do agree that this is a matter of concern.

However, we will take up these matters in our interaction with my colleague
the Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology. In the meantime, the
current budget will be directed to programmes that seek to improve
technology transfer, training and extension. Furthermore, we have
identified specific products, largely indigenous in nature, whose use by
small-scale producers we will support.

Izinto ezifana nokusansangu kodwa okungesiyo esikubiza sithi phecelezi
ngolimi lukaJoji sithi i-hemp, amadumbe, nezindlubu. Ezinye zezinto lezi
esincediswa ngazo yilabo abacwaninga ukuthi ngabe yiziphi izinto ezintsha,
kumbe izitshalo ezintsha, ezingasilekelela ukuthi sikwazi ukungena kulezo
zimakethe ebesingekho kuzo ngaphambilini.

Uma ngingathi nqampu-nqampu i-hemp le, efana nokusansangu, iyakwazi ukwenza
indwangu enjengalawa malokwe esiwagqokile namhlanje kumbe yenze o-dashboard
bezimoto. Emsebenzini esiwenzayo-ke kulokhu, sisebenzisana nabakwa-Mercedes
Benz ngoba nabo banawo umdlandla wokubheka ukuthi bangasisebenzisa kanjani
lesi sitshalo esisitshalayo. Ngithi-ke, kule mali encane esiyitholayo
yocwaningo lwezolimo, sizobhekisisa kulezo zinto ezibalulekile zokuveza
izinguquko ezintsha kulezo zinto esizikhiqizayo. (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Things like dagga, but not the one that we call hemp in English, the
amadumbe, and the izindlubu are some of things that we are being helped
with by those who are conducting research on new crops, the crops that will
enable us to enter into those markets that we could not enter before.

In brief, hemp produces dagga, and its fibre can be used to make clothes
such as we are wearing today. It can also make dashboards. To make the
latter possible, we are working together with Mercedes Benz, because this
company has shown interest in finding out how it can use this type of plant
that we grow. Therefore, I would like to say that, with this small amount
of money that we were given to conduct research on agriculture, we will
consider the important things that will improve our product.]

Support services can only succeed against the background of adequate basic
infrastructure. Infrastructural provision focusing on water, energy,
transport, storage and communication should be recognised as the basis of
economic activity and pursued as such. Farmers should not be relegated to
the past when it comes to infrastructural development and technological
advancement. They also want to have cellular phones, and therefore I say to
Comrade Ivy that I think such infrastructure should also be provided in
those areas where my constituency works and resides. [Applause.]

Farmers know that one cannot expect to reap where one has not sown. It is
only proper that the nation should show its appreciation of this wisdom by
ensuring that the budget provides for the necessary investment in the
future of this industry. Enhancing our household food security remains our
priority. All our policies, including those guiding land reform,
international trade and rural development, must result in greater
availability and accessibility of food at household level. Our policy has
shifted from that of national self-sufficiency to household food security
in accordance with our commitment to the elimination of hunger and
malnutrition amongst all members of our society.

I am pleased to announce that as Government, in partnership with the Food
and Agriculture Organisation, we are implementing a special food security
programme which has two main components: That of irrigation rehabilitation
and that of diversification of crops. This will improve the production
capacity of subsistence and resource-limited farmers in the areas of the
Northern Cape, the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.

I would like to turn to Vote No 20, that of Land Affairs. I think all of us
in this House will agree that the land question in South Africa remains one
of our daunting challenges. In the past five years we have laid the basis,
both in terms of legal instruments, as well as programmes for addressing
the legacy of our past.

In presenting the Vote of the Department of Land Affairs, I would like to
indicate the achievements that have been made so far, as well as the
challenges that continue to confront us, and the programmes and budgetary
implications of dealing with these. If one were to look at our achievements
for the past five years, one would see that our redistribution programme
has shown steady progress. We have given land to those people who were
landless. We have ensured that some of our projects have a mix of both
settlement and agricultural activity. We do note that indeed in this area
there had been many other programmes, such as commonages, both in the rural
towns, as well as now in the rural communities.

There has also been an exponential increase in the number of settled claims
when it comes to restitution. If we look back at the number of claims we
settled in March 1999, we only had about 41, but today we can proudly say
that we had settled about 1 651 by the end of February 2000. We have set a
target which we hope we will meet by March 2000, that of settling about
3000 claims.

We would like to rejoice with communities of Sophiatown, which have been
waiting for so long before we were finally able to resolve their claims of
the past years. [Applause.] We would again like to say that, when it comes
to restitution, particularly that of land restoration to those communities
which have been disadvantaged previously, we have been able to settle the
claim of the community around Putfontein, in the North West, and we will
soon be finalising the claim of the community of West Bank in East London,
before the end of March 2000. [Applause.] I think this will help hon
members as they go back to their constituencies to, at least, be able to
respond to the questions as to what happens to one claim or another.
However, that indicates the work that we have actually done in the past
five years, and which we will continue doing.

We are aware of the concerns that people have raised around this programme
- that it is slow and that it has not given the results that we all desire.
We say yes, that is true. However, if one looks at some of the instruments
that we have put in place, particularly in January, we actually have some
increase. I think for this we must say thank you to Comrade Hanekom for the
administrative process that he brought into place. It has laid a good
foundation for us. [Applause.]

With regard to the tenure programme, we have had the legislative reform
programme, in which we have put in place those laws that protect the tenure
of those people who are vulnerable. One of these pieces of legislation is
on land tenure reform, or what is commonly known as Esta. We have also put
in place the interim protection of informal land rights and many others
which I will not highlight by name.

I must say that the Bill that was passed today, further gives us some of
the instruments that we need in order to accelerate our land delivery
programme. I must also say that the above achievements were made against
the following challenges that continue to confront us: A full realisation
of the land reform policy objectives, as envisaged in the RDP document,
which we still have not reached. I know many of the members in this House
have been wondering what we meant when we said we would deliver 30% of
agricultural land.

We meant precisely that, and that remains our objective. To what extent we
will be able to reach that objective in these coming five years, will
actually be reflected in terms of the budgetary allocation that we will
receive. However, it is an idea that, in my view, will take us a long way
in redressing the imbalances of the past.

To this extent, we can say that we have delivered, at least, about 0,6% of
agricultural land. It is marginal, but it has made some dent and we will
continue to do so. One of those challenges that we face is still that of
how we can accommodate a black commercial farming sector into the
agricultural development, by using our land reform programmes.

We are also challenged about increasing the choices, suitability and
quality of land parcels acquired by our beneficiaries through the land
reform programme. We have, therefore, said to ourselves that our direction
in mid-term will seek to address the following: Recommitting ourselves to
the Government objectives set in the RDP, acceleration of the work of the
two departments, and ensuring that the quality of the lives of those
beneficiaries who have access to land is, indeed, improved. We will also
ensure that, in terms of the resource allocation that we have received in
this Parliament through the redistribution programme, we meet these
challenges.

One of the questions raised by parliamentarians in the portfolio committee
was why there has been a decline in the 1999 budget, particularly the
spending in the redistribution programme. In 1998 ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, I wish to ask you to draw your remarks to
a close: the time allotted to you has expired.

The MINISTER: It is as a result of the reprioritisation that we started in
January 1999, where we were starting to look at the quality of the projects
that we were receiving from the beneficiaries. That has helped us to ensure
that the projects that we now receive are those that can improve the
quality of life of our people. Therefore, the budget must, at the end of
the day, maintain a balance compromise between these programmes and the
resource allocation in a manner that allows decisive Government
intervention in addressing the inequalities of the past.

We have to ensure that the development of our rural communities, served by
land reform, happens where people are. We believe, therefore, that the 2000-
01 budget allocation will allow us, as these two departments, to meet our
current commitments and objectives. [Applause.]

Adv S P HOLOMISA: Mphathiswa, kuyakufuneka ndingxolise umntu ngokuthi xa
usathetha, athi ixesha lakho liphelile [Minister, I have to reprimand
someone for telling you that your time had expired whilst you were still
talking!]

Madam Speaker, ladies and gentlemen, amakhosi present in this House, it is
common knowledge that South Africa is one of the leading nations in the
field of agricultural production. Our agricultural sector is in a position
to compete in the international trade arena with the best economies of the
world. State assistance to this sector has played a crucial role in
developing commercial farmers. This assistance has taken various forms,
which were cumulatively political, financial, technological and in the form
of vast tracts of land.

It is imperative and in the interests of the nation that this level of
development within this sector be maintained and driven to even greater
heights, since it is an integral part of the economic development of the
country. The unpleasant feature of this commendable scenario, however, is
that the state support accorded to the industry was almost exclusively
directed at the white section of our population. This was done at the
expense of black South Africans, who, due to a lack of political power over
a long period of time, were not able to enjoy equal support and
opportunity. On the contrary, an emerging black class of farming
entrepreneurs was systematically destroyed as a result of deliberate state
policy.

The major challenge facing this Government and our people, therefore, is
striking the necessary balance between the need to ensure that the sector
continues to develop and grow and the need to facilitate a meaningful and
productive entry of blacks into the mainstream agricultural economy. This
is obviously a mammoth task requiring a partnership between government and
the private sector, in particular white agriculture, which benefited from
the previous dispensation. Surely, it would not be asking too much of white
agriculture to urge them to transfer skills to their aspirant black
brethren, to share their land and equipment with them and to enter into
partnerships with them. Some of them, we must concede, are already doing
some of these things, but we need to see more of them being partners in
this drive towards national development and reconciliation.

The state, for its part, must expedite the process of making agricultural
land at its disposal much more available and accessible to black farmers,
irrespective of their levels of development. This has to be done with
sensitivity to the needs of the communities who were dispossessed when such
land was declared state land. Here we are talking about land outside the
communal areas some of which would be land which was used for the
development of irrigation schemes, dairy farming, crop production and so
on. When it is placed at the disposal of the people, we should be careful
not to be seen to perpetuate dispossession.
Institutions such as the Land Bank, the ARC and the National Agricultural
Marketing Council must be brought closer to the people. They must be user-
friendly and a common feature in the lives of ordinary South Africans. They
must not be so remote as to be associated with Pretoria, a distant and far-
away place reachable only by those who have the means to travel.
Information about the services that these and other institutions have to
offer must be disseminated through all forms of communication.

All state departments and offices, including traditional authorities and
their houses, must be centres of information. Within the reasonable bounds
of fiscal discipline, adequate funds should be allocated to these
agricultural institutions. We are justly encouraged to learn about the
establishment of village or community banks which are aimed at what are
known as subsistence farmers. They should indeed be community banks with
outlets in each and every village. Care should be taken, however, to ensure
that they do not turn out to be omashonisa [microlenders] who will further
impoverish the people.

An integrated rural development approach is indispensable to agricultural
growth and food security in the countryside. The Department of Public Works
can play a vital role in ensuring that enough dipping tanks are constructed
to help fight tick-borne diseases and other sicknesses. The same department
could facilitate access to the arable allotments by building roads and
bridges between residential areas, neighbouring towns and markets and the
fields themselves.

Naturally, the Department of Trade and Industry can facilitate the opening
up of domestic and international markets for farm produce. I am certain
that all the parties involved in the work of the portfolio committee are
committed to ensuring that the Minister and Department of Agriculture
succeed in attaining these and other goals as mentioned by the Minister,
which are aimed at the eradication of poverty and the development of the
economy for the benefit of all South Africans. With the usual complaint, of
course, that we could have done with a bigger Vote than has been allocated,
we as the ANC support this Vote. [Applause.]

Mnr A J BOTHA: Mevrou die Speaker ...

'n AGB LID: Mooi praat, Andries, mooi praat!
Mnr A J BOTHA: Baie dankie, ek sal probeer.

Mevrou die Speaker, die landbou het die afgelope agt maande 'n besondere
ondervinding gehad. President Mbeki het gereeld met landbouleiers vergader
en duidelik belangstelling getoon in die syfers wat hulle aan hom voorgelê
het. Onlangs is daar veel gepraat oor die funksie van die opposisie en
watter optrede sinvol is. Hierdie is 'n kritiese waarneming van
konstruktiewe gedrag van die President se kant af, soos om ook van sy
Kabinetskollegas by die besprekings te betrek. Net so sal ek voortgaan om
kritiese kommentaar te lewer, ook waar die Regering se optrede nie
konstruktief was nie.

In hierdie verband wil ek by die Minister van Finansies aanbeveel dat hy
ook luister en die syfers bestudeer wanneer hy by hierdie geleenthede
teenwoordig is, net soos alle landbouers na hom geluister het en sy syfers
bestudeer het toe hy sy Begroting ingedien het. Dit kan nie veel
verbeelding verg nie om ons ontsteltenis te begryp dat hy alleen na die
landbou verwys het toe hy maatreëls aangekondig het wat ten gunste van die
mariene bedryf en teen die landbou diskrimineer. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)
[Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker ...

An HON MEMBER: Speak well, Andries, speak well!

Mr A J BOTHA: Thank you very much, I will try.

Madam Speaker, over the past eight months agriculture has had an
exceptional experience. President Mbeki regularly met with agricultural
leaders and clearly showed interest in the figures which they submitted to
him. Recently much has been said about the function of the opposition and
what actions are meaningful. This is a critical observation of constructive
conduct on the part of the President, such as involving some of his Cabinet
colleagues in the discussions too. In the same vein I will continue to
deliver critical comments, also where the action, of the Government were
not constructive.

In this regard I want to recommend to the Minister of Finance that he
should also listen and study the figures when he is present at these
functions, just as all agriculturalists listened to him and studied his
figures when he submitted his Budget. It does not take a lot of imagination
to understand our dismay that he only referred to agriculture when he
announced measures which were in favour of the shipping industry and
discriminated against agriculture.]

He quite rightly identified the absurdity of a ship paying for road
development, and therefore granted the marine industry an effective 34%
rebate on diesel. Yet he did not find it as absurd for an agricultural
tractor that is tilling the fields to pay for road development. He
explained to Parliament that this was necessitated by the possible misuse
of the system in that the same diesel needed for use on the land could be
used to power motorcars, bakkies and lorries on the road.

Firstly, the fraction of diesel that may be used by the average farmer for
road use is indeed very small. If not, he would be so unproductive that he
would not manage to survive. Secondly, in addition, the hon the Minister
and the industry know only too well that agricultural diesel can be
identified with a marker as it has already been agreed to mark paraffin in
order to discourage mixing it with diesel. The discrepancy between the
decision to mark paraffin and not diesel can thus only be construed as
having a tax implication and has nothing to do with the practicality or not
of marking diesel.

One can pump diesel fuel out of a ship's tank into a land-based tanker or
any other receiving vessel for use on the roads. Why worry about the
possible abuse in agriculture only and not about this possible abuse? I
request the hon the Minister to clarify this position with regard to the
discrepancy in the rebate, and further to reassure us that only economic
considerations motivated this decision and that there is no political
reason behind it whatsoever.

The much-needed agreement with the European Union is actually detrimental
to many sectors of South African agriculture and every resource will have
to be mustered to achieve competitiveness against heavily subsidised
imports. We must maximise our productiveness through technological
excellence, our marketing strategy must be globally competitive and we must
examine the possibility of export incentives for agriculture. In order to
achieve this, the Agricultural Research Council must be continually
expanded and developed, which is not possible with the steadily diminishing
budget for it, as we have experienced over the past few years and as the
hon the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs has so clearly identified
in her speech here.

If the hon the Minister of Agriculture cannot get the funds required from
the Government directly, and we have no explanation why this is so, then by
all means let her get it from the science council via the Department of
Arts, Culture, Science and Technology. Without this, not only will existing
agriculture suffer, but the emerging sector will suffer even more and
indeed be under threat.

The hon the Minister of Finance announced a capital gains tax in order to
close loopholes that enable a very select few to avoid paying the full
amount of tax owed by them. If this proposal, as announced, is not
radically adjusted to exclude virtually all agricultural sales of land, a
mortal blow will be dealt to the industry. Land remains land and only
marginally changes in intrinsic value. It is inflation that increases the
nominal value of land, and to tax this nominally inflated value after 40 to
45 years, which is the working lifespan of the average farmer, is absurd.
Profitability in farming is so marginal that a very large proportion of
farmers cannot afford to establish a pension scheme. To now tax capital
which they must use to survive in their old age is not good governance, nor
is it morally justifiable.

In addition, this proposal will also detrimentally affect rural
development. It is standard procedure to sell some land in order to
establish collateral for increased land holding. This is no attempt to
avoid taxes, but indeed a direct investment of risk capital into the
economy. Capital gains tax once again will so detrimentally affect this
market as to make it a disaster - not only for existing commercial
agriculture, but for the very matter that the hon the Minister mentioned
here this afternoon, namely black commercial agriculture, which we want to
develop.

Black commercial agriculture also requires collateral, and if this market
is destroyed, then the main collateral that agriculture requires worldwide
will no longer be available to any of these sectors and this plan and this
scheme of the hon the Minister, which is indeed admirable, will not
survive. We fully agree with the hon the Minister that the poorest of the
poor are a matter for welfare and must not be dumped on the agricultural
sector, which is already under threat. I cannot understand ... [Time
expired.]

Mr G B BHENGU: Madam Speaker, hon members, the IFP applauds hon President
Mbeki for his foresight and understanding in respect of two important
facts. Firstly, that the majority of subsistence farmers are women.
Secondly, the saying that if one educates a man, one has educated an
individual, but if one educates a women, one has educated a nation.
[Applause.]

This he did by appointing Madam Minister, in the person of ka Msane-Didiza,
whose roots stem from the rural area, which is also a traditional area.
With that understanding, we are sure that care is going to be taken to
embroil disadvantaged women who have been left out, and who are really the
torchbearers in the task of feeding the nation.

A large percentage of citizens, especially in rural areas, depend on
agriculture as the only means of ensuring a living. Unfortunately, they
depend on subsistence agriculture. The challenge facing us is to develop
our people from subsistence farmers to commercial farmers who can stand on
their own in the international arena.

Where should we start to be able to do this? The IFP believes that the
issue relates to land and the security of tenure is of utmost importance to
farmers. Many farmers in rural areas would like to improve their farms.
They are however hampered by the fact that they enjoy no security of
tenure. Provision should, for instance, be made for leases to be granted
for land. The tenant must be allowed to effect improvements, all of which
must be recorded. He or she should pay rental to traditional authority and
at the end of the lease, he or she should be paid out of the unused value
of his or her improvement.

In commercial farming, large areas of unused and underutilised land should
be made available to emerging farmers. The imposition of land tax may be
one of the methods of making this available.

May I commend the Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs for devolving
all state agricultural land to be administered by the provincial department
of agriculture with the help of her regional offices.

Lokhu thina sikubona njengegxathi elikhulu elizokwenza ukuthi kubhekelwe
laba bantu akade belokhu belahliwe bengakwazi ukulima. Bekuthi uma belima
kube sengathi abakwazi ukudlula babe ngabalimi abalima kakhulu. Bazokwazi
ukungena kulawa mapulazi, bakwazi nokukhombisa ukuthi ngesikhathi befika
abamhlophe kuleli zwe, abafikanga abantu abansundu belamba. Bafika belima.
Bafika bakhonza kodwa base benza ukuhlakanipha ngokuthi babaqhelise
nezindawo ezazingamadolobha lapho babengakwazi ukuthi badayise khona.
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[We see this as a great step that will make it possible to cater for the
previously marginalised farmers. Whenever they farmed it was as if they
could not become great farmers. They will be able to occupy farms and show
that when whites arrived in this country they did not find black people
starving. They found them ploughing their fields. They first sought refuge
and later tricked black people by pushing them away from the cities where
they could sell their products.]

Coming to training, most of our people are entering farming for the first
time since they were debarred by the apartheid era. Since neither good land
nor restricted capital should be wasted, their training must receive top
priority. Most of the aspirant farmers will not have time to attend formal
training institutions. Therefore, we recommend that they need to be
provided with training on the job, that is training where they are working
on the farm.

Financial assistance is very crucial for farming purposes. Having been
trained, an aspirant farmer must have access to financial assistance.
However, private and public ownership of land must not be prerequisites for
financial assistance. Our people must develop within the African context of
understanding communal ownership of land. We need to devise an African
system which can enable the communal farmers, in a communal situation, to
be able to access the financial funding.

Kudingeka sikuyeke lokhu ukuba uma sikhuluma ngokuthuthukisa, sithathe
indlela yokwenza izinto yaseNtshonalanga sifike siyiphoqelele e-Afrika,
bese kuthiwa i-Afrika yehlulekile. Ayehlulekile. Yehlulwe ukuba iphoqwe
ngento okungesiyona eyase-Afrika. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[We should avoid entrenching the Western way of doing things in Africa when
we talk about developing people. At the end of the day we will say Africa
has failed. It has not failed. It has failed because there was something un-
African that was entrenched in Africa.]
We require our Agricultural Research Council to go into that with the
Agricultural Marketing Council so that they can come up with an African
system that can address African problems, so that we in South Africa who
are regarded as the best can then sell it throughout Africa as a module.
[Time expired.]

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Speaker, hon members, hon Minister, ladies and
gentlemen, I would like to applaud the assurance given to us during the
budget review of the Department of Agriculture that it will continue with
its programme of targeting women in agriculture. Because of our history,
women in the agricultural sector have been marginalised. The commitment by
the department will ensure that women are brought into the mainstream of
the agricultural sector, which, for far too long, has been one dominated by
males. The Female Farmer event of last year gave us a basis upon which we
could evaluate the gender programme of the department. As the ANC, we wish
to encourage the department to continue making this one of the important
dates in their national events calendar.

One of the most important elements of this programme is that it highlighted
the role that women can and continue to play in the socioeconomic
upliftment of our communities. I wish to highlight the work done by Mrs
Philisiwe Mathabela of KwaZulu-Natal, who has made an immense contribution
towards job creation in her village of Ngwavuma. Through her
entrepreneurial skills, she contributed significantly to the rural
development of her community. Well done, Philisiwe!

Wenze kahle nkosikazi, halala! [You have done well, woman,
congratulations!]

To all the other women she has demonstrated that women can make a
difference in agriculture. I would like to encourage every woman to follow
the efforts of Mrs Mathabela and become an entrepreneur.

Uma sizothi siyisizwe, simele ukuthi sikwazi ukuzondla. [If we call
ourselves a nation, we must be able to feed ourselves.]

We all know the history of this country, which relegated blacks to the
status of always being tenants, but never landowners. Thus black people
were involved in the agricultural sector as workers on smallholdings in the
so-called reserves. If they tilled the land, it was never for commercial
gain, but as a means of putting food on the table. Now the challenge is to
make use of the opportunities and encourage blacks to become commercial
farmers, large or small.

Heading the department's list of priorities for the year is their
agricultural support services. This is a bold step in the right direction
to create an environment for black farmers to enter into commercial
farming. Providing adequate support services continues to be an urgent
challenge. In the budget debate last year, I made particular reference to
the importance of extension services. These services should play a
meaningful role in support of the previously disadvantaged communities.

Extension services provide important technical assistance to emerging
farmers. This kind of support will ensure that emerging black farmers
become efficient in the way they conduct their farming activities. Hence
training farmers on the farm becomes important. I wish to stress to the
Minister and her department that, this year, we will monitor how the
institutions of the state impact on this matter and how their budgets are
used in support of our programmes.

The challenge is to see how the parliamentary grant of the ARC and the
marketing council gets directed towards meeting the priorities that serve
our development agenda. The refocusing of the priorities of the ARC and the
marketing council should provide support to the black emerging farmers.
Clearly, the synergy between provincial departments and agricultural
development institutions also become key. I trust that the Minmec of
agriculture will pay particular attention in order to enhance co-
ordination.

The quality of our extension services needs to be improved and enhanced.
This can be achieved through linking extension services with research. But,
more importantly, is how the knowledge is transmitted to those we serve,
particularly women, in the rural areas.

Ngithi kumhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe bayaludinga lolu sizo omama. [To the hon
the Minister, I say women need this assistance.]

The culture of quality service provision from our men and women in the
Public Service is critical.
Bahlala emahhovisi kanti kufanele babe sensimini nabalimi. Lokhu kumele
ukuba kubukwe ngamanye amehlo. [They stay in offices instead of ploughing
fields with farmers. This needs to be looked at differently.]

My opinion is that it must not end at the Batho Pele campaign level, but we
must see it in the attitude of workers at local level.

Regarding the Land Bank, in the past the Land Bank's clients did not
include certain categories of society, particularly blacks. However, we are
happy to see that the Land Bank has broadened its client base to include
those who were previously disadvantaged. These efforts of the Land Bank are
also encouraging. Their number of clients has grown considerably owing to
their financial aid packages to emerging black farmers. Importantly, the
Land Bank also changed the criteria for loan applicants. This, we hope,
will ensure that the previously disadvantaged will have a better chance of
obtaining loans.

I am also optimistic that the Land Bank will accelerate the implementation
of the development of black empowerment and rural financing. These efforts
are all commendable. But of what use are they if our rural communities must
travel hundreds of kilometres to the nearest branch of the Land Bank? I
would like to urge the Land Bank to bring the bank closer to the people.

Kudingeka basondele ebantwini abantulayo. [They need to come closer to
needy people.]

It should be made more accessible to the rural communities. I have noticed
that, with regard to the land care and irrigation schemes, the department's
programme on land care has captured the need for rehabilitation of
irrigation schemes which remain a legacy of our past. These so-called white
elephants which we see in the previous homelands can turn into something
good - black elephants - that can empower our people.

Akube nendlela abalimi bakithi abathola ngayo amanzi banisele nabo. [There
should be a way for our farmers to get water so that they can irrigate
their crops.]

By empowering our people we will make sure that they, in turn, contribute
positively towards the economic development agenda of our country. This
type of infrastructure and others are critical for the support of an
economically viable agricultural sector in our society. The ANC-led
Government is more than ready to meet the challenge of creating an
environment within which we can strategically manage an integrated approach
to service delivery, thus creating a better life for all.

Sizonxusa uNgqongqoshe wezeziMali ukuthi athi ukwengeza imali ngoba phela
ngaphandle kolimo akukho ukudla, umphakathi uzokufa. [Ihlombe.] [We will
appeal to the Minister of Finance to increase the budget, because without
farming we cannot have food and society will perish. [Applause.]]

Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairman, this is the first Vote handled by the hon the
Minister in her capacity as a fully fledged Minister. As Deputy Minister we
learnt to know her as a sensible, clear-thinking and resolute person whose
primary concern is the well-being of agriculture, irrespective of the size
of the farming enterprise or the colour of the skin of the entrepreneur.

Of course, it is in the best interest of our future that the face of
agriculture should change and the progression from subsistence to small-
scale commercial and further to fully fledged commercial farmer be
facilitated and expedited. Fundamental to this process is that our vital
unrenewable resource, namely the land or the soil, be utilised in a
sustainable way.

Although I believe that this concern is shared by the hon the Minister, it
is disconcerting to view the continued degradation and deprivation of this
resource when one travels our country. Despite the fact that agriculture is
mainly a provincial competence, I would like to ask the Minister if the
time is not opportune to, once again, initiate a national campaign to
protect our soil. It would have to be accepted that this cannot be a once-
off campaign. Erosion is the Aids affecting our earth and carries the germ
of eventual desertification and consequent destruction in it.

The ravages of the fires in the Western Cape and the floods in other parts
of our country has a short, medium and long-term effect on agriculture. It
is therefore disturbing that it would seem that totally insufficient
provision is made for alleviating the effects of natural disasters like
these. Although I am aware that disaster aid for agriculture is not
provided for by the Agriculture budget, I want to call on the hon the
Minister to present agriculture's case in Cabinet, so that adequate
provision can be made to meet at least the basic requirements of those many
farmers who would not survive without state aid after the most recent
disasters.

Only this morning we observed on television that farmers in the Northern
Province are up in arms because the Land Bank is refusing to assist them,
and I would like to ask for the hon the Minister's intervention. It would
also be short-sighted and naive to think that farmers who are victims of
these disasters should be allowed to lose their land in order to enhance
the redistribution process. The fields, orchards and land which have been
destroyed will require millions of rands to restore, and that is capital
which is beyond the means of most farmers.

Dit is ontstellend om te sien dat daar weer eens 'n afname in die
begrotingstoewysing aan die Landbounavorsingsraad is. Die afname van
R20,318 miljoen beteken dat eksterne finansiering met 20% per jaar sal moet
toeneem. In 'n kompeterende wêreld en globale ekonomie is die enigste
paspoort na mededingendheid meer effektiewe produksie. Dit word verkry deur
verbeterde produksiemetodes en effektiewe arbeidsbenutting. Eersgenoemde
kan slegs bewerkstellig word deur volgehoue navorsing en tegnologie-
oordrag.

Alhoewel daar sekere tegnologieë is wat geredelik in die buiteland
beskikbaar is, is daar geen manier waarop navorsing vir die plaaslike
vereistes afgeskaal kan word sonder drastiese en uiteindelik rampspoedige
gevolge nie. Die direkte asook indirekte bydrae van die landbou tot die
bruto binnelandse produk is van so 'n aard dat 'n tekort aan
mededingendheid en verlore markte rampspoedige gevolge inhou. Die rooi
ligte flikker helder. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is disturbing to see that there is once again a decrease in the budget
allocation to the Agricultural Research Council. The decrease of R20,318
million means that external financing will have to increase by 20% per
annum. In a competitive world and global economy the only passport to
competitiveness is more effective production. This is attained by better
production methods and effective labour utilisation. The former can only be
achieved by continued research and the transfer of technology.

Even though there are certain technologies that are readily available in
foreign countries, there is no way in which research for local needs can be
scaled down without drastic and eventually disastrous results. The direct,
as well as indirect, contribution of agriculture to the gross domestic
product is of such a nature that a lack of competitiveness and lost markets
could have disastrous consequences. The red lights are flashing.]

In conclusion I would like to ask the Minister something. She mentioned
labour-intensive agriculture. Wherever I go I hear of commercial farmers
managing with fewer labourers, and I think we must address this problem.
[Time expired.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Chairperson, the Ministry has recently committed itself
to providing up to R5 billion for the transformation of the farming
industry over the next 20 years. We support Government in its policy to
develop farmers from previously disadvantaged backgrounds. What we are
concerned about is the cutting of funds for agricultural research. If it
takes up to 20 years for agricultural transformation to take place, we must
be careful that our strategies for change do not implicate negligent or
current strong areas.
We all want to see our land teeming with livestock and other forms of farm
produce owned by all our farm owners. But if we want to see this happening
we must invest in developing our research capacity and education
opportunities, which can only serve to empower and enhance the success of
our farmers. Farmers have been warned that they must increase their level
of competitiveness. Some sectors that show high enough levels of
competition are those in maize, pineapples and wool, to name a few. Others,
like those in the meat and dairy sectors, for example, are not sufficiently
competitive at all. We call on Government to come to the aid of especially
those weaker sectors, perhaps through certain incentives, subsidies or
loans in order to assist them to compete more favourably on the global
market.

Job losses in the agricultural sector have decreased the labour force from
1,2 million in 1994 to about 650 000 currently. We must not allow our
agricultural sector to disintegrate to levels at which global market
pressures would force our farmers to cut down on their workforce. We must
not blind ourselves to the possibility that unless the agricultural sector
remains stable, the upcoming farmers will face extreme difficulty in the
future to sustain themselves. We may as well kiss goodbye to the R5 billion
the Government aims to invest in these new farmers. [Time expired.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil die Minister bedank vir die
uiteensetting, en haar ook loof vir die wyse waarop sy in haar eie taal met
ons gepraat het. Baie dankie.

Die VF loof en bedank die boere van Suid-Afrika - 'n land waarin daar net
4% goeie landbougrond beskikbaar is - daarvoor dat hulle, ondanks geen
beskerming teen wêreldlandbou, geen of baie min simpatie van die Regering
en geen subsidie, genoeg kos produseer vir Suid-Afrika en nog belangrike
buitelandse valuta verdien.

Die VF wil ook hulde bring aan die georganiseerde landbou; Agri SA met mnr
Chris du Toit as president, die Transvaalse Landbou-unie met sy sterk
lojale ondersteunerskorps en die groeiende African Farmers Union. Ek wil 'n
beroep doen op hierdie organisasies om hulself te herorganiseer sodat hulle
uit een mond oor landbou kan praat, soos die organisasie Graan SA, wat
onlangs in Bothaville aangekondig het dat al die graanprodusente nou by
wyse van een organisasie met een stem praat.

Ek wil ook hier lof uitspreek vir die wyse waarop hierdie graanorganisasie
'n komitee vir vennootskap en ontwikkeling in landbou het, waardeur hulle
op dié wyse aktiewe steun gee aan die ontwikkeling van boere in die
opkomende landbou. Ek sê ook baie dankie aan die uittredende president, mnr
Japie Grobler, in dié verband.

Hierdie begrotingspos is 'n afskeepbegrotingspos sover dit program 2:
Landbousteun en -ontwikkeling betref. Dit is reeds vandag wyd bespreek en
die Minister het daarna verwys. Ek wil vra hoe sy navorsing gaan handhaaf.
Hoe gaan ons regtig aan opkomende boere voorligting gee en bestaansboere
help? Dan is daar die belangrike werk van die Landbounavorsingsraad, waarna
ook al verwys is. Ons móét hierdie vakante poste gevul kry.

Ten slotte net 'n opmerking oor die moreel van die boere: die Regering moet
asseblief meer landbouvriendelik wees teenoor al die boere. Eerstens is
daar die plaasmoorde en die diefstal. Daar is die onsekerheid met
betrekking tot grondhervorming, kapitaalwinsbelasting, duurder lisensies,
swakker paaie, groter invoere sonder heffings, die knellende wetgewing oor
verblyfreg aan arbeiders, die insetkoste en ook die duurder dieselprys ...
[Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for the
exposition, and also praise her for the manner in which she spoke to us in
her own language. Thank you very much.

The FF praises and thanks the farmers of South Africa - a land in which
only 4% of good agricultural land is available - for producing enough food
for South Africa and still earning important foreign exchange, despite
having no protection against global agriculture, little or no sympathy from
the Government and no subsidy.

The FF also wants to pay tribute to organised agriculture; Agri SA with Mr
Chris du Toit as president, the Transvaal Agricultural Union with its
strong loyal support base and the growing African Farmers Union. I want to
make an appeal to these organisations to reorganise themselves so that they
can speak about agriculture with one voice, which is what Grain SA has
done, by announcing in Bothaville recently that all the grain producers are
now speaking with one voice from one organisation.

I also want to express praise for the manner in which this Grain
organisation has established a committee for partnership and development in
agriculture, by means of which they give active support to the development
of emergent farmers in agriculture. In this regard, I also want to thank
the outgoing president, Mr Japie Grobler.

This Vote is being neglected in so far as Programme 2: Agricultural Support
and Development is concerned. This has already been widely discussed today
and the Minister has referred to it. I want to ask her how she is going to
maintain research. How are we really going to give emergent farmers
guidance and assist subsistence farmers? Then there is the important work
of the Agricultural Research Council, to which reference has also already
been made. We must have these vacant posts filled.

In conclusion I want to say a few words about the morale of the farmers:
the Government must please be more agriculturally friendly towards the
farmers. Firstly, there are the farm murders and the theft. There is
uncertainty with regards to land reform, capital gains tax, more expensive
licences, poorer roads, bigger imports without levies, the oppressive
legislation regarding tenure rights to labourers, the input costs and also
the more expensive diesel price ... [Time expired.]]

Mr M S GININDA: Mr Chairperson, as a member of the ANC, I wish to express
myself on how I think this budget can be used to advance our objectives of
developing small and medium farmers, particularly those who were previously
disadvantaged. This point is critical if we want to transform the economy
of our country. The political miracle achieved in 1994 has better enabled
us to accelerate the transformation agenda in all spheres of our society.

Agriculture was, in the past, characterised by large inequalities with
regard to access to land in terms of both race and gender. Large subsidies
used to go to commercial farmers, largely white entrepreneurs. These
imbalances must be corrected urgently. My view is that the budget should be
viewed as an instrument that has to assist us in implementing our noble
ideals and the dreams of our electorate. Our challenge in the coming five
years is to ensure that deracialisation of the agricultural sector becomes
a reality. This can be done by increasing the number of participants. A
radically changed ownership on the basis of race and gender and of
productive resources must become a priority.

In my own constituency we currently have a range of small and subsistence
farmers who want to grow and become commercial. The constraints are largely
captured in the implementation of the broadening agricultural thrust
strategy document of the department as reflected in the land policy. The
challenge is this: To what extent is the department going to put in place
programmes that will demonstrate, in real terms, the implementation of
Batat?

If one looks at the role of the National Agricultural Marketing Council,
one detects that it has limitations in as far as implementing the results
of their investigation is concerned. My own view is that there has to be
synergy between the national Department of Agriculture and the provinces in
order to ensure that implementation occurs.

We must increase market access, both locally and abroad. International
trade is, in fact, the trade of domestically produced and consumed
products. Therefore our emphasis and strategies must be on the maximisation
of domestic products. It is then that we can have competitive international
trade that is sustainably optimised. It must be clear that international
trade develops from or is supported by domestic market products which are
first produced locally and then expanded to foreign markets.

On the issue of financing, clearly, the Land Bank is trying its best
through the range of products it offers. However, my view is that those who
are at the lower end of the market still face challenges in accessing
finance. It is therefore important to look at how we can bridge the gap.
This is urgent. The village bank institutions set up by farmers and
communities are going to deal with these challenges of rural finance in
some way, but they will need support in order to become viable.

Another important matter is access to land. We are pleased about the
strategic intervention that the Minister is making with regard to dealing
with this matter. The integration of land affairs and agriculture has been
long overdue. In addressing inequalities we need to accelerate the land
reform initiative that is aimed at vigorously implementing programmes to
support resource-poor farmers and black farmers. Encouraging human resource
development within the sector and improving access to services and
resources, including extension and credit, are urgent necessities.

I would like to give my support to the Ministry's priority on farmer
settlement. Human resource development and capacity-building in the form of
farmer training, the development of institutions, improved extension
services and easier access to finance must become our top priority. The
black emergent farmers must be capacitated with regard to investment in
marketing infrastructure in rural areas in order to give them better access
to markets. It is in this way that we can build a commercially viable black
farming sector.

We need to accelerate the implementation and monitoring mechanisms of the
programmes that deal with the transfer of ownership of land through
redistribution, restitution and tenure reform in order to benefit the poor
and the historically disadvantaged. The Agricultural Research Council's
research technology information must be disseminated to the black
commercial farmers so as to put this knowledge into practice. This will
improve productivity and boost the economy of our country.
Kune lesikucela eNdvuneni yeliTiko leTekulima neTemhlaba. Kwekucala sicela
umhlaba, lona lowatsatfwa ngulaba labamhlophe, ngobe sifuna kulima.
Kwesibili sicela kusitwa ngetimali tsine balimi kanye natsi lesifuna
kulima, ngobe baze babe lapha bakhona khona laba bekunene, basitwa
nguhulumende wabo. Natsi-ke sicela iNdvuna kutsi isisite. Kwesitsatfu
sicela kutsi labo labafuna kulima baceceshwe babe nelwati lwekulima kuze
kube khona umkhicito.

Kwekugcina sicela kwekutsi kutsengisa, loku lesitsi yi-marketing, iNdvuna
ikwente kuvuleke, ngobe kuze kube ngulamuhla nje, solo kuvulekele laba
labamhlophe labatsatsa live labogogomkhulu batsi badlisa tinkhomo tabo,
kwasa live lihambile. [Tandla.] (Translation of Swati paragraphs follows.)

[There are four things that we are asking for from the Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs. First, we are asking for land, the land which
was taken from us by the whites. We also want to do commercial farming.
Second, we, the emergent farmers and those who want to do farming, are
asking for some financial assistance, because the whites also rose up to
where they are now through the help of their own government. That is why we
also want our Minister to help us. Third, we request that those farmers who
want to do commercial farming must be trained, and well informed about
farming so that they can become productive farmers.

Lastly, we would like the Minister to open the sales, that is what we call
marketing, so that it is open to all. Because up till now marketing has
only been open to whites - the very people who took the land of our great
grandfathers. They pretended to be asking for some grazing fields; the next
thing the land was gone. [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson and hon members, South Africa has a dual
agricultural economy comprising a well-developed commercial sector and a
predominantly subsistence-oriented sector in the rural areas. The hon the
Minister pronounced herself very clearly on this one too.

This dichotomy manifests itself in the way the sector is developed. In some
fields such as sports and education we are at pains to speak out against
separate groupings, whereas in agriculture there are unions which operate
along racial lines. This is not compatible with the way of life in the new
South Africa. The sooner Agri SA and Nafu find each other and tackle
agricultural issues together the better for this country.

In the wake of the floods that hit some parts of this country, it is very
unfortunate that the Land Bank tells farmers such as those in Letaba that
they are not from declared disaster areas while they have lost large chunks
of land and crops through the floods. The department should wake up to the
plight of those who feed the nation, given the fact that they are asking
for soft loans and not to be bailed out for free. The Land Bank has to
provide a full range of financial services for farmers while maintaining
strict business principles. The step-up scheme which proved very popular
when introduced, has to be refined and it must keep pace with inflation.
The small and beginner farmers will find help in such schemes.

We hope that the problems that beset the Land Bank until early this year
are passed and buried, and the institution can go on with service and
assistance to farmers. A thorough investigation into how some provincial
agricultural institutions such as Agribank in the North West province
conduct their business has to be mounted as a matter of urgency. Clients
have their assets and farming implements repossessed, in some cases
allegedly without the necessary legal process being followed.

Agriculture will only succeed if more and more students enrol for courses
at agricultural tertiary institutions. Such intending students should be
encouraged by making financial aid available to them. A case can be made
for them in the National Students Financial Aid Scheme championed by the
Department of Education. The country has an acute shortage of people who
hold qualifications in agriculture.

Interest in agricultural engineering as a career choice has to develop
amongst students. Success in the course of study will qualify them in food
processing, packaging, storage and transport. Coupled with these are off-
farm activities such as the operation of computers and sales.

Sadly, we notice a cut in the funding for the Agricultural Research
Council. This will definitely affect research adversely. This council
should in no way be left to compete with or ask for funds from the
Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology like some other
institutions.

We are grateful to the Minister of Trade and Industry and the Government
for standing their ground on the question of port and sherry which are
agricultural products. We are not oblivious to the controversy still
besetting these names in other quarters. However, we are just grateful that
farmers have made their mark.

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, there is much truth in the saying that
farmers are never really satisfied: It either rains too much or too little;
the market prices are never high enough; the wind is too strong or too
weak; and the water is too little or too expensive!

This is common among all farmers in South Africa. There are many faces to
agriculture in South Africa. I will not be speaking much in terms of the
development side, but on the commercial side today, and I say this because
there are serious threats. There is an uneasiness in the present
agricultural climate in South Africa, and the Minister for Agriculture and
Land Affairs should take note of some of the reasons for this.

Farmers are being murdered at a constant rate on farms; floods have
destroyed the future of many farmers; land reform and land claims create
uncertainty on all sides; imports of subsidised agricultural products
distort our domestic market; the increase in fuel costs has an impact on
production costs; labour laws are not agriculture-friendly; and problems
with crop and animal thefts are not easy to solve. There is nothing wrong
with the policy and the objectives set out by the Minister and the
department in regard to these problems. In fact, they have wide support.
However, the problem lies in the methods used to implement this policy in
practice and in obtaining the support of all role-players. That is where
the problem lies.

Die sterkste instrument wat die Minister het om die beleid te implementeer
is die Departement van Landbou en sy bekwame amptenare. Baie kundigheid is
in die Ministerie te vinde. [The strongest instrument the Minister has to
implement the policy is the Department of Agriculture and its competent
officials. There is a great deal of expertise to be found in the Ministry.]

There is no other agriculture department in Africa which has the knowledge
and the expertise that the South African Department of Agriculture has -
and I hail the officials who sit there, and those of the Agricultural
Research Council. They have to be used, but they have a problem in that the
shortage of funds in South Africa does not allow the department to function
optimally, and that problem does not emanate from the Minister, but from
the allocation from central Government.

Die toedeling van beskikbare fondse deur die Departement van Landbou is in
pas met die Regering se beleid om nuwe toetreders te begunstig, en ek is
nié daarteen nie. Die tekort aan fondse veroorsaak egter dat daar nie
genoeg fondse is om aan ander belangrike fronte geld toe te ken nie. Fondse
vir byvoorbeeld effektiewer voorligting, dieresiektebestryding soos TB en
brucellose, veeartse wat nodig mag wees, die monitering van die in- en
uitvoer van landbouprodukte, hulpbronverbetering, veral ná oorstromings, en
vir navorsing is absoluut noodsaaklik. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[The allocation of available funds by the Department of Agriculture is
consistent with the Government's policy to favour new entrants, and I am
not opposed to that. However, the shortage of funds is resulting in there
being insufficient funds to allocate money to other important spheres. For
example, funds for more effective extension services, the combating of
animal diseases such as TB and brucellosis, veterinarians that may be
needed, the monitoring of the importation and exportation of agricultural
products, resource improvement, particularly after floods, and research are
absolutely essential.]

There is another important point. If we consider the African renaissance
which our President speaks of, it would be based on agricultural
development, which in turn would create development throughout Africa. That
development in agriculture in Africa would be initiated in South Africa,
which has the expertise. We must seriously consider funding that expertise
and keeping it in place, or else we will not be able to fulfil our role in
Africa.

Die Minister moet gelukgewens word met die feit dat toenemend gebruik
gemaak word van kundigheid binne-in die Departement van Landbou en van
plaaslike adviseurs, en al minder van die wonderlik opgeleide buitelandse
adviseurs wat nie veel van ons omstandighede af weet of wil weet nie, en in
die verlede baie wantroue op vele terreine geskep het.

Die sukses van die vestiging van nuwe boere sal ten nouste afhang van
kundigheid oor die maatskaplike en ekonomiese realiteite in Suid-Afrika.
Die rigting wat die departement onder leiding van die Minister en die
direkteur-generaal inslaan, skep al meer hoop en vertroue by die
kommersiële landbousektor as in die verlede, en ons dank haar daarvoor dat
sy die realiteite raaksien.

Die uitdaging van die Minister van Landbou is om die vertroue volledig te
wen van al die boere in die land dat sy en die departement die ware
kampvegters is vir hulle belange en nie net vir dié deel van die bevolking
wat in die verlede sogenaamd benadeel is nie. Haar uitdaging is om die
suksesvolle boere se vertroue en samewerking te kry, en sy sal vind dat die
doelstellings van die Regering van die dag om nuwe boere te vestig en van
bestaansboere kommersiële boere te maak baie vinniger verwesenlik sal word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The Minister is to be congratulated on the fact that increasingly use is
being made of expertise in the Department of Agriculture and local
advisers, and less and less use is being made of the wonderfully trained
foreign advisers who do not know or want to know much about conditions
here, and in the past created a great deal of mistrust in many spheres.

The success of the establishment of new farmers will depend to a very great
extent on expertise relating to the social and economic realities in South
Africa. The direction the department is moving in under the leadership of
the Minister and the director-general, is already creating more hope and
confidence in the commercial agricultural sector than in the past, and we
thank her for perceiving the realities.

The challenge of the Minister of Agriculture is to gain the full confidence
of all the farmers in the country that she and the department are the real
champions of their interests and not only that part of the population which
in the past was ostensibly prejudiced. Her challenge is to gain the
confidence and co-operation of the successful farmers, and she will find
that the objectives of the Government of the day to establish new farmers
and to turn subsistence farmers into commercial farmers will be achieved
far more quickly.]

With regard to research, the Government cannot escape its responsibility to
fund basic research.
The more we expect the industry to fund research, the more the shift will
be away from basic research towards applicable research and that will have
to be bases on the basic research done in other countries. By doing this,
we will be doomed to depending on basic research from outside our country
and control of basic knowledge and new alternatives by patent price ...
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Mr Chairman, I am
very glad that the hon Dr Van Niekerk likes us in this department.
Apparently he has a problem with the Minister of Finance rather than with
us. I assure the hon member that we will ask the Minister for some more
money next time.

I would like to address a problem that the hon Botha brought up - he is not
here now - and that is the question of competitiveness.

Mededinging is fundamenteel tot die huidige doelwitte van die Departement
van Landbou. Wat ons betref, is mededinging ingeskryf in die hart van ons
doelwitte. Ons wil 'n doeltreffende landbousektor opbou. Ons wil
internasionaal mededingende landbousektor skep.
Daar word dikwels geredeneer dat die landbou nie meer so belangrik is nie.
'n Mens kry soms mense in ander sektore wat redeneer dat die nasionale
statistiek daarop dui dat die landbou tans net 5% bydra tot die land se
totale bruto binnelandse produk. Ek wil hierdie wanopvatting oor die waarde
van die landbou tot die ekonomie baie graag uit die weg ruim. Die landbou
se bydrae tot die ekonomie is baie groter as daardie syfer van 5% en die
grootte is 'n standaardfaktor waarvan 'n geweldige groot groep mense in die
land afhanklik is.

Wat 'n mens moet doen om te sien hoe belangrik die landbou se rol in die
ekonomie is, is om te kyk wat gebeur wanneer daar 'n droogte is of wanneer
daar 'n ander ramp of vloede is. Dit het onmiddellik 'n uitwerking op die
ekonomie, soms van groot omvang. Daar word byvoorbeeld bereken dat droogtes
en lae oesopbrengste die bruto binnelandse produk met van 0,5% to 2% kan
beïnvloed. Die bruto binnelandse produk kan met hierdie persentasie styg of
daal as gevolg van gunstige of ongunstige landboutoestande. Dit is hoe
belangrik die landbou vir die ekonomie is.

Daar is terug- en vooruitbindings in die landbou. Die boere koop kunsmis,
chemikalieë en implemente. As hulle dit nie doen nie, dan het dit 'n
terugwaartse uitwerking op en aansienlike gevolge in die vervaardingsektor.
Net so is daar 'n voorwaartse skakeling ten aansien van die lewering van
rou materiale. Agb lede sal nog sien wat hulle vanjaar vir tamaties en
aartappels gaan moet betaal na die vloede in die noorde. Dit is die skakels
wat die landbou se belang vir die totale bruto binnelandse produk
beklemtoon. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Competition is fundamental to the current goals of the Department of
Agriculture. As far as we are concerned, competition is entrenched in the
heart of our goals. We want to build up an effective agricultural sector.
We want to create an internationally competitive agricultural sector.

It is often argued that agriculture is not that important any more.
Sometimes one encounters people from other sectors who argue that national
statistics suggests that agriculture currently contributes only 5% to the
country's total gross domestic product. I should very much like to
eliminate this misconception about the value of agriculture to the economy.
The contribution of agriculture to the economy is much larger than that
figure of 5% and this size is a standard factor on which an enormously
large group of people in the country are dependent.

What one should do to see how important the role of agriculture in the
economy is, is to look at what happens when there is a drought or when
there is another disaster or flood. This immediately has an effect on the
economy, sometimes of great magnitude. For instance, it is estimated that
droughts and low crop yields can influence the gross domestic product by
between 0,5% and 2%. The gross domestic product can rise or fall by this
percentage as a result of favourable or unfavourable agricultural
conditions. That is how important agriculture is to the economy.

Agriculture has links with both those sectors servicing it and with those
relying on it. The farmers purchase fertiliser, chemicals and implements.
If they do not do so, then the effects of this will work back towards, and
have significant consequences in, the manufacturing sector. In the same way
there is a connection with regard to the delivery of raw materials. Hon
members have yet to see what they will have to pay this year for tomatoes
and potatoes after the floods in the north. These are the links which
emphasises the importance of agriculture to the total gross domestic
product.]

Let us look at competitiveness. We can look at it from different
perspectives. Perhaps the most important is to look at it from the angle of
production inputs. This is what farmers normally mean when they refer to
competitiveness. In other words, they imply that the Government has the
ability to intervene to reduce their costs or, indeed, to increase them.

In the past, as members know, many farm inputs were subsidised by the South
African government. The government also determined output prices to the
advantage of farmers. Now we are in a situation in which output prices are
set by world markets, which have been low for many years, especially since
the Asian crisis of 1998. On the other hand, farmers sometimes tend to feel
that input prices are raised by government policies. This is what is called
``the cost price squeeze'' on agricultural incomes.

The major costs to farmers, in order of priority, are the following.
Firstly, wages is the biggest one. The second biggest one is fuel costs,
especially the diesel price. The third one is taxes, including VAT, then
interest rates, the cost of water and, of course, there are a lot of other
costs.

Let us just look at this cost price squeeze for a moment. The fact of the
matter is that throughout the years 1973 to 1991 the terms of trade in the
agricultural sector were completely negative. There was a positive growth
in productivity, that is true, especially in the years 1973 to 1983. In
those years it was possible for farmers to get a substantial positive
growth after farm income, but on the whole we lost about 1% per year in
farm income between 1973 to 1991. At present the indications are that we
are in the same position as in the period from 1973 to 1983, during which
farm income was very bad.

Our people are talking about subsidising. The last big subsidy was the pay-
out of the drought of 1991 to 1992. In respect of subsidies, we did the
right thing by bringing them down. That was exactly the right thing to do.
However, one reaches a point where the competitiveness of agriculture
reaches a critical point. Indications are now that the levels of
subsidisation in South Africa have reached levels that are lower than those
for Australia and New Zealand, which were traditionally the lowest
agricultural subsidisers in the world.

In other words, what one needs now - and that is what speakers today have
been arguing - is better targeted support to farming, for example in terms
of risk management. Risk management affects small farmers far more than big
farmers, in respect of a drought, for example. Big, strong farmers can take
out insurance. If one targets assistance to smaller farmers by way of
insurance, one is reaching the right people, and that is the challenge for
us in South Africa at the moment.

But in general I would say, with regard to the numbers that I have
available, the position shows that farmers are, of course, making less
profit than they would in a free market, partly because of the taxes on
inputs. This intervention by the state includes also taxes and tariffs on
tradable input such as pesticides, herbicides, chemicals, packing material,
packing equipment, mechanical parts and the taxation on diesel.

How should one look at the matter of diesel, which the hon Botha brought up
today? The fuel tax, or taxes on fuel, distorts the price of diesel to the
extent of 40% of its price. I just want to run through it, although most
hon members know how the diesel price is constituted. It is constituted of
the Equalisation Fund levy, the Road Accident Fund levy, customs and excise
and the fuel tax, which includes the fund for roads. The distortion in
total is 40% while in a free market situation, the distortion of the fuel
tax alone would be 33%. What does this mean?

The tax on diesel has a substantial effect on the profitability of farmers
over the short term. That is a scientific fact and not a question of policy
here or there. But to some extent our farmers have done brilliantly,
because they have lowered their input. They simply use less diesel and in
that respect they, over the long term, seem to adapt to the price of diesel
quite well. However, the question is whether we have not reached the stage
now where this should be looked at, and the Government and our department
is looking at the matter continuously together with the Department of
Finance.

However, the problem is that that the diesel rebate on agricultural
activities is misused very easily, as the Minister of Finance has said. We
must find a way around this. How can one find a way around it? Perhaps
colouring will help. We have looked at colouring and it is not a foolproof
method. I want to ask a question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Deputy Minister, your time
has expired.

The DEPUTY MINISTER: I am asking whether we should not look at the diesel
tax and give it a rebate on account of increasing labour on farms.
[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, landbou is een van die slagare van die
Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie. 'n Gesonde landbousektor het 'n heilsame invloed
op almal in die land. Die landbousektor is primêr daarvoor verantwoordelik
dat 40 miljoen mae in Suid-Afrika gevul word teen 'n prys wat dit moontlik
maak om darem 'n bietjie sous ook oor die pap te kan gooi. Verder is die
landbousektor een van die grootste werkskeppers in die land, en is nagenoeg
'n miljoen mense, plus hul afhanklikes, vir hul daaglikse bestaan van die
landbou afhanklik. Verder is 'n pleit vir die landbou verreweg nie meer 'n
pleit vir wit bevoorregting nie, aangesien talle swart entrepreneurs nou
hierdie mark betree. Net vanoggend het 'n ANC-lid my gevra om hom te help
om 'n plaas te koop.
Ek wil ses knelpunte in die landbou baie kortliks onder die agb Minister se
aandag bring. Eerstens, die Landbounavorsingsraad se krane word finansieel
feitlik toegedraai. Hulle is nie eens meer in staat om personeel te vergoed
nie. Geld wat in landbounavorsing belê word, word driedubbel terugontvang.
Landbou het 'n hoogs gespesialiseerde bedryf geword en elke mislukte oes is
skadelik vir die hele land se ekonomie. In die verband kan ook werklik
uitgereik word na, en geleer word van ander lande in die substreek van
Suidelike Afrika.

Tweedens, die Landbank het hulp van R20 miljoen aangekondig vir die
vloedgeteisterde gebiede. Ons vra dat hierdie geld spoedig en doelmatig
aangewend word, maar on gaan verder. Ons kan maar enige boer vra; droogtes
is erger as oorstromings. Dit mergel 'n mens uit oor 'n geleidelike tydperk
van jare en niemand kry jou eintlik jammer nie, behalwe miskien die
dominee. Finansiële instellings is simpatiek wanneer te veel water skade
aanrig, maar nie wanneer die gebrek daarvan erger skade bring nie. Ek pleit
vir die herinstelling van 'n goedgereguleerde droogtehulpskema. Ons kan
maar dink aan Josef en Egipte se sewe vet jare en sewe maer jare. Die
Regering en georganiseerde landbou moet eenvoudig weer hierdie groot
probleem kollektief en proaktief die hoof bied.

Baie dankie vir die woorde van die Minister aangaande dieselpryse. Ek pleit
vir die uitbreiding van die dieselrabat wat nou op die visserybedryf van
toepassing is na die algemene boerderybedryf. Sekere soorte boerdery, veral
saaiboerdery, word wel lamgelê deur die dieselpryse. Die deel van die
dieselprys wat aan die padboufonds afgestaan word, is onregverdig teenoor
boere wie se implemente 99% van hul dieselverbruiktyd glad nie op ons paaie
beweeg nie. Die verskoning van die uitvoerbaarheid gaan ook nie op nie.
Gekleurde diesel, plus swaarder strawwe in geval van misbruik as
afskrikmiddel kan 'n antwoord wees.

Aangaande kapitaalwinsbelasting doen ek 'n ernstige beroep op die Minister
dat die toegewing van toepassing op privaatwoonhuise en -voertuie ook
uitgebrei sal word na plaaseiendom. Kapitaalwinsbelasting sal gewoon
bygevoeg word by die pryse en die koste van voedselproduksie nadelig tref.

In verband met plaasmoorde vra ek die Regering om groter sensitiwiteit.
Uitsprake soos wat on onlangs op Ermelo gehoor het, of wat na bewering
gehoor is, is stereotiperend en groot veralgemenings. Boere word
onregverdig gekriminaliseer en ``Kill the Boer, kill the farmer'' word 'n
afskuwelike werklikheid. Haatspraak teen 'n deel van die gemeenskap is aan
die orde van die dag. Die Regering moet groter erns in verband hiermee aan
die dag lê en 'n daadwerklike, voorkomende offensief instel soos tans in
die stede. Daar bestaan persepsies dat die Regering in hierdie verband 'n
Jan Smuts-benadering het van, ``Let things develop''.

In die laaste plek wil ek praat oor Zimbabwe. Die totale landbougemeenskap
kyk met groot besorgdheid na wat tans in Zimbabwe gebeur, waar kommersiële
plase eenvoudig beset word en mnr Mugabe sy arms behaaglik vou. Die
landbougemeenskap kyk met grote kommer na hierdie Regering wat tot nog toe
nie 'n woord van veroordeling hieroor laat hoor het nie. Ons vra 'n
duidelike, ondubbelsinnige versekering dat sulke optrede met die volle mag
van die gereg behandel sal word. Die beskerming van die reg op privaatbesit
word allerweë beskou as die mees basiese van menseregte. [Tyd verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, agriculture forms part of the backbone of the
South African economy. A sound agricultural sector has a healthy influence
on everyone in the country. The agricultural sector is primarily
responsible for 40 million stomachs being filled in South Africa at a price
which at least makes it possible to be able to pour a bit of gravy on the
pap. Furthermore, the agricultural sector is one of the biggest job
creators in the country, and approximately a million people, plus their
dependants, are dependent on agriculture for their daily existence.
Furthermore a plea for agriculture is by no means still a plea for white
privilege, as numerous black entrepreneurs are now entering this market.
Just this morning an ANC member asked me to help him buy a farm.

I would very briefly like to bring six problems in agriculture to the hon
the Minister's attention. Firstly, financially speaking, the Agricultural
Research Council's taps are virtually being shut off. They are no longer
even capable of remunerating staff. Money invested in agricultural research
is recouped threefold. Agriculture has become a highly specialised industry
and each failed crop damages the entire country's economy. In this regard
we could also really reach out to, and learn from, other countries in the
subregion of Southern Africa.

Secondly, the Land Bank has announced assistance in the amount of R20
million for the flood-ravaged areas. We would ask that this money be
utilised quickly and effectively, but we would go further. One can ask any
farmer; droughts are worse than flooding. They wear one down over a
progressive period of years and no one really takes pity on one, except
perhaps one's pastor. Financial institutions are sympathetic when too much
water causes damage, but not when a lack thereof causes more damage. I am
appealing for the reintroduction of a well-regulated drought assistance
scheme. One can think of Joseph and Egypt's seven fat years and seven lean
years. The Government and organised agriculture simply have to face this
big problem collectively and proactively once again.

Thank you very much for the words of the Minister regarding diesel prices.
I appeal for the extension of the diesel rebate, which is currently
applicable to the fishing industry, to the general farming industry.
Certain types of farming, particularly crop farming, are in fact being
paralysed by the diesel prices. The portion of the diesel price which is
paid into the road-building fund, is unfair to farmers whose implements are
not on our roads at all for 99% of their diesel consumption time. The
excuse about practicability is also not acceptable. Coloured diesel, plus
heavier penalties in the case of misuse, as a deterrent, could be an
answer.

With regard to capital gains tax, I would also like to make a serious
appeal to the Minister that the concession applicable to private homes and
vehicles also be extended to farming property. Capital gains tax will
simply be added to the prices and will negatively affect the cost of food
production.

With regard to farm murders, I would ask the Government for greater
sensitivity. Statements such as those we recently heard in Ermelo, or which
were allegedly heard, lead to stereotyping and great generalisation.
Farmers are unfairly criminalised, and ``Kill the Boer, kill the farmer''
becomes an atrocious reality. Hate speech against a sector of the community
is the order of the day. The Government must exhibit greater seriousness in
this regard and institute a decisive, preventative offensive as is
currently the case in the cities. Perceptions exist that in this regard the
Government has a Jan Smuts approach of ``Let things develop''.

Finally I would like to talk about Zimbabwe. The entire agricultural
community is watching with great concern what is happening in Zimbabwe,
where commercial farms are simply being occupied and Mr Mugabe is
comfortably folding his arms. It is with even greater concern that the
agricultural community is looking at this Government, which has to date not
expressed a word of condemnation in this regard. We request a clear,
unambiguous assurance that such behaviour will be dealt with using the full
force of the law. The protection of the right of private ownership is
universally viewed as the most basic of human rights. [Time expired.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Chairperson, when talking about meaningful agriculture and
farmers, we are talking about white people. One needs only to watch their
congresses, meetings and protest marches, whenever they have them, and that
becomes very clear to one. Of course, history has seen to that. Large-scale
farming is not only a technical and financial thing, it is also a cultural
thing.

Because of forcible exclusion from it, black people have no large-scale
farming culture. I recently met a black man who has ventured into large-
scale farming. Although he was not doing very badly financially and
technically, he was thinking of quitting because on the social side he was
not doing very well. He did not know where the boerewors gatherings were
happening, or where the latest information was shared about where the rats
had been sighted or where the worms had been seen recently. Therefore he
was thinking of quitting. I think, by now, he has already done so.

Yet it is imperative that large-scale farming be democratised. How we get
there is a huge and complicated matter. But there are a few blacks in small-
scale farming, and perhaps these are the people who might graduate into
large-scale farming, but at the moment they have enormous problems.

Firstly, they have a very small infrastructural base. Secondly, their
financial base and support is extremely weak. Thirdly, they often have no
collateral, and financial institutions, including the Land Bank, give them
a hard time. Fourthly, compared to their large-scale farming counterparts,
their farmers' organisations are weak and therefore not able to help them
much. Fifthly, it seems as though Government does not consult them
sufficiently. Government officials go to them with policies or schemes all
ready for implementation.

Sixthly, the training given to small-scale farmers by the Land Bank or the
ARC is often very limited. Seventhly, small-scale farmers have very little
support in the area of marketing for their products. Eighthly, information
and technology transfer for small-scale farmers is very weak. It seems as
though, if we are to democratise farming, we would need to embark on a
robust 10-year to 20-year programme to deliberately promote black farmers.
We need to do this, particularly for future generations. And I can see,
Comrade Minister, that future generations are definitely coming. Their
arrival is imminent!  [Laughter.]

Such a programme could include such things as marketing, financial
management, leadership skills, farming, technical matters, and so on.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Chairperson, Pavarotti said that one of the best things
in life is that, three times a day, one must stop what one is doing, sit
down and eat. Of course, we, as farmers, play a big role in that.
[Interjections.] I would like to congratulate the Minister on her lovely
green dress, which is appropriate to wear on the day of her first Vote as
Minister. I think the colour is probably from a genetically modified
organism, but we congratulate her and trust that her period as Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs will be successful.

We believe that her emphasis on commercial agriculture is right. Before I
came back to politics, I was the president of the KwaZulu-Natal
Agricultural Union. We defined a commercial farmer as anybody who produced
more than they could eat, and who bartered or sold whatever they had left.
What are we doing in Kwanalu? We brought together about 4 000 large
commercial farmers, mostly white, and over 30 000 small black farmers.
[Interjections.] We have, today, very strong district agricultural
councils, equally representative of both the communities and doing a great
job.

In our sugar industry in KwaZulu-Natal our small-scale farmers produce more
sugar than the whole of the Kingdom of Swaziland. There is absolutely no
reason why small farmers and black farmers cannot compete with white
farmers. [Interjections.] What we need to do is to have an emphasis on
assisting those people to cross those thresholds, and I believe that our
Minister's approach and our Department of Agriculture's approach is a good
one. If the Minister wants to see more development of commercial
agriculture, we have to ask why our high producing areas, such as the
former Transkei, are not producing adequate food. Why are what Mamahlangu
Ntuli calls the ``black elephants'' not black elephants? Why are they white
elephants?

I believe that is the question we have to ask ourselves. Why are areas
which have huge potential, good soils and good infrastructure not actually
producing? [Interjections.] We can go to Tugela Estates, or Makatini. We
can go to many other examples of classic colonial approaches to commercial
agriculture. I want to encourage the Minister to build that partnership
which she has already started building with organised agriculture. In
Kwanalu, we have been able to bring the capacity of the larger commercial
farmers together with the opportunity for development of the small farmers.

In the meetings of our district agricultural councils, whether one speaks
Zulu or English, there is no need for translation, because everybody
understands one another. It is an example of rural people co-operating,
working and bringing about development. They are able, through those
district agricultural councils, to lobby local government to get better
services to build capacity.

Finally, I do want to commend our department. We have a department of
excellence in the Department of Agriculture. We must not allow that to
change. I do, however, believe that the economic review, which the
Minister's department produces, could be better. There is, for example, no
mention in the economic review of what the labour position is. I think the
economic review's assumption that there are 57 000 large commercial farmers
and 1,3 million small farmers is questionable. I venture to suggest there
are very many fewer of the other farmers. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr D A HANEKOM: Mr Chairperson, Minister, hon members, I would like to say
a few words about trade in particular, but let me first just give hon
members some background. In the agricultural policy document released by
the department in November 1998, three major policy goals were set out:
firstly, to build an efficient and internationally competitive agricultural
sector; secondly, to support the emergence of a more diverse structure of
production with a large increase in the numbers of successful small holder
farming enterprises; and thirdly, to conserve our agricultural resources.

The policy document then goes on into some detail on what needs to be done
in order to achieve these goals. It should be said that much has already
been done by this Government towards the realisation of our goals. The past
few years have seen rapid and quite dramatic changes in the agricultural
sector. These changes have already produced impressive results: a
significant rise in agricultural exports, food price inflation lower than
in decades, the transfer of over a million hectares of land to black
farmers through our land reform programme and a shift towards more
sustainable farming practices in response to policy changes.

Just to deviate a little, I know the statistics can sometimes be a bit
depressing, but the Minister should not get depressed, because I think that
we have made very significant progress in giving land to the landless
people of our country. The statistics can easily be used to make it appear
less than what it is. If we take the restitution programme, together with
the redistribution programme, and if we look at it as a percentage of the
available land for redistribution, obviously the conservation land of our
country, the forestry land, the mountainous land, etc, is not available,
then indeed the outcome is still a modest outcome, far more modest than we
would like to see it be, but perhaps it is a bit better than the statistics
show at the moment.

Nonetheless, there is much to be done. We have good farmers in our country,
black and white, male and female. Established farmers have responded well
to changes in the marketing system, and many of our land reform
beneficiaries have taken full advantage of new opportunities offered to
them. Of course, much more needs to be done to achieve the diversity of
production and to re-establish a vibrant class of black farmers in our
country.

One of the challenges facing this Government is to reinforce and support
these changes by a number of well-considered proactive interventions in the
area of agricultural trade. The main goal is to maintain and enhance market
access for agricultural products and to ensure that the sector contributes
to its full potential to the export growth target aspired to in Gear,
namely a 10% export growth rate per annum by the year 2000.

Agricultural exports are critical to the achievement of this target. By
1996, agricultural exports were already contributing over 10% of foreign
exchange earnings and showing a steady upward trend. To achieve our export
growth potential, however, we need an environment in which we can exploit
our comparative and competitive advantages. We will have to make full use
of the World Trade Organisation's rules to eliminate unfair market access
barriers and to protect our local agricultural industries against unfair
trade practices. In this regard, our effective participation in the WTO to
press for global reforms in agricultural trade is critical.

Our main export market for our farm products is the European Union. If
unreasonable market barriers were removed and we were operating under
conditions of fair trade, our farmers would have no difficulty competing
with European farmers despite our resource limitations. The truth is that
huge sums of money are paid out annually to European Union farmers. More
than half the European Union budget goes to direct and indirect subsidies
to farmers. They are effectively being paid to farm. Our fight is not with
European Union farmers, but the effect of these subsidies and market access
barriers makes it extremely difficult for our farmers to be competitive.

It goes further. Because of the subsidies, surpluses are produced and
exported at prices which do not reflect production costs. The result is
that potential export markets for us and our neighbouring countries are no
longer available, because those countries are buying cheaper products from
Europe. We should not underestimate the effect that these price-distorting
subsidies have on developing countries that are dependent on their
agricultural exports. [Interjections.] It is the one area in which many
African countries have some comparative and competitive advantage.

Countries that are currently net importers of agricultural products could
be and should be net exporting countries, but because of the price-
depressing effects of the subsidies, they are simply not able to compete.
We must take up this issue with vigour and engage in collective action with
countries which are facing similar market access difficulties and which are
negatively affected by price-distorting subsidies. Our active membership of
the Cairns group of countries must be used to our full advantage.

The department should indeed be commended for the excellent work that is
being and has been done in trade negotiations and in their participation in
the preparations for the Seattle meeting of the WTO, and other often
unnoticed work done to enhance our country's export potential. The
requirements of importing countries are often rigorous. Our foot-and-mouth-
disease-free status is critical. Our attempts to eradicate Newcastle
disease and other animal diseases are vital, not to mention a variety of
actions necessary to meet the phytosanitary standards of importing
countries. Without becoming overprotectionist and doing exactly what we are
criticising other countries for doing, we should certainly be on our guard
against the so-called dumping of agricultural products from those highly
subsidised countries and ensure that appropriate measures are introduced in
order to protect our farmers from the effects of unfair trade.

I will now respond briefly to some of the points made by previous speakers
during this debate. I must say that the first point that really struck me
was a remarkable degree of consensus in trying to deal with and identify
those measures that are most important and most significant in order to
achieve the best for our farmers in the country and for our agricultural
economy. However, there clearly still seem to be points of difference which
I will refer to in a moment. However, let me briefly speak about the point
about diesel, the Land Bank loans to farmers and the support for greater
allocations of funds to the ARC, then I will go on and speak about the
rather shocking point mentioned by one member regarding the poorest of the
poor.

On the issue of diesel, we have to admit that there does appear to be a
contradiction. I would agree with many of the points made by the hon member
Botha. We need to put our minds together and seek an effective solution to
this problem. It really does not make sense that one sector should enjoy
the fruits of a rebate effectively, while another sector, a very important
sector to our country, much more important in terms of contribution to
gross national production or gross domestic production than the fishery
sector, does not enjoy the benefit of the rebate. We need to put our minds
together and find a solution to the problem, so that this benefit can be
extended to our farmers.
With respect to the budget allocation to the ARC, I think everybody here is
in agreement that the returns on money spent on research in agriculture,
are high, and that we really do need a greater budget allocation to the
ARC. There is no doubt that we will have difficulty in achieving the
competitiveness and/or maintaining the competitiveness that I spoke about,
unless we have the best in agricultural research, we stay with the best in
the development of technology, and we introduce appropriate cultivars,
animal species and farming methods which can make us among the best in the
world. Therefore, the work of the ARC is incredibly important and they need
to be sufficiently resourced to continue with their work.

On the Land Bank issue and the question of loans to farmers, which the hon
Dr Schoeman raised, I think the Minister will respond to that, but it is
not true that the Land Bank did not go out of its way to accommodate their
clients in the Northern Province, and one should make the point that it is
not the Land Bank's responsibility to come up with disaster relief measures
in the face of the disaster. Their job is to provide farmers with finance
on the best possible and sustainable terms, and to treat their clients,
especially their diversified range of clients, as well as they possibly
can. I think that they are doing that.

On the matter of the poorest of the poor, I was rather shocked by the
comment made by the hon member Andries Botha that this is a matter for
welfare. It is not. It is, of course, an important issue that there be some
kind of safety net for the poorest, but a large number of the poorest of
the poor live in rural areas. In fact, the majority of the poorest people
in our country live in rural areas. Many of them are women and many depend
on their own modest agricultural activities for their livelihoods.
Therefore, I am rather shocked. I believe that through improved technology,
through improved access to finance, through better training and extension,
they could double their incomes or produce a good supply of nutritious food
for their families and, thus, contribute well towards the achievement of
the goal of household food security.

The Minister emphasised, indeed, a shift in policy towards household food
security. It is very important. If we are going to ensure that all people
in our country have enough to eat, we have to redirect our efforts towards
the poor. We need a paradigm shift. We need to acknowledge that the poor...
I have no doubt that the Minister will never neglect the poor. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Adv S P HOLOMISA: Mr Chairperson, ladies and gentlemen, the Department of
Land Affairs has, against almost insurmountable odds, made tremendous
strides towards addressing the problem of the land. I am saying this, fully
cognisant of the fact that one can still confidently state, without fear of
contradiction, that more than 80% of the land is in white hands, while no
more than 13% is under black occupation.

The three land reform programmes, namely tenure reform, restitution and
redistribution, are still a long, long way from achieving the desired
results. Yet, there are thousands of victims of land dispossession, who can
testify that this Government's policies have brought some changes in their
lives. It is, for instance, no longer an easy matter for soulless
landowners to evict people from their farms without the due process of the
law. This due process of the law, which is buttressed by, among others, the
Land Reform (Labour Tenants)  Act and the Extension of Security of Tenure
Act, also requires that alternative accommodation be available before an
eviction order is granted by the court.

Furthermore, eviction orders issued by magistrates, most of whom are known
sympathisers and friends of current landowners, are subject to automatic
review by the Land Claims Court. It is a sorry but predictable indictment
against our inherited judicial system to report that the majority of these
eviction orders have been overturned by the Land Claims Court on review.
This is why the period for review has had to be extended by a year. Due to
the poor conditions under which the intended land reform beneficiaries
live, most of them are still not aware that they are entitled to apply for
the registration of their rights as labour tenants, and that they have the
right to apply for land on which they live or for alternative pieces of
land.

We are encouraged, therefore, to learn that the Department of Land Affairs
is embarking on a publicity campaign to bring this vital information to the
intended beneficiaries. We would appeal to all departments - nationally and
provincially - as well as nongovernmental organisations, traditional
authorities and most importantly, white farmers on whose land these
beneficiaries live, to assist the department in sending out this message to
its target group. If all of these people were to be aware of these rights
and were to take advantage of them, we would have made a difference to
lives of thousands of our people.

Millions of the people living in communal areas will commend the Minister
for her unequivocal decision to transfer legal ownership of the land to its
rightful owners - that is, the communities or tribes. This is an odious
legacy of the apartheid past, which has no place in a nonracial, democratic
state. As recent experience shows, the co-operation of traditional leaders
and the affected communities will go a long way towards the acceleration of
the transfer of this land to the people. The Government's standing policy
of giving recognition to all forms of land tenure, including communal
tenure, will give the affected people their inalienable right to decide by
themselves which system of land-holding will be to their benefit and to the
benefit of those who are still to come.

The restitution process is galloping apace, despite the teething problems
experienced in the initial stages. The amendment of the Restitution of Land
Rights Act to do away with legalistic methods of settling claims has paid
dividends because, in less than a year since the amendment, 1 610 claims
have been settled. We are confident that the target of 3 000 claims - to be
settled by the end of March as set by the commission itself - will be
realised. About 63 455 claims have been registered. This is an awesome task
which, however, can be overcome if the necessary support is given to the
commission. Now that the commission has begun to deliver and is in a
position to spend its allocated budget, its morale will no doubt be boosted
if more funds in the future come its way.

We might do well to remind this House and the nation that the restitution
process is part of the national programme of reconciliation. It is not a
retributive exercise aimed at punishing those who enjoy the ill-gotten
gains of colonialism and apartheid. If there are any people, therefore, in
this House who are friends to the group of farmers resident in parts of
Mpumalanga and the Northern Province who still call themselves the
Transvaal Agricultural Union and have resolved to mobilise millions of
rands to fight the restitution process, they might wish to do them and the
country a service by advising them that this Government will not be
deterred in its struggle to right the wrongs of the past; that these
farmers should join the new South Africa and help build a nation whose
defining feature is no longer a rich white section and a poor black
section; and that they are nevertheless wasting their money - money they
could put to better use by, for instance, investing in the education of
their children if they cannot reconcile themselves with the idea of sharing
their wealth with farmworkers and their families.

The redistribution arm of the Land Reform Programme was from the beginning
a programme whose success would depend on co-ordination with and co-
operation from departments such as Agriculture, Water Affairs and Forestry,
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Housing, Provincial and Local
Government, Health, Education and many others. Besides the fact that the
amount of R16 000 was inadequate to buy land and at the same time develop
it, it was an unfair burden that the Department of Land Affairs was
required to carry. After all, its task is to provide land to the poor and
not to carry out the line functions of the other departments.

While the review of the programme was inevitable, it is our view that the
department should continue to identify land suitable for distribution and
to assist the landless to acquire such land. The increase in delivery on
land reform is bound to make demands on the deeds registration systems,
surveys and mapping. These systems, fortunately, continue to be the best in
the world. We are confident that any volume of work to be generated by the
land reform programmes will easily be accommodated.

Mhlali-Ngaphambili, ndikhuthazwa ngumoya omhle wentsebenziswano phakathi
kwawo onke amalungu ekomiti xa sihlangene ekomitini. Ndingamqinisekisa
uMphathiswa nesekela lakhe, okaDu Toit, namasebe abo omabini ngenkxaso
esizakuyinika kumalinge abo okwenza impilo yabemi beli ibe ngcono.

Liyaphela ngoku ixesha lokuba kubekho abamele oohlohl' esakhe
bengabananzele nto abahlwempuzekileyo. Simema wonke ubani, onento yokwenza
nezolimo nosetyenziso lomhlaba, ukuba beze ngaphambili size kwabelana
ngezakhono esinazo ukuphucula intlalo-ntle yethu sonke.

Sikhuthazwa na lilinge elitsha leemanyano zamanye amafama, ukomeleza
amakhonkco entsebenziswano phakathi kwawo nawo onke amaqela amelweyo
ekomitini. Loo nto iza kwenza sikwazi ukwabelana ngezimvo nabo ngqo,
singaxhomekeki kwimibutho yezombuso.

Ekuhambeni kwexesha le komiti iza kuthi bhazalala ijikeleza amaphondo
osithoba iqwalasela inkqubela neengxaki eziphathelele kwinkqubo yenguqu
kumiwo-mhlaba. Siza kuzama ukubonana nabo bonke abachaphazelekayo. Iinjongo
zinye, kukupheliswa kwendlala nophuhliso lwemveliso yokutya kumakhaya onke
asemaphandleni.

Sithi, okokugqibela siyi-ANC, siyayixhasa le voti. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Adv S P HOLOMISA: Mr Chairperson, I am heartened by the good spirit of co-
operation prevalent among all members when we meet as a committee. I can
assure the Minister and her deputy, hon Du Toit, and their two departments,
of our backing in their efforts to create a better life for all the
citizens of this country.

The time for people with self interests, who do not care about the plight
of the poor, has come to an end. We invite everybody who has anything to do
with agriculture and the use of land to come forward so that we can share
our skills and improve the welfare of all of us.
We are also encouraged by the new efforts on the part of agricultural
unions to strengthen working relations between themselves and all groups
represented in the committee. That will make it possible for us to share
skills with them directly, and not depend on state organs.

In due course, this committee will visit the nine provinces to look into
progress and problems relating to landownership. We will try to meet with
all stakeholders. The objective will be the eradication of hunger and the
development of food production for all rural households.

Finally, we as the ANC support the Vote. [Applause.]]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Mr Chairman, hon Minister and hon members of this House,
the Portfolio Committee on Land Affairs is an incredibly important one.

We on this side of the House are as eager as anyone to see the department
succeed in its aims of bringing about a more equitable distribution of
land, without disrupting either the economy of the country or the
productivity of the land upon which we all depend for food and fibre. We
are, therefore, gratified to note that there has been a deliberate shift in
policy away from the old approach which sought to encourage the
redistribution of land by way of encouraging communal ownership,  to a more
modern and pragmatic approach which seeks to encourage individual title
deeds rather communal ones and commercial rather than subsistence
agriculture.

We must not be misunderstood. We fully appreciate the importance of
existing communal land to those who live on it and work it. It is a most
important source of security to them, and we welcome all the attempts which
are being made through legislation to tighten up this form of ownership and
allow it to bring greater benefits to those who share it. What we are
saying to the Minister is that, despite these existing benefits, it is an
outmoded system of tenure which, for a host of very good reasons, cannot
deliver maximum benefits to the owners. We now need to accommodate the new
owners of land in a more modern system of individual freehold tenure, so
that our emergent farmers and new landowners can log into the modern
financial world which requires working capital, collateral, cash flows and
other aspects of a modern economy which have been denied to so many for so
long.

My colleague, the hon Maluleke, will be dealing at greater length with some
of the options that are open to us in assisting those who want to be
landowners to acquire such land. I should like to use the short time still
available to me to touch on the vex problem of land restitution and
reparation. I wish to tell the Minister that my experience in this field
has given me a good insight into the difficulties and pitfalls.

There are enormous administrative and financial problems to be overcome.
That is why we support a budget that will enable the hon the Minister to do
this. However, there do appear to be some encouraging signs that people who
were dispossessed of their land now have renewed hope that their claims
will be addressed. Like they say in Africa, even if the elephants have
fought, the grass will still grow. We welcome this. However, we do have
some reservations about the redistribution programme, which my colleague
will address at great length.

We once more want to call upon everybody in the House to remember the flood
victims. We also want to draw the attention of the Government to the plight
of those farmers who have lost stock, property and crops in this disaster.
A way will have to be found to relieve the burden of their losses.

Last but not least, we wish the new Minister well in her important task. As
Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, she has the responsibility of
providing resources for all our people. [Applause.]

Prof H NGUBANE: Chairperson, hon members, hon Minister and friends, the
Minister has lately produced a number of new strategies for dealing with
land reform, which are commendable and which should therefore be
highlighted.

In the context of state land management, the hon the Minister has directed
that all state agricultural land should be administered by the provincial
departments of agriculture, whereas up to now, it was administered by the
central Department of Land Affairs in Pretoria. To give substance to the
change, the hon the Minister has further instructed that powers of attorney
be given to each provincial MEC responsible for agriculture. This step is
very welcome. The far-reaching consequences of these matters can hardly be
over-emphasised.

The different provinces each have their own distinctive historical
experiences regarding land matters. For instance, the labour tenancy system
has a long history in KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga, which now have to cope
with multitudes of landless people as a result of upheavals over the past
two years when people were evicted from white-owned farms.

These two provinces have thereby borne the stresses and strains of the
impoverishment and suffering of these masses of landless and homeless
people. It makes good sense, therefore, to empower the relevant MEC in each
province to take decisions for the complete amelioration of this
destitution. The IFP endorses these new measures, trusting that they will
be accompanied by steps to foster development and the provision of relevant
financial packages for carrying out all the necessary duties.

Moving now to land tenure reform, a draft Bill originally completed in June
1999 is currently being reviewed. The hon the Minister has directed that
the Department of Land Affairs should produce a consolidated and
rationalised land administration system and so transfer land in the
relevant areas to the tribes or communities who have occupied or used the
land.

One expected outcome of these planned strategies would be to deal
effectively with present overcrowding in the former homelands. This, again,
gives us hope. That we are thus appreciative of the new approaches adopted
by the Minister and her department does not mean however that the IFP no
longer views with concern the basic policy from which land legislation
derives.

Land Affairs is the only governmental portfolio dealing entirely, and
exclusively, with one racially defined section of our population.
Ironically, this section comprises three-quarters of the population of the
country. The roots of this anomaly lie in section 25 of the 1996
constitution which says:


  A person or community dispossessed of property after June 1913, as a
  result of past racially discriminatory laws or practices, is entitled, to
  the extent provided by an Act of Parliament, either to restitution of
  property or to equitable redress.

I shall make a point of reminding this House that the only people deprived
of their land before June 1913 were Africans. Section 25 of the 1996
Constitution thus endorses that exclusion and deprivation. The direct
beneficiaries of that clause are, essentially, members of the other racial
groups, who were particularly targeted by the Group Areas Act of the
apartheid government.

Having been quite genuine in commending the Minister's efforts, it is with
some reluctance that I persist in emphasising these inescapable facts,
nevertheless. South Africa has been described as a country of two nations
by none other than our own President. Others, for instance the well-known
historian, Terence Ranger, described this country as one which combines a
minority more privileged than almost anywhere in the world, with a majority
more deprived than anywhere else in Africa, where there have been no
devastation of wars.

What must be underlined is that this Third World, which is represented by
the internal majority, is racially defined and it is administered by the
Department of Land Affairs. This task of administering the lives of three-
quarters of the population is ranked so low that the department gets less
than 1% of the country's Budget. All of this raises embarrassing questions
about our professed concerns in this House about human rights.

We, in the IFP, shall continue to support the Minister when she seeks
forthright and practical solutions to these very sticky problems. In the
shorter-term, we shall strive with her to harness and support indigenous
knowledge in all relevant spheres, especially in order to foster self-
respect among possessors and users of this knowledge and promote
cultivation and use of indigenous crops through continuing research. We
shall also support the use of indigenous forms of storage of crops and
foodstuffs whereby people can be self-reliant and feed themselves. We shall
promote crop and livestock production and protect marketing, assisting the
Minister in this effort. In the long-term we will also continue to support
the Minister in her quest for bringing about equity in land matters. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the next speaker,
Ms O Kasienyane, is making a maiden speech. Please be courteous to her.
[Applause.]

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues and friends,
the land question is no doubt central to all issues which involve
correcting injustices of the past, affirming the dignity of every citizen
in this country and reconstructing our lives. The Constitution of our
country states very clearly that the state must take reasonable legislative
and other measures within its available resources to foster conditions
which enable citizens to gain access to land on an equitable basis. It is
therefore our constitutional obligation, as well as our political and moral
responsibility, to address the sad legacy of years of dispossession and
denial of land rights.

From time immemorial we have seen a bitter and brave struggle for land,
from King Galeshewe to King Shaka, from King Hintsa to King Makgoba. Land,
and its availability, is still a major challenge to our people today. When
our forefathers said ``Mayibuye iAfrika!'' they were calling for the return
of their land. [Interjections.] Our hard-won democracy will be meaningless
to many people unless the land which was taken from them is restored.
[Applause.]
Millions of our people who live in the rural areas are crying out for
secure land rights and access to land. For many, many people it is their
only source of livelihood. Although we all know that the land question is
still a complex and difficult one to resolve, we cannot run away from it.
We owe it to our people to find an effective and creative solution to the
problem.

On 6 March this year, the Deputy Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs,
Adv Du Toit, visited my constituency in Taung on a fact-finding mission
about the deterioration of the Taung irrigation scheme. He was greeted by
farmers who immediately said ``Re batla title deed go lema! [We need title
deeds for farms.’’]

The MEC for agriculture explained to the Deputy Minister about the huge
debts which farmers incurred. All avenues have been explored, but the only
remaining solution is in obtaining loans from financial institutions.
However, the banks are not prepared to provide them with loans, because
they do not own the land, they are farming on the tribal land.

This Taung case raises a number of important questions. Who actually owns
tribal land? What are the rights of occupants and landowners on such land?
Should home owners in the former Bantustans not be able to obtain title
deeds to their homes if that is what they want? Should farmers not be able
to get title deeds or at least a form of tenure which would allow them to
get bank loans? And what about the land rights of women? Are these rights
properly respected under the existing traditional systems? The fact remains
that customary law and practices do continue to prevent women from securing
land tenure.

Clarity is urgently needed on this question as to who actually is the owner
of this so-called tribal or communal land. Some say the Government is the
owner. Some traditional leaders claim that the land belongs to them. There
have been calls for all this land to be transferred to traditional
authorities. Meanwhile, in the absence of clear answers to these questions,
people on the ground are confused. Investors are not investing. Farmers and
home owners are not able to get bank loans. These areas remain relatively
undeveloped and impoverished.

It is true that we are still facing mammoth challenges if we are to meet
the expectations of our people in the rural areas. Some are saying ``ilizwe
lethu [our land].'' Whereas we are addressing the problems in our
townships, it is in the rural areas that our people are crying out for us
to help. Our people still do not even own the houses which they built
themselves in the rural areas.

We cannot obtain loans from a bank to improve our houses or to expand them.
It surely cannot be right that our own houses do not belong to us. It
surely must be possible for farmers who have been farming a piece of land
for generations to get ownership of that land. That does not mean that we
want to privatise all communal land or that we do not appreciate the value
of traditional systems and the important role of traditional leaders. We
must get real investment and development in our rural areas. Our rural
people must enjoy the same rights and opportunities as other citizens of
our country.

The good news is that the Department of Land Affairs has been looking
carefully at these complex issues for some time now. They will soon be
releasing draft legislation which will address a number of these issues.
The Department of Housing has also made it possible for our people in rural
areas to get Government subsidies for low-cost housing. For instance, in
Pilanesberg and Taung in North-West, we will be getting construction of
2000 houses next year.

The land reform programme has also allowed our people, who have never had
access to land, to become owners of productive farms through their
community properties associations. We are thankful for that.

Lemme ga le bolae, go bolaya lefifi. [Half a loaf is better than no bread.]

In dealing with the land issue, we gain strength from our experiences and
we are motivated by the will of our people who drink from the cup of
encouragement, a cup of our forefathers who said nko ya kgomo mogala
tshwara thata, e se re o utlwa sebodu wa kgaoga. [Nako e fedile.] [Legofi.]
[when things do not go well, one should not give up hope.] [Time expired.]]
[Applause.]

Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairman, I would like to congratulate the previous
speaker on her maiden speech and I wish her a long and satisfying
parliamentary career.

Die samevoeging van landbou en grondsake in een portefeuljekomitee was 'n
logiese stap en dit word verwelkom. Omdat grond soveel emosie ontketen,
word dit verwelkom dat die voorsitter, die agb Patekile Holomisa, se
benadering een van konsensus is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[The consolidation of agriculture and land affairs in one portfolio
committee was a logical step and it is welcomed. Because land is such an
emotive issue, it is welcomed that the approach of the chairperson, the hon
Patekile Holomisa, was one of consensus.]

We have appreciation for his approach of consensus seeking.

Ooglopend sal hy nie altyd daarin slaag nie, maar die manier waarop dit
gehanteer gaan word, gaan in 'n groot mate bepaal of 'n volwasse en
bevredigende oplossing bereik gaan word. As alternatief is die Zimbabwe-
model ons voorland. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Obviously he will not always succeed in that, but the way in which this is
going to be dealt with will, to a great extent, determine whether a mature
and satisfactory solution will be found. Alternatively, the Zimbabwe model
lies in store for us.]

I am confident that we have the imagination, ability and resilience in this
country to avoid replicating Zimbabwe. Of course, there is an imbalance in
the present distribution of land and this has to be rectified. Government-
related institutions such as the Land Bank and the commercial farming
sector have a vital role to play in this regard, but we must always
remember that it must be essentially a market-driven process. The yearning
to own one's own bit of God-given earth is basic to each of us and if we do
not recognise that need, we are courting disaster. Maybe this relates to
the fact that the Bible teaches us that God moulded man from clay according
to His own image, but it is also a fact that He mutilated man to create
woman. [Interjections.]

Providing land might satisfy a spiritual need, but it is not a passport to
wealth and happiness. It is of no use to set targets of 15% and 30% for
land redistribution if there is not at least some reasonable assurance that
those persons who have been settled have an equal or better chance of
attaining economic viability through the practice of sustainable
agriculture. The latest figures supplied by the hon the Minister indicate
that 1 047 farms benefiting 34 597 households have been purchased with the
aid of the R15 000, and now the R16 000, grant scheme. Total expenditure
since 1994-95 for redistribution has been R470,85 million.

The annual Quality of Life Survey, first published in 1998,  indicates an
overall bleak picture, showing projects being assembled and transferred by
the Department of Land Affairs,  leaving beneficiary communities without
access to basic services and little likelihood of any improvement in their
economic circumstances. The report identifies a key problem facing the land
reform programme as the way in which it fails to integrate properly with
local planning and other development processes.

It also suggests that decisions about land use are made by a select few.
The general institutional framework was identified as being weak. The
report points to the fact that in many cases projects are placed out of the
reach of services provided by the Department of Agriculture. Generally the
contribution of agriculture to projects is seen as minimal, and a need to
boost this area is identified. Water is identified as the major constraint
facing agricultural projects.

It is to be welcomed that in the 1999 Quality of Life Survey specific
farming activities are monitored, and when this is published it should give
an even more accurate indication regarding the constraints of the process.
I would like to call on the Minister to look again at the desirability of
setting surface area targets for redistribution. Owing to the drastic
difference in land potential from east to west, it would be far more
realistic to use agricultural potential as a parameter.

Cognisance must also be taken of the revolutionary agricultural production
breakthroughs achieved by resource-poor countries such as Israel. Let us
move forward, establishing more and more successful farmers from our
previously disadvantaged communities in a sensible and credible way.

Nkskz A N SIGCAWU: Mhlalingaphambili, inguqu eyenziwe luhlelo lokubuyiselwa
kwemihlaba kwabo babewuhluthwe ngooRhulumente bengcinezelo, kuqukwa
nabamaphandle, ayinakulityalwa kwimbali yeli lizwe.

Kukho umahluko omkhulu empilweni yabo bantu banikezelwe imihlaba yabo ngulo
Rhulumente weANC. Le mihlaba ibuyiselwe kubantu eyayihluthwe kubo de
banikwa nemali yokuyiphuhlisa. Aba bantu baye bafumana imihlaba yokwakha
amakhaya abo neyokuvelisa ngokwezolimo, kwatsho kwadaleka imisebenzi.

Mandicacise malunga neemeko ezigquba ezilalini, ngakumbi xa zithelekiswa
nezo zasezidolophini okanye ezifama. Mkhulu umahluko phakathi kweendawo
ezichazwa ngegama elithi ``rural''. Eli gama liyasetyenziswa ukubhekisa
kwiindawo ezizilali, iindawo ezizifama nakwiindawo ezizilokishi.

Xa ndicacisa ndingathi uphuhliso luyathothoza ezilalini ngenxa yemithetho
elawula usetyenziso lomhlaba. Imihlaba ekhoyo yileyo kuthiwa yeyabantu
abalima amasimi okanye amadlelo, kodwa awukho umhlaba onokunikezelwa
kubantu abafuna uphuhliso. Noxa le mihlaba ingalinywanga, abantu eyayinikwe
bona basemi kwelithi yeyabo. URhulumente akanakho ukuyinika abantu
abanqwenela ukuyiphuhlisa ngenxa yemithetho yomiwo-mhlaba engekalungiswa.
Nokuba umhlaba lowo uphantsi kukaRhulumente okanye uphantsi kolawulo
lweenkosi, into ebalulekileyo yeyokuba loo mihlaba ayifumaneki. Abantu
kufuneka behle besenyuka beze neziqinisekiso phambi kokuba bafumane uncedo
lwemali ukuze baphuhlise, ngelo xesha ikati ilele eziko imisebenzi ayikho
ikhonjwa eGoli naseKapa.

Ngoku ndiza kuthetha ngokunqongophala komhlaba neendlela ezilalini. Xa
abantu basezilalini bebenokufumana le mali ifunyanwa ngabantu ezidolophini
ukuze bakhelwe izindlu baze bona bayisebenzise ekuphuhliseni le mihlaba
kuthiwa yeyamadlelo okanye amasimi, bebenokuba nayo indlela yokuguqula
impilo yabo. Bangakwazi ukuthenga izixhobo zokulima nembewu. Bangagxotha
ikati eziko, bathengise, baze ngentsalela bakwazi ukufundisa abantwana babo
bahlawule neenkonzo, ngokukodwa xa abantu bekhuthazwa ukuba baseke iikomiti
zolawulo lwemihlaba yabo. Kungalula ngokunjalo xa besebenzisa iinkundla
zolawulo-mihlaba ukuze bakhawuleze bafumane amaphepha-mvume okusebenzisa
loo mihlaba.

Ndithetha nje kwezinye iingingqi azakhiwanga izindlu zabantu ngenxa
yamabango phakathi kweelali needolophana zasemaphandleni, oko kubangelwa
kukungacaci kwemithetho elawula imihlaba ezidolophini nasezilalini. Le ke
yintlungu kwabo bafuna izindlu. Kukho ithemba elikhulu lokuba ukusekwa
koomasipala ezilalini nokudityaniswa kweedolophana ezisezilalini zibe
ntonye, kuya kwenza umahluko ekukhawuleziseni uphuhliso neenguqu.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa speech follows.)

[Mrs A N SIGCAWU: Mr Chairperson, the change brought about by the land
restitution programme to those who were deprived of their land by apartheid
governments, including homeland governments, cannot be forgotten in the
history of this country.

There is a big difference in the lives of the people who were given back
their land by the Government of the ANC. Land has been given back to those
from whom it was taken, and they have also been provided with funds to
develop it. These people obtained land to build their homes and make
produce, resulting in job creation.

Let me explain the conditions prevalent in rural areas, more especially in
relation to those in urban areas and on farms. There is a big difference
between the areas defined as ``rural''. This word is used to refer to
villages, farms and townships.

Furthermore, I can say development is very slow in rural areas because of
the laws governing the use of land. It is said that the only land available
is arable land and land for grazing, but nothing for development purposes.
Even though this land remains uncultivated, the people to whom it was given
insist that it is theirs. The Government cannot give this land to people
who want to develop it because the laws governing landownership have not
yet been amended. Irrespective of whether it is state land or traditional
land, what is important is that it is not available. People have to go up
and down trying to come up with security before they can get loans for
development, whereas they are unemployed and jobs are said to be in
Johannesburg and Cape Town.

Now I am going to address the scarcity of land and lack of roads in rural
areas. If people in rural areas could get the housing development subsidies
received by those in urban areas and use them for the development of the so-
called arable and grazing land, they could transform their lives. They
could buy agricultural equipment and seed. They could eradicate hunger,
sell their produce, and educate their children and pay for their school
fees, particularly when encouraged to set up land management committees.
Things could be easy if they made use of tribal authorities so that they
could get title deeds for such land.

Right now in some areas people's houses have not been built due to claims
involving villages and rural towns, which is caused by the lack of clarity
in the laws governing the use of rural and urban land. This is a source of
sadness to those who want houses. There is a great hope that the
establishment of municipalities in rural areas and the integration of small
rural towns will speed up development and transformation. [Applause.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon members, the Government's programme of land
reform, among other things, aims at extending security of tenure and
providing land restitution to all South Africans, something which the ACDP
supports. We are, however, very aware of the fine balance that must be
found between the rights of the landless and those of landowners.

Land reform and capacity development of the people who need it the most are
under threat. In the first instance, the progress in land reform is too
slow. There have been 63 455 land claims lodged and about 785 settled.
Since 1994 Government has promised up to 1,8 million hectares of land to
previously disadvantaged people as part of their land reform programme.
When the process is caught up in long legal disputes, and lacks the
necessary momentum, this inevitably leads to frustration of the landless
and the dispossessed. Zimbabwe is an example of what happens when a
government neglects or postpones the land issue.

How long must the people of District Six wait? Another millennium? Justice
delayed is justice denied. The Government has recently stated that it aims
to redistribute 15% of farm land. The Minister has stated, however, that
Government is still busy trying to come up with a coherent policy on state
land disposal. The Government must speed up on this issue. The longer
Government takes, the more impoverished the landless communities will
become.

The quality of the land is also deteriorating as Government delays. In the
long run erosion of natural resources occurs and the land is designated as
waste land. We need to be serious about poverty alleviation, and land
reform can make a contribution towards this end. The ACDP supports this
Vote, but we do want to caution Government to speed up the process of land
redistribution.

Gen C L VILJOEN: Chair, I think we all can admit that ownership of land is
indeed an emotional issue. It is a real issue and we have to address it. We
cannot run away, as was previously said. I think we can also all agree that
the Zimbabwean way is the wrong way. It is a violation of human rights. In
fact, it comes down to ethnic cleansing. It justifies action in terms of
the African Charter on Human Rights and People's Rights.

Yesterday my party approached Foreign Affairs in a formal letter, asking
the South African Government, in terms of article 47 of the said charter,
to take this matter up with Zimbabwe and also with the OAU. By fighting
this violation of human rights in Africa, this Government can demonstrate
two things to all the people of South Africa: firstly, a genuine commitment
to the human rights of all people in South Africa and, secondly, a
guarantee that this programme of land reform - a very sensitive one - will
be carried out in a responsible way, without prejudice and with a fair and
unbiased attitude.

What is the right way? We think that a process should be instituted -
proper, fair and open - with detailed consultation, especially with
everyone in organised agriculture, moulded together in partnership to
achieve this important aspect in the most peaceful way possible, and
jealously caring for the scarce agricultural land of our country to ensure
that the land redistribution programme is carried out in such a way that
agricultural resources are wisely and effectively utilised and not wasted
for the sake of the future of our people.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, the next speaker, Z
Kotwal, is making his maiden speech. Please be courteous to him.
[Applause.]

Mr Z KOTWAL: Chairperson, hon members of the House, land ownership in South
Africa has long been a source of conflict. Our history of conquest and
dispossession, of forced removals and a racially skewed distribution of
land has left us with a complex and difficult legacy. This legacy has
caused major instability in the lives of millions of rural people, who were
forced to live under insecure arrangements on land belonging to others.
Kunzima uma uhleli endaweni yomunye umuntu. [It is difficult when one is
living on someone else's land.]

They had and have no alternative place to live and no alternative means of
survival. This situation is the result of hundreds of land-related racially
discriminatory laws, laws introduced and enforced under colonialism and
apartheid, the most infamous of these being the Land Act of 1913. I mention
these facts, not because I like to dwell on the past, but rather so that we
can understand why so many land owners evicted our people from their farms
after the 1994 elections.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, this is a maiden
speech. Please, continue.

Mr Z KOTWAL: It is unfortunate that some sectors resorted to these actions,
and even more saddening that some of them are still clinging to this laager
mentality. [Interjections.] Families who have been living in harmony with
landowners were mercilessly dumped on the roadsides.

Abelungu bamapulazi babefika nogandaganda badilize imizi yabantu.
Babebathwala babalahle emigwaqweni, izimvula zibanethe futhi balahlekelwe
nayimfuyo yabo. [White farmers came with tractors and destroyed people's
homesteads. They carried them off and dumped them at the roadside. The rain
fell on them and they also lost their livestock.]

These evictions led to the mushrooming of squatter settlements around our
cities and towns. Our people look to the branches of the ANC for help and
guidance. Our branches were inundated with calls, especially from our
youth, for permission to fight back, to attack the farmers, to burn their
houses down and to evict them - an eye for an eye. I thank God that the
local leadership comes from a family of tolerance and maturity; a family
that did not want our beautiful country to go up in flames; a family that I
am proud to be a member of; my family, the ANC. [Applause.]

We kept our people at bay by preaching reconciliation and assuring them
that our Government, led by the ANC, would come to our rescue. And come to
our rescue they did by enacting the extension of Security of Tenure Act.
When this House debated this Act in 1997, the opposition parties vehemently
opposed it. Nevertheless, this Act provides tenure security in two ways.
Firstly, by helping people living on rural or peri-urban land to obtain
stronger land rights to the land on which they are living. Secondly, by
laying down certain criteria that landowners must follow before they can
evict people. This Act is enforceable by the magistrates' court and the
land claims court.

Ngifuna ukuthatha leli thuba ngibonge le Ndlu ngokushaya le miThetho
evimbela ukuxoshwa kwabantu emapulazini. [I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the House for passing the laws that prohibit the
eviction of people from farms.]

Ake ngiphaphathe. [Ihlombe.] [Let us applaud.] [Applause.]]

Although we have this good and just Act in place, certain landowners
continue to intimidate our people by making life unbearable. To illustrate
this, I would like to cite a few examples. In my home town, Piet Retief in
Mpumalanga, which is a predominantly forestry area, farmers plant trees on
the doorsteps of our people's homes. [Interjections.]  Can one imagine
opening one's door in the morning and being greeted by a pine tree? Another
example would be where they deprive our people of a very basic need such as
access to water. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Sadly, local government cannot intervene as government funding cannot be
used on private property. All our councillors can do is to plead for the
mercy of the landowners. Furthermore, landowners do not respect our
culture, as they denied our people permission to bury their dead next to
their ancestors. One such case is in the farm Diemagrati in the Ermelo
district, where the Nkosi family were denied permission to bury one of
their sons on the farm.
In conclusion, I would like to give a bit of free advice to the SA
Agricultural Union, especially their subsidiary, the Transvaal Agricultural
Union. [Interjections.] Instead of collecting millions of rands to fight
land claims in Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and the Northern Province, the
union should rather spend the money on the development of the rural poor.
Farmers or groups such as the Transvaal Agricultural Union should get away
from their laager mentality. This ``us against them'' attitude is not
conducive to the upliftment of the rural poor. [Interjections.] A better
life for all ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEE: Order!

Mr Z KOTWAL: ... should not only be a process driven by the ANC, but all
should claim ownership of it so as to contribute to the socioeconomic
upliftment of all the citizens of South Africa.

In closing, I would also like to take this opportunity to wish all my
Muslim brothers and sisters across the world a happy Eid Mubarak.
[Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, hon members, the Department of Land Affairs
has as its aim the equitable distribution of land within the context of
reconstruction, growth and development. It is not surprising that the
Budget shows a 22% increase on last year's, and this is most welcome.

Restitution of land may tend to be a double-edged sword, as it brings about
displeasure in some areas. Some people in a particular area may decide to
leave after having been forced to occupy a place, while others may decide
otherwise. The leader of the community, a kgosi in this case, then gets
torn between two factions: those who want to go and those who want to
remain. Eventually the community straddles two pieces of land. This is one
matter that has to be addressed, and a policy on this matter has to be
developed so that in the end we do not have people eating their cake and
still having it.

The communities of Bakubung and Bakwena who straddle Lledag and Boons,
Taaiboschkein and Ratsegaaistad respectively, are the closest examples in
this instance. The hon the Minister has just referred to the Batloung of
Putfontein, who, in a way, would also decide to leave or to go to either
Ramatlabama or Putfontein, as the case may be.

The 18% increase in land reform will be felt by those who have for a long
time yearned to have land and use it profitably. It is common knowledge
that blacks were hard-pressed to occupy land in the past. We believe that
in some instances consideration has to be given to affirmative action in
land tenure.

Black farmers in some provinces have had seven-year lease contracts with
their respective governments. Added to the contract was the option to buy,
but the uncertainty that prevailed in the wake of the 1994 elections
resulted in some farms being abandoned, and these farms have since
deteriorated in value through disuse. The matter has to be revisited and
deliberated on so that more land could be made available for the previously
disadvantaged people.

In order to make people good land users, they should be exposed to land;
they should have access to land. And with this in mind, land could be put
aside for young people who want to follow a career in agriculture to
practise on. Finally, the land reform programme will be long and tiresome,
but in cases where victim compensation is feasible, this should be done
without any delay before people lose patience.
Land distribution should be mounted with the greatest circumspection to
avoid a blindfolded payment to Peter while robbing Paul. The land tenure
reform will be debatable for a long time to come, as evidenced currently by
the situation surrounding the Municipal Demarcation Board. [Time expired.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, hon Minister, the PAC will support this Vote,
but we feel that we have to go to the heart of the matter. Not to do so
would be a betrayal of thousands of fellow countrymen and women who have
suffered pain, humiliation and death since the struggle for land and
freedom began.

We have crossed the Rubicon of political independence, against the wishes,
hopes and expectations of many in the country and in the world. Six years
after the election of a democratic, nonracial and nonsexist Government, we
have political power, but no land.

Millions of Africans live in filthy squatter camps which are unsuitable for
human habitation. Out of 63 000 land claims lodged between 1998 and 1999,
only 795 settlements were made during that period. There is not enough land
for Africans. There is not enough land to claim. Recent floods have put a
spotlight on the misery of millions of our people even in the richest
province of Gauteng.

Landlessness has become so acute in recent years and squatter camps are
mushrooming everywhere. We are really sitting on a time bomb that could go
off at any time. I was involved in a few cases where squatter camp dwellers
invaded a beautiful college campus. No one from Government downwards seemed
able to help. In the end, squatters took the land, demolished the buildings
and helped themselves to the roofing-iron, the wood, the windows, the
doors, the mats, the plumbing and electrical fittings.

Those of us who are laughing at the plight of Comrade Mugabe in nearby
Zimbabwe, would be well advised to examine our situation here. It may be a
case of: ``He who laughs last, laughs best''. We urgently need to amend
section 25 (7) of our Constitution. We have a long overdue indaba to review
land redistribution. The shameful 87% to 13% ratio is our albatross. This
must be changed, so that we have a South Africa that all South Africans can
be proud to belong to, and defend, if need be.

I repeat, and will do so ad nauseum: Landownership is the basis for
nationhood. Land is the foundation for wealth. Land is the source of
mineral and agricultural products and all kinds of raw materials for human
use and development. Land is the source of food, houses, employment, means
of education, pastures and graveyards. A landless nation is no nation.

Izwe lethu! [Ihlombe.] [It is our land! [Applause.]

Awasabeli amalungu. Ngabe kutheni? [You do not respond. Why?]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairman, let me just
finish off the point which I started earlier this afternoon. What I was
suggesting was that if one gets a diesel rebate on the tax value that is
being paid at the moment, would it not be a good thing if that could be
coupled with job creation? One could get this diesel rebate if some new
employment is created and, in any event, this could make provision for
increasing the competitiveness of the agricultural sector. Then one creates
an incentive and, if one loses the tax on the diesel, at least in this
instance, one can, at the same time, create employment. That is possible,
and I think it is something that has to be looked at.

We have a way of talking quite glibly when we talk about land reform, but
what are the facts? I want to tell the House that if one looks at how land
was distributed in this country when the ANC came into power in 1994, one
sees that the average amount held per person in South Africa was 1,3
hectares in the case of blacks, compared to 1 570 hectares per person in
the case of whites.

Now, clearly, as hon Mogoba has just said, that cannot be sustained and it
cannot be accepted in any way. The 7,7%  originally allocated in 1913 under
the Native Land Act was also the heart of the problem and that is why, when
the hon Schoeman,  who is not here now, says that one should use
agricultural potential as one's criterion for measuring if we should go
ahead with land reform, it cannot be accepted. Then it shows that he does
not know the history in terms of which the land question operated in South
Africa.

'n AGB LID: Jy moet dit in Afrikaans sê!

Die ADJUNKMINISTER: Ek wil dit vir die boere en vir almal in die land sê.
Ons kan nie sê grondhervorming is 'n saak wat ons vir die mense van die ANC
kan los nie. Grondhervorming ter wille van die stabiliteit in hierdie land
is 'n nasionale saak wat elke mens in hierdie land ten nouste raak, ongeag
watter kleur hy ook al is. Ons kan nie sê ons gaan 'n bietjie grond hier
herverdeel en 'n bietjie grond daar herverdeel nie, en dan ontdek ons tot
dusver is daar 8% sedert 1994 slegs 0,8% herverdeel.

Die departement is nou gerat, ná 'n redelik stadige aanloop - ons gaan 'n
nuwe direkteur-generaal ook kry - om te lewer, maar dan moet dit elke mens
in die land wees, ook die rykste boer. [Tussenwerpsels.] Andries Botha het
dit ook gesê. Ek weet hy dink so, alhoewel ek nie weet van sy party nie.
Dit is egter in ons almal se belang dat hier moet herverdeling kom, en
daardie 30%-mikpunt in die HOP moet nog behaal word! Ons kan nie vir ewig
wag nie, want waarom moet ons? Dit is 'n kwessie van armoede ook. Laat ek
almal net weer eens herinner aan die syfers oor armoede in hierdie land en
waar die armoede lê. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[An HON MEMBER: You must say that in Afrikaans!

The DEPUTY MINISTER: I want to tell the farmers and everyone in the country
this. We cannot say that land reform is a matter which we can leave to the
people of the ANC. Land reform for the sake of stability in this country is
a national matter which very closely affects everyone in this country,
irrespective of their colour. We cannot say that we will redistribute a bit
of land here and a bit of land there, and then we discover that since 1994
only 0,8% has been redistributed.

The department is now geared up, after a fairly slow start - we are going
to get a new director-general too - to deliver, but then it must be
everyone in the country, including the richest farmer. [Interjections.]
Andries Botha also said that. I know that is what he thinks, although I do
not know about his party. However, it is in the interests of everyone for
there to be redistribution here, and that 30% objective in the RDP must
still be achieved! We cannot wait forever, and why should we? It is a
question of poverty too. Just let me remind everyone again of the figures
on poverty in this country and where the poverty lies.]

About half of South Africa's population can be classified as poor, but the
point is that most of the poor live in the rural areas. The poverty share
of rural areas, that is the percentage of poor individuals that live in
rural areas, is 72%. The poverty rate in rural areas, that is the
percentage of individuals classified as poor, is about 71% compared to 29%
in urban areas. So the point is that if one combines the the high poverty
rate and the depth of poverty, that is a measurement of the amount required
to move all individuals above the poverty line, one will see that poverty
in rural areas is of such a magnitude that 76% of the total poverty gap in
South Africa is accounted for by rural households.

Now, the poverty gap in South Africa is the main problem in the country and
76% of the poverty gap is accounted for by rural households, that is the
depth of poverty and the rate of poverty combined, although they make up
only 50% of the population. Now that is why one must have land reform at an
accelerated pace. That is why it is at the forefront of the national
programmes of South Africa. That is why I think we still have too little
money. That is where our department is going to make great strides. Watch
us! Watch this space. [Applause.]

I am sure we are going to move on with it, because if we do not move
quicker, this country is in trouble, serious trouble, and then everyone is
in trouble, even the big farmers, and they know it! We will have to
redistribute more. We cannot continue with the the slow progress we have
made. It was an extremely difficult process to get to where we are now.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The Deputy Minister does not
need any help. Please continue, sir. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Thank you, Chairman, and thank you to whoever it was
for the support.
 
That is why land reform, land redistribution and land restitution are at
the heart of Government's policies. They are part of our drive towards
poverty reduction and asset redistribution, and should be seen as such.
There are a few key design elements of the redistribution programme that
will have to be addressed from time to time, which are being addressed by
our Minister now with very strong leadership and will lead to further
success.

Let me just mention a few of the main design elements that are being looked
at continually at the moment. When we started originally, the idea was that
the programme, instead of being a supply-driven one, should be demand-
driven. There were some doubts about the possibilities of Government
expropriation and what that would do to land prices. It was decided that
there would be independent encounters of buyers and sellers in the market
coming to Government and getting help.

It was thought that using expropriation was inconsistent with the
protection of private property rights. That is not a true view on what
expropriation is. Expropriation, in fact, is a necessary adjunct of all
highly capitalised societies for the simple reason that one cannot put a
railway down at a place. A farmer may not want to have the railway going
through his farm, so the line has to go around it.

An HON MEMBER: Householders too.

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Exactly. Expropriation correctly used, sensitively
used, used as our Constitution says it must be used, is in the public
interest and is something which can be used extensively in South Africa for
very sensitive purposes if there is no other way around the markets. The
point is that land markets will not automatically work effectively for the
poor. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr D K MALULEKE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Minister and
colleagues, it is gratifying to hear the Deputy Minister talking about the
accelerated pace at which they are going to be operating. We certainly will
be watching them. My colleague the hon Seremane stressed the importance of
moving towards a modern system of land holding for those who until now have
been denied this privilege. At the same time, he did not deny the
importance of traditional systems of land tenure, which have existed until
the present time.

I should like to explore a few options which are open to the hon the
Minister and which could be explored. However, we note with concern the
15,9% decline in the estimated expenditure for the year 2000-01 in respect
of land reform, with the focus shifting from land redistribution to
restitution. While we fully support the restitution programme as mentioned
by my colleague, it must be seen as a separate exercise to land
redistribution. Redistribution of the 25 million hectares of state land
must be seen as a specific and focused programme of settling significant
numbers of able and competent landless farmers in our country. Those hon
members are the Government today. They have the power. They are sitting
with 25 million hectares of land and they must do something about it. They
must distribute to those landless people.

We do not want land to lie idle. This invites land invasion, such as that
we have recently seen in Zimbabwe, vandalism of infrastructure and, more
importantly, the failure to maintain and promote sustainable agricultural
production. We need to address urgently the upgrading of commercial systems
of land ownership. Under current tribal land tenure systems, little
incentive exists for occupants to invest capital and sweat equity to
develop such land. This has lead to overgrazing, poor management and low
productivity, resulting in serious soil erosion and environmental
degradation.

In order to reverse this poverty trap, land use and ownership patterns need
to be changed drastically. However, this legal and structural change needs
to be executed in a way that is sensitive to the views and perceptions of
those people who still value traditional practices, so that they understand
why reforms are necessary and how they should benefit from that reform. One
innovation could be to introduce amendments to the current Companies Act to
make it possible for rural tribal communities to form companies.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member Gogotya and hon
member Magazi, I know it is towards the end of the debate, but please allow
the member to have his say at the podium. [Interjections.]

Mr D K MALULEKE: Chairperson, we are aware of the chatterbox Gogotya.

The DP recognises the complexity associated with the administration of
communally owned land. We will consequently await the outcome of a
comprehensive and fully consultative study due to be undertaken into this
issue in the near future. The most important consideration in any outcome
will be the protection of the natural resources, together with the optimal
utilisation of the land concerned.

Let me remind some of those chatterboxes on the backbenches ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Confine yourself to your
debate, sir. [Interjections.] Order! Your speaking time has expired, sir.
[Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I think the enthusiasm of the Deputy
Minister is quite appropriate in respect of the topic he addressed.
Successful land reform is an important point in our total endeavour to
create a peaceful future in South Africa. If we do not succeed in this, the
future in South Africa will not be peaceful. We can look at examples around
us where that has not happened and what the result is. Successful land
reform can only take place if the right principles and methods are
implemented.

There are many role-players involved, not single role-players or any one
idea. Co-operation between the role-players will eventually determine
success or failure. Each role-player in South Africa has, over time, in
South Africa, learned a lesson. We must take heed of the many lessons, not
only in South Africa, but also beyond our borders, in terms of land reform.

The important lesson from Riemvasmaak, as put forward in a study by the
School of Government of UWC, should be noted in any future resettlement. It
has been shown that individual title deeds to land should be favoured above
collective title deeds. The breaking up of valuable land into plots for
subsistence production should be avoided. Thorough planning, involving all
facets, is always of paramount importance.

We must also take heed of the lessons learned from Zimbabwe. The question
of certainty of title deeds and ownership of land must be handled with
care. It is important, not only for the commercial farmers, but also for
the small farmer who, for the first time, gets access to land. He wants to
know how certain he is of the land. Then there can be development. The
comments made by the acting director-general on expropriation to obtain
land for land reform purposes in South Africa were disturbing. Fortunately,
the Deputy Minister immediately responded and placed a better perspective
on the matter. In fact, expropriation of land for reform purposes is not
high on the agenda of the department.
There is a nervousness amongst landowners in South Africa in the wake of
what is happening with farmers in Zimbabwe. [Interjections.] It is
necessary to again confirm, in clear terms, the position, intention and
protection by Government of title deeds, and thus ownership of land in
South Africa. This will help to keep emotions under control. The response
by farmers in South Africa to situations similar to those in Zimbabwe could
be quite different. [Interjections.]

Clarity and certainty of ownership of land will stimulate co-operation by
the farming community in South Africa to successfully implement land
reform. If the Minister could remove this uncertainty, she would cause a
breeze of well-intended goodwill and co-operation to blow from all sides to
facilitate land reform. Land reform cannot go on for ever ... [Time
expired.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Mr Chairperson, an indication of the existence of a more
just society would be a more equitable and fair land ownership and
occupation pattern. Inequality among the races in our country has always
manifested itself in landownership, and it still does.

Anywhere one goes in our country, whether it is the urban or rural areas,
one sees this. If it is in the rural areas, we are crowded together in the
villages. The yards are small, the fields are small and the number of stock
is small, whereas white people occupy large farms. One sees them as one
drives on the national roads. Sometimes one cannot even see their houses.
One just sees the gate saying ``Van der Merwe'' or ``Viljoen'', and so on.
[Laughter.] However, there is none that says ``Mangena'' or ``Mdadana'',
and so forth. [Laughter.]

If it is in the urban areas, the same thing happens sixinene ndaweninye [we
are packed in one place] in the townships. If it is Cape Town, we are in
Langa, Crossroads and so forth. White people are in Sea Point, Constantia,
Bloubergstrand and similar areas. [Interjections.] That is why black people
are the only people who are squatters. By definition, a squatter is someone
who has no land and settles on somebody else's land. That is why, in our
pursuit for a more just and truly democratic society, we must embark on a
rigorous land reform and redistribution strategy.

At the moment, we are not doing very well. An indication of that is land
restitution. Restitution is a small part of the land reform and
redistribution programme, yet five years after the establishment of the
Commission on Restitution of Land Rights, only about 1% or so of more than
60% of land claims have been settled. At this rate, it will take us
something like 30 years just to settle restitution claims.

We understand that by the end of this month more claims will have been
settled. I wonder what percentage this will represent. The rural
development strategy we have just been talking about in this House must
mean, amongst other things, that greater redistribution of land takes
place, otherwise what are we talking about when we talk about rural
strategy.

However, we know that it will not come cheaply. I wonder whether the
Minister has considered the introduction of land tax, for example, for
absentee landlords or people who have two large tracts of land. Land beyond
a certain percentage, or land that has been lying fallow for a certain
period could be taxed. The money that is obtained from that could be used
to finance this land reform.

In fact, considering the enormity of her task, I wonder why the Minister is
not perpetually on her knees, begging the Treasury to toss more millions
into her lap so that she can pursue land reform with greater oomph and
energy. [Applause.]

Mr M A MAPHALALA: Chairperson, hon members, Madam Minister, thank you.

Ngikhuluma lapha ngingumuntu ophuma emakhaya. Ngikhulele lapho uthi uma
ukha amanzi okuphuza kufuneke uwabange nezimbongolo nezinkomo, ngoba
engekho amanzi ahlanzekile. Ngiphuma emakhaya lapho kuphila khona abantu
abampofu.

Uma sikhuluma ngokuthi le ndaba yokwabiwa komhlaba iyindaba ethinta imizwa
yabantu, kuliqiniso. Ithinta imizwa yabantu njengendaba yokuba sibe lapha
ePhalamende okukade kuyindaba ethinta abantu abaningi abangafuni ukuthi
iningi labantu baseNingizimu Afrika babe kuleli Phalamende, bazocabanga
bakhulume ngokuthi izimpilo zabantu kufanele zibe njani. Nale ndaba
yemihlaba-ke nayo injalo. Ukuhlukana kwethu phakathi kusekutheni abanye
badla imbuya ngothi kanti abanye bangamabhuhuza, i-bourgeoisie. Yilapho
lapho sibanga khona. Wonke umuntu othanda ukuthi kube nempilo enhle kubo
bonke abantu eNingizimu Afrika uthi yebo, umhlaba mawabiwe kabusha.

Namuhla, njengoba sikhuluma lapha akekho umuntu ofuna ukuthi: Yimi engenza
ukuthi kube khona lokhu kuhlupheka okukhona eNingizimu Afrika. Sonke nje
sesithi kufanele kulungiswe. Sonke sesithi uHulumeni noMnyango wezoLimo
nezemiHlaba mawusheshise ulungise. Ngubani owayonile? [Ubuwelewele.]

Kunenkinga-ke yokuthi kukhona abantu abaqhamuka ekuhluphekeni, njengoba
ngisho, asebekhuluma namhlanje ngama-chatter boxes. Ngabe ayazi amalungu
ukuthi i-chatter box iyini? Iwuhlobo oluthile lukathelefoni. Uthelefoni
awuzicabangeli ukuthi uma ushaywa uzokutshela ukuthini. Uthelefoni uphinda
le nto ekade ishiwo ngumuntu obewushaya. Bathi-ke kukhona ama-chatter box
ngapha, kodwa ngibona sengathi bona bangama-chatter box impela ngoba
abanawo nalawo mapulazi lawo esikhuluma ngawo njengoba sebethi abanye
abantu bangama-chatter box. [Ihlombe.]

Ngithi labo abanohlevane namuhlanje, lokuthi kungaphindi lokho okwenzeke
eZimbabwe, mabakhululeke. Ngeke kwenzeke lokho lapha eNingizimu Afrika
ngoba sinoHulumeni oholwa nguKhongolose. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)
[I speak here as a person who comes from the rural areas. I grew up in an
environment where one had to drink water from streams together with donkeys
and cattle. There was no drinkable water. I come from an area that is
populated by poor people.

If we say that the issue of land redistribution touches people's emotions,
it is true. It touches people's emotions exactly the same as our presence
here in Parliament, which has touched the emotions of many people who do
not want the majority of the South Africans to be represented in this
Parliament, because they will think and speak about how the lives of our
people should be improved. It is the same thing with the land issue. What
divides us is that some of us are poor people while others are bourgeois.
That is where we differ. All those who wish a better life for all the
people of South Africa are in favour of the redistribution of land.

As we are speaking today, nobody wants to say: "I am the cause of the
people's misery in South Africa". Now we are all saying that things must be
rectified. We are all saying that the Government and the Department of
Agriculture and Land Affairs should rectify the situation without delay.
Who messed up the whole thing in the first place? [Interjections.]

There is the problem of people who come from poor families and who are now
talking about chatterboxes. Do members of Parliament know what chatterboxes
are? It is a type of telephone. A telephone does not know what to say to
you whenever it rings. It just passes on the message of the caller. They
say there are chatterboxes here. I think that the real chatterboxes are
they themselves, because they do not own any farms, while they call other
people the chatterboxes. [Applause.]

I would like to say that those who fear what is happening in Zimbabwe might
happen here should relax. Such a situation will not take place here in
South Africa, because we have the ANC-led Government.]

Since 1912, the ANC policy has been one of making a better life for all in
South Africa; not for blacks, not for whites, but for every South African -
a better life. [Applause.]

Ngakho-ke ngeke kwenzeke ukuthi kuphindeke esaseZimbabwe. Ngiqhamuka
kwisizinda sabavoti engingaso lapha. Yisizinda leso esinamakhosi kanye
nabantu nje. Athe amakhosi ayahambisana nohlelo lukaKhongolose lokwenza
ngcono umhlaba. [Ihlombe.] Bathe abantu besizinda engibuya kuso
bayahambisana nohlelo lukaKhongolose lokwenza imihlaba ibe kubantu bonke
ukuze kube nempilo enhle kuwo wonke umuntu.

Manje ngubani-ke lowo osezokwenza isimo saseZimbabwe? Ngizowatshela
amalungu ukuthi ngubani. Umuntu ozokwenza ukuthi kubuye isimo saseZimbabwe
lapha eNingizimu Afrika yilaba bantu abathatha abantu babalayishe
kogandaganda, njengoba elinye ilungu kade lisho, babalahle emgwaqeni. Nabo-
ke abantu abafuna ukwenza isimo saseZimbabwe. [Ihlombe.]

Abantu abafuna ukwenza isimo saseZimbabwe lapha eNingizimu Afrika yilaba
bantu abenza ukuthi umnyango ukhulume ngokuchibiyela imithetho ngaso sonke
isikhathi ngoba bengafuni ukuthi badedele umhlaba ukuthi nabantu abampofu
bakwazi ukuwusebenzisa. Nabo-ke abantu abafuna ukwenza isimo saseZimbabwe.
[Ihlombe.] Ngeke uHulumeni ayenze leyo nto. UHulumeni oholwa nguKhongolose
uthe asizukuwuhlwitha umhlaba kubantu noma ikanjani. Kufanele kuxoxwe
ukuthi kufanele abantu bawuthole kanjani umhlaba. Akakaguquki kuleso simo
uKhongolose.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Therefore, what is happening in Zimbabwe will not happen here. I come from
an area whose voters I am representing here. It is an area that consists of
the amakhosi and the commoners. The amakhosi said they were in favour of
the ANC's plan to improve land. [Applause.] People of the area where I come
from say they are in favour of the ANC's plan to give landownership to
people so that everybody will have a better life.

Now, who will cause the Zimbabwean situation here? I will give hon members
the names of the people who will cause that situation. The persons who will
cause it are those who load their workers on tractors as one of the hon
members has just said, and dump them at the roadside. Those people are the
ones who want the Zimbabwean situation to take place here. [Applause.]

People who want to cause the Zimbabwean situation are those who make the
Department of Land Affairs talk about amending laws, because they do not
want to give up their land so that poor people will be able to make use of
it. Those are the ones who will cause the Zimbabwean situation in South
Africa. [Applause.] The Government will not allow this to happen. The ANC-
led Government has said that it will not take land from people anyhow.
There should be some negotiations as to how people will be given land. The
ANC has not changed in respect of that situation.]

A better life for all. That is what we want.

Ngithi kuNgqongqoshe bathi laba bantu engibuya kubo, endaweni
yaseBergville, kwafakwa amanzi. Awafakwanga nguKhongolose. Lawo manzi,
agcwele umhlaba wonke, athatha umhlaba okufanele ngabe abantu
bayawusebenzisa aya kubantu bamapulazi. Awabasizi laba bantu abakuleyo
ndawo. Bathe sicele ukuthi asheshise ukuthi lo mhlaba siwuthole ukuze
sikwazi ukuthi silime.

Bathi abantu bangapha eMsinga bayalima. Batshala amaklabishi notamatisi
ezindaweni ezincanyana. Abanayo indawo eyanele yokuthi bakwazi ukulima.
Bacela ukuthi kusheshiswe ukuthi laba bantu bawuthole umhlaba. Nazo izinto
abazishoyo abantu basemakhaya.

Bathi abantu basemakhaya, cha, uma umuntu ekhuluma ngabantu abampofu
ukhuluma ngabantu abansundu nje kwaphela. Leyo nto yenziwe nguhulumeni
wobandlululo. Labo bantu bakahulumeni wobandlululo, okade ukhona izolo,
bakhona lapha namhlanje. Kufanele-ke siyiguqule leyo nto.

Bathi bona bangabalimi abancane, hhayi ngoba bethanda. Bangabalimi abancane
ngoba abanazo izinto zokwenza ukuthi bakwazi ukusebenza. Bangabalimi
abancane ngoba imihlaba yabo ayithuthukisiwe. Bathi-ke bacela lezi zimpiko
zikaNgqongqoshe, ezingo-ARC no-NAMC nezinye, keziguqule ukubuka kwazo
zibheke ukuthi ngubani impela okunguyena osele emuva ngentuthuko.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[I say to the hon the Minister, the people of the area where I come from,
Bergville, say water was installed. It was not installed by the ANC. The
water that is found all over the country and with which farms are supplied,
has occupied the land that people should have been using. People who stay
near farms have no access to the water that goes to the farms. They have
requested us to ask the hon the Minister to speed up the process so that
they will be given land so that they can start ploughing.

Every time the people of the Msinga district plough, they grow cabbages and
tomatoes on a small piece of land. They do not have enough land to
cultivate. People want the process to be accelerated so that they will get
land. Those are the grievances that are aired by the rural people.

People in the rural areas say if one is talking about poor people one is
obviously referring to black people. That situation was caused by the
apartheid regime. Those who supported it, who were in power a few years
ago, are in this House today.

People in the rural areas say that it is not their will to become small
farmers. It is because they do not have the things that will help them to
work more efficiently. It is because their land is not developed. They ask
if the ARC and the NAMC,, which are the arms of the ANC, can change the way
they look at things and look at who were left behind when it comes to
development.]

Yes, the ARC is doing wonderful work, but their focus must be changed.
There is a degree of development among the commercial white farmers as
compared to the black farmers. Black farmers do not want to be subsistence
farmers; they want to be commercial farmers like everybody else.
[Applause.] Black farmers want to be big commercial farmers, not small
farmers all the time. They do not want to be emergent forever, but want the
Government to refocus resources. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOLIMO NEZEMIHLABA: Sihlalo, ngiyabonga kakhulu ngaleli
thuba osunginike lona manje. Ngiyazi ukuthi isikhathi sesidliwe yinja,
nabaningi bethu sebefuna ukugoduka. Izisu seziyakhala. Kulabo abafana nami
nje abaphethe nabantwana sekukubi impela. [Uhleko.]

Mangithi qaphuqaphu nje kancane ukuphendula ngoba izinto eziningi ezishiwo
ngamalungu ngeke sikwazi ukuthi siziqede zonke namhlanje. Engizokusho
ngukuthi mayelana nesiphakamiso esishiwo ngomunye wamalungu ePhalamende
mhlawumbe kuzofuneka sibe nenguyazana sike siwuxazulule lomuba esibhekene
nawo ngoba phela yindaba le ekuyiyona eyinkinga. Ngabe asizange sizabalaze
ukuba umhlaba wethu wawungathathwanga. Yikho futhi nalokhu kuxazululwa
kwale nkinga kulukhuni kangaka. Kuthinta imimoya nemiphefumulo, kuvuse
nosinga kwabanye. Kodwa engikuthandayo ngukuthi abantu bakithi nanamhlanje
basazimisele ukuxoxisana, abakangeni ezikhalini. Lokho akusho ukuthi ngoba
beziphethe kahle belungile ababuzwa ubuhlungu. Mhlawumbe kufuneka sazi
ukuthi nalaba ababekezelayo kuba khona isikhathi lapho kuthi xhifi khona.

Ngizozama ukuphendula ezinye izinto esezishiwo. Mangibonge kuMagwaza,
Maphalala! Lubalulekile lolu daba alushoyo lokuthi abalimi abancane
abamnyama abazange bazikhethele ukuthi bafuna ukuba bancane. Abazange futhi
basho ukuthi bona bafuna ukuhlala bebancane. Bayayifuna intuthuko futhi
bayayifuna nenqubekela-phambili. Njengongqongqoshe-ke we ANC omele lolu
phiko, sethembisile ukuthi sizoguqula isimo, senze ukuthi iminyango
kaHulumeni yenze loko efanele ikwenze. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, thank you for
giving me this opportunity. I know that time has been eaten by the dog and
many of us want to go. We are hungry and people like me, who have children
to look after, are restless. [Laughter.]

Let me briefly explain, because many of the things that hon members have
said cannot all be covered today. What I want to say is that regarding the
proposition made by one of the hon members, perhaps we will need to hold a
bosberaad so as to solve the problem we are facing, because it is crucial.
We would not have fought for freedom if our land was not taken from us.
That is why the solution to this problem is so difficult to find. It
touches the spirit and the soul and caused an uncontrollable impulse to
other people. What I like is that even today our people are prepared to
negotiate, they are not in a fighting spirit. That does not mean that they
are calm, because they do not feel the pain. Maybe we need to know that
even those who are tolerating the situation sometimes do lose their
tempers.

I will try to give answers to some of the issues that have been raised. I
would first like to thank Magwaza, oh! Son of Maphalala! The issue that you
have raised is important, especially the one that says small black farmers
did not choose to be small. They did not even say that they wanted to
remain small. They want development together with progress. As an ANC
Minister who represents this arm, we have promised that we will change the
situation so that Government's departments will do what is appropriate.]

Kubo bobabili umntfwanenkhosi babe Ginindza, kanye nababe Kotwal
baseMpumalanga, ngitsandza kusho ku kutsi loku lebakushoko vele kubuhlungu.
Nasibuka simo sebantfu basemapulazini kuyabonakala kutsi nalamhla nje
bondlebezikhanyilanga laba basasitsatsa njengebantfu labafanana netimaku,
bantfu labangenawo emalungelo. [Tandla.] Kucoshwa kwebantfu emapulazini
akubonakalisi kutsi loluntjintjo lesalutfola nga 1994 lukhona nakubo.

Angisho kutsi ngekumisa kwe-Mtsetfo weKwelulwa kweKuvikeleka kweliGunya
leKuhlala, kutawufanela kutsi kube nemigomo letakwenta emaBhunu lahlala
emapulazini abekelwe imigomo yekutsi ngembi kwekutsi asuse bantfu kufanele
kubukwe kutsi labo bantfu batawubekwa kutiphi tindzawo. [Tandla.] Mine
ngekwami kubona ngitsi, kutawufanela kutsi nasibuka kutsi bantfu sibanika
njani imihlaba, sicale sibuke bantfu labafana nalaba labahlala emapulazini,
lekungabo labahlupheke kakhulu kwendlula labanye.
LiSekela lami Babe du Toit ukhulumile impela nakatsi umtsetfo lesinawo
lesisengakawulahli lobitwa ngekutsi ngumtsetfo weKwemuka, uma usetjentiswa
ngendlela lengiyo ungakwati kusisita kutsi sifeze leyo miphumela lefunwa
nguHulumende. Kuze kube ngunyalo besisancenga sitsi, chabo, asikakafuni
kutsi size sifike lapho. Kodvwa nangabe kukhona bontsamolukhuni, loku
kutawusenta-ke, natsi singuHulumende kutsi siphindze sicalate, sitsi:
``Hhayi bo, kantsi lamandla lesiwaphetse ngewekwentani?''
Ngitsi-ke nasingafuni kutsi size sifinyelele lapho, kutawufuneka kutsi
kubekhona nekubambisana, ikakhulukati kulabo labaniketwa lilungelo lemhlaba
lowawutsetfwe kubantfu labamphisholo.

Babe Seremane utsi Hulumende akaphucuke, abonise tinhlelo letinsha tekwenta
kutsi labo bantfu labasemaphandleni, etindzaweni tabo baniketwe ema-
individual title deeds ematayitela amuntfu ngamumye, kute-ke neligama
lesiSwati laloku - kumbe tigcebhezana temhlaba labangasho ngato kutsi
ngewabo lomhlaba.  Mhlawumbe kutawufuneka sisho kutsi cha, luhlaka lwemgomo
weMhlaba lwetfu lusho kukhanye nje kutsi bha, kutsi la kulengabadzi
sitatibukisisa tonkhe timo tekutsi imihlaba lekhona iye kubantfu.
(Translation of Swati paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to say that what both the hon Mr Gininda and the hon Mr
Kotwal from Mpumalanga said is very painful. When one looks at the living
conditions of people on farms it is obvious that even today those people
who refuse to change still regard us as dogs, and that is people who do not
have rights. [Applause.] The eviction of people on farms is not a
reflection of their acceptance of the change that we brought about in 1994.
Let me point out that in terms of the Extension of Security of Tenure Act,
we are required to put in place policies that will prevent farmers from
evicting people before such people have been provided with an alternative
place to live. [Applause.]

It is my personal opinion that when we address the question of land
restitution, the first people to be considered should be the people who
live on farms because they are the most vulnerable.

My deputy, Mr Du Toit, made a valid point when he said that if applied
correctly, the Expropriation Act, which we still have not repealed, would
assist us in achieving Government's goals. Until now we have been patient
because we did not want to go to extremes. However, if people refuse to
change, we as Government will be forced to review the situation because,
after all, we have the power to enforce the law. What I am saying is that
if we do not want to go that route, we have to start co-operating with each
other. I am specifically addressing this to those who were given land
rights of the land taken away from black people.

Mr Seremane said that Government should improve itself and introduce new
programmes to ensure that rural communities who own land are awarded
individual title deeds - there is no siSwati word for this - or special
land permits which will be regarded as proof that such land belongs to
them. Maybe we need to indicate that our draft land policy it very clear
with regard to this issue. We will consider all the different ways in which
we can ensure that people do get land.]

In other words, we said that our tenure security would be extended to all
South Africans under diverse forms of tenure.

Sikwenta loko ngobe siyati kutsi kukhona tidzingo letehlukene kubantfu
kuletindzawo lesihlala kuto. Loko akusho kutsi emalungelo entfutfuko
akanganiketwa kuze labo bantfu labahlala etindzaweni temakhosi
bangatfutfukiswa. Kodvwa, mhlawumbe kutawufuneka siphindze sibute kutsi
laba lababamkati betimali bona yini bangantjintji. Yini kufaneleke kutsi
kuntjintje bantfu kuphela? Futsi nangikhumbula kahle, angati-ke labanye.
Mine ngitalelwe endzaweni yakaMsane mine, kaMaphumulo. Nangikhumbula kahle
- ngingati-ke labanye - kutsiwa umhlaba wemakhosi ngumhlaba webantfu.
Inkhosi libamba. Kodvwa-ke tintfo toniwa boSomtsewu labefika batibekela
emakhosi, nawo ase atibona kutsi ngiwo laphetse umhlaba. Umhlaba
ngewebantfu! [Tandla.]

Uma sitsi-ke umhlaba ngewebantfu, nangu Nkhosi Holomisa uvumile lapha,
kantsi nalabanye ku IFP batsite bayavuma. Kutawufuneka bantfu nemakhosi
bahlangene naHulumende babonisane kutsi ingabe tindlela tini letincono
tekwenta kutsi imihlaba yabo lapho bahlala khona iyakwati kubaniketa
ematfuba ekutitfutfukisa. Uma sibuka simo njengobe sinje lamuhla nje, mine
ngiyiNdvuna yeTekulima neTemihlaba nje ngiseloku ngiphatsele bantfu
labahlala etindzaweni tasemakhaya umhlaba. Umbuto utsi: Kantsi tsine
siyawudzimate sikhululeke nini?

Tsine-ke singuHulumende sitsite sitakwenta loku. Sitawukhulumisana sibone
kutsi umtsetfo lesitawushaya uwavikela njani emalungelo ebantfu kuleto
tindzawo, ikakhulukati bomake bona lebebatsatfwa njengebantfu labangenalo
lilungelo lekuba  nemhlaba. Ngiyabonga kulona wakaKasienyane ngekubeka
kwakhe loludzaba. Lubaluleke impela loludzaba ngobe phela siyati kutsi
bomake ngabo labangumgogodla walelive.

Ngitsandza kusho kutsi ngiyabonga nakubabe Mangena nakatsi kutawufuneka
ngempela kutsi sisheshise kubuyisela umhlaba webantfu kubanikati.
Sitakwenta loko, futsi tinyenti tindlela lesesitibekile. Sifuna futsi
kubuka nasibuyisela lomhlaba, ikakhulukati etindzaweni tasemakhaya lapho
sitawukwati kuwubuyisela khona, kutsi singabelekelela kanjani bantfu,
kungabi kubaniketa umhlaba nje kuphela, kodvwa sibuke nekutsi
batawutfutfukisa njani lowo mhlaba ngendlela letabaphilisa. Uma sibuka
ibhajethi yekubuyiselwa kwemhlaba iyabonakalisa kutsi cha, sekuyakhanya
kutsi tsine njengaHulumende sesisitsatsile sinyatselo sekusebenta
ngekusheshisa. (Translation of Swati paragraphs follows.)

[We are doing this because we know that people have different needs in
different areas. This does not means that the right to development will be
withheld until the people who live on land belonging to amakhosi have been
developed. Perhaps the question we should be asking is: Why are our
financial institutions not changing? Why is it that only people are
expected to change?

I was born at Msane in Maphumulo. If I remember well - I do not know what
others know - it is said that land belonging to amakhosi is the people's
land. However, things went wrong when the colonisers arrived, because they
appointed their own amakhosi who regarded themselves as the rightful owners
of the land. [Applause.]

Nkhosi Holomisa agrees that land belonging to amakhosi is the people's
land, so do some members of the IFP. It is going to be necessary for the
people and amakhosi, together with Government, to come together and try to
find the best methods to develop their land. As things stand today, I as
the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs am still holding land in
trust for people in the rural areas. The question is: When are we going to
be free?

We as Government are going to do this. We are going to negotiate and see to
it that the laws that we pass protect the rights of people in such areas,
especially women who were regarded as people who did not have the right to
own land. I would like to thank the hon Ms Kasienyane for raising this
issue. This is a very important issue because we know that women are the
backbone of this country.

I would also like to thank Mr Mangena for suggesting that Government fast-
tracks the process of returning land to its rightful owners. We are going
to do that, and there are a number of mechanisms that we have already put
in place in this regard. We want to make sure that when we restitute land,
especially when we do so in rural areas, we do not only give people land,
but also assist them to develop that land in a sustainable manner. Looking
at the land restitution budget, it is clear that we as Government have
taken a step to fast-track this process.]

Chairperson, I share some of the views expressed by hon members during the
debate on the Agriculture Vote, particularly the concerns around flood
assistance to victims in the Northern Province and Mpumalanga. The
continued rain has also affected other provinces such as the North West,
even though to a lesser extent. We have had discussions at Cabinet level,
and have agreed that it is necessary to give the necessary support to
ensure that those farmers in particular can go back into production.

The Ministry for Agriculture and Land Affairs has had consultations with
the agricultural unions, both Nafu and Sawu, and we agreed on a particular
process. We decided that we needed to set up a task team to properly assess
flood damage on various farms in the affected provinces. We also agreed
that the key to this problem is to look at recovery measures immediately.
These measures will be defined on the basis of correct assessment, which
will enable us to determine where we can intervene immediately to deal with
the situation.

Aid will, however, not stop there. The Land Bank, together with the IDC,
has also put in place immediate support for farmers. The Land Bank has
committed an amount of R20 million towards soft loans and the IDC has
committed about R170 million for the recovery of agricultural
infrastructure. It is, however, important that financial institutions with
clients in the affected areas should not shift the entire burden onto
Government. They must also join the efforts of the other parties and
provide resources so that farmers who are clients of FNB or Standard Bank
can get assistance from them and not merely be shifted to Government
immediately.

I think the challenge of disaster or risk management is a challenge that
all of us, as a nation, have to share. We are formulating a long term
national agricultural risk management strategy which will cover all farmers
and which will ensure that all risk takers share the risk. Such a strategy
would also ensure that Government contributes.
Some members said blindly that we need to bring back the drought assistance
system. I do not agree with that. What we need to look at is how we can
prepare ourselves for the various risks that impact on the agricultural
sector, and find a better way in which the various resources that can be
contributed, either by Government, farmers or insurance industries, can be
administered correctly.

We do appreciate the concerns raised by MaNtuli around the accessibility of
the Land Bank. The Land Bank is doing everything in its power to ensure
that they again abide by the Strauss Commission which challenged the bank
to strengthen other rural finance associations which will become
subsidiaries where money can be loaned in order to ensure that those
farmers who stay away from the centres where money is currently being lent,
can actually afford to get support. One of such instruments is the village
bank system.

I must say to uBaba uHolomisa that we will ensure that the bank does not
become umashonisa. If one were to take the experience of the North-West
Village Bank, who have had some years of experience, it has never become
umashonisa because of the commitment and the participation of local
communities. The moneys for setting up those banks came from the local
communities. All the state did was to give technical support so that they
could function properly. If that is the way in which such institutions can
be run, we will avoid having fly-by-night institutions.

I must say that if we had enough time - and were not as hungry as hon
members all look now - we would have gone into various discussions on
various issues that hon members have raised. However, I do commit myself
and the department that, in the policy discussions that we will have with
the hon members in the portfolio committee, we will take up some of these
issues so that, as we move forward, we can indeed move together. Amandla!
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, on behalf of the
House, I wish all Muslim members and their families a happy Eid Mubarak.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:47.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Labour on 15 March 2000 submitted a draft of the
         Unemployment Insurance Bill 2000, and a memorandum explaining the
         objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Labour and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(1)(a)
         and (b).

     (2)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Truth and Reconciliation Commission for 1998-99 [RP 38-2000].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Select Committee
         on Land and Environmental Affairs for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Liquidation Account of the
         Tobacco Board for the period 1 January 1997 to 31 March 1999 [RP
         202-2000].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Labour and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises for information:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Unemployment Insurance Fund for 1996 [RP 37-2000].

         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Mines and Works Compensation Fund for 1998-99 [RP 195-
              99].


         (c)     Report of the Department of Labour for 1998-99 [RP 61-
              2000].

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Reports of the Board on Tariffs and Trade on the -

     (a)    Rebate of duty on biaxially oriented polypropulene film used in
         the manufacture of self-adhesive tape, Report No 3873;

     (b)    Rebate of the duty on textile fabrics impregnated, coated,
         covered or laminated with polyurethane, for fishing, Report No
         3874;

     (c)    Reduction in the rate of duty on "Agarbatti" other odiriferous
         preparations which operate by burning, Report No 3875;

     (d)    Withdrawal of items under rebate items 307.04 of Schedule 3 to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, Report No 3877;

     (e)    Withdrawal of the provision under rebate item
         313.04/26.10.01.00, Report No 3878;

     (f)    Rebate of full duty on vinyl, chloridevinyl acetate copolymers,
         for the manufacture of floor coverings, Report No 3880.

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Report of the Department of Agriculture for 1999 [RP 59-2000].

