---
title: 'National Assembly - 05 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-10-05
---

THURSDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:23.

The Speaker took the Chair.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs S F BALOYI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that the SA Medical Research Council will begin clinical trials
           of a vaccine to combat HIV/Aids within months; and


       (b)  the statement that a successful HIV/Aids vaccine is estimated to
           have the potential to save the lives of about 20 million people
           during the first decade of its use;


  (2) believes that such a vaccine will save our Government and the country
       billions of rands in lost production and health costs;


  (3) welcomes these clinical trials and hopes that these trials will be
       successful in finding solutions to arrest the spread of Aids; and


  (4) reiterates our Government's stance on the causal link between HIV and
       Aids, and calls upon all South Africans from all walks of life to
       combine their efforts in strengthening the Aids awareness campaign.

[Applause.]

Mnr S E OPPERMAN: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat -


       (a)  die gemeenskapsgebaseerde programme van die Departement van
           Openbare Werke daarop gemik is om armoede te verlig;


       (b)  daar gedurende die afgelope drie boekjare meer as R700 miljoen
           vir hierdie programme toegewys is; en


       (c)  nie een sent van hierdie miljoene aan die armes van die Groot
           Karoo toegewys is nie;


  (2) dit daarom vreemd vind dat die ANC sy verkiesingsmanifes en sy
       sogenaamde bekommernis oor armoede in die Groot Karoo bekend wil
       maak;


  (3) die inwoners van Beaufort-Wes, Laingsburg, Murraysburg en Prins
       Albert en omgewing aanraai om nie toe te laat dat hulle weer mislei
       word nie;


  (4) erken dat die ANC die arm mense van die Karoo in die afgelope ses
       jaar verwerp het; en


     5) glo die mense van die Groot Karoo sal die ANC gedurende die komende
        munisipale verkiesings by die stembus in eie munt terugbetaal.
        [Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the DP:

  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the community-based programmes of the Department of Public
           Works are aimed at alleviating poverty;


       (b)  during the past three financial years more than R700 million has
           been allocated for these programmes; and


       (c)  not one cent of these millions has been allocated to the poor in
           the Great Karoo;


  (2) therefore finds it strange that the ANC wants to make known its
       election manifesto and its so-called concern about poverty in the
       Great Karoo;


  (3) advises the residents of Beaufort West, Laingsburg, Murraysburg and
       Prince Albert and surrounding areas not to allow themselves to be
       misled again;


  (4) recognises that the ANC has rejected the poor people of the Karoo
       during the past six years; and


  (5) believes that the people of the Great Karoo will pay the ANC back in
       kind at the polls during the forthcoming municipal election.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Mr M F CASSIM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the genetic engineering process is meant to alleviate
       poverty, reduce production costs, eliminate pests and minimise labour
       costs;


  (2) acknowledges that the genetic process requires patents for those who
       are involved in this industry;


  (3) urges that precautionary measures be taken to ensure that the genetic
       engineering process does not partly or completely change the
       receiving plant's genome; and


  (4) urges the Government to ensure that the process really helps farmers
       to grow in this industry, given the fact that this industry operates
       on and with patents that do not allow farmers to save seeds resulting
       from this engineering, but that they have to pay for the right to use
       these genetically engineered plants.

Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the statement by the hon Mrs Sheila Camerer quoting a newspaper
           in the United States of America characterising President Thabo
           Mbeki as a despot who does not tolerate criticism, a black
           Verwoerd and South Africa's own Mugabe; and
       (b)  she was a Deputy Minister in a government whose political
           orientation derived from Verwoerd's racist policies;


  (2) recognises that President Mbeki is world-renowned as a great thinker,
       a defender of the rights of the poor and the downtrodden, and an
       important leader in the continent; and


  (3) calls on Mrs Camerer ...

[Interjections.] No, she is not honourable! [Laughter.]


  (3) calls on Mrs Camerer to desist from deliberately ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! I must ask the member to please withdraw his statement
that the hon Mrs Camerer is not ``honourable''.

Mr D V BLOEM: She is ``honourable'', Madam Speaker. [Laughter.]

Dr S J GOUS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the announcement by the SA Medical Research Council that
       clinical human trials of an already manufactured anti-Aids vaccine
       will begin in February;


  (2) believes that this is a positive step in the fight against Aids, and
       will save millions of lives and rands;


  (3) reminds the Government that this vaccine is not a cure for Aids and,
       therefore, current projects on Aids awareness, safe sexual practices
       and the prevention and treatment of the disease should still be
       implemented with full force;


  (4) welcomes comments made by the president of the SA Medical Research
       Council to the effect that South Africa cannot afford any more
       blunders and mixed messages; and


  (5) urges the President of the Republic and the Minister of Health to
       throw their full support behind the research for such a vaccine that
       will eliminate a virus that is a major cause of the Aids epidemic,
       which is a major cause of death in South Africa.

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:
  That the House, following the disturbing revelations made in the Cape
  High Court yesterday of assaults on wardens, the setting alight of cells,
  smuggling of weapons and cellphones, and the planning, management and
  execution of crimes from the Pollsmoor Prison -


  (1) seriously questions the effectiveness of Pollsmoor Prison as an
       institution;


  (2) acknowledges that the Department of Correctional Services has lost
       control over the prison and the prisoners it houses and that,
       consequently, Pollsmoor Prison is effectively run by criminals from
       within;


  (3) calls on the Minister of Correctional Services to appoint a
       commission of inquiry into the conditions, the management, discipline
       and the general state of the prison as an institution; and


  (4) urges the Minister to bring the report and recommendations of such
       inquiry to the House for debate, following which he must report to
       the House what steps will be implemented to rectify the situation.
Mr R D PIETERSE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the Constitutional Court ruling that the state has an obligation
           to implement an effective housing plan and to provide emergency
           shelter to destitute people of the Wallacedene community; and


       (b)  that this ruling by the Constitutional Court complemented a
           decision taken earlier by the High Court;


  (2) recognises that the Western Cape government and the Oostenberg
       municipality undertook to provide this community with waterproof
       temporary structures, basic sanitation, water and refuse services;


  (3) notes that, to date, only a single tap has been provided to the
       community; and


  (4) calls on the New NP-DP-controlled Western Cape government to respect
       the court's decision and to provide housing and an appropriate
       infrastructure to the poor.

[Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Department of African Languages at the University of
           Transkei is threatened with closure;


       (b)  senior lecturer W M Kwetana reports that 343 students are
           enrolled in the University's Department of African Languages;
       (c)  the excuse given by the Department of Education for closure is
           that there are no jobs for those who major in African languages;
           and


       (d)  the PAC urges the Minister of Education, Prof Kader Asmal, to
           intervene;


  (2) observes that African languages need to be developed so that they can
       cope with modern technological terminology;


  (3) bears in mind that the Constitution recognises African languages and
       the need to develop them; and


  (4) believes that -


       (a)  there is a need for important instruments such as treaties and
           legislation to be available in African languages for the
           majority of Africans who cannot read any of the colonial
           languages presently used; and


       (b)  only university graduates who have majored in African languages
           can help in this herculean task and ensure that African
           languages are spoken correctly, especially in Government
           institutions such as the SABC.

[Interjections.] To those who say that I am using a colonial language, I
wish to say that I am using it for their benefit.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die AEB sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem -


       (a)  van die uitspraak van die Leier van die Opposisie in Zimbabwe,
           mnr Morgan Tsvangirai, wat vra vir die bedanking van mnr Mugabe;
           en
       (b)  daarvan dat die ANC op 4 Oktober 'n voorstel in die Huis
           ingedien het waarin mnr Tsvangirai oor sy uitspraak in die
           openbaar veroordeel word;


  (2) die ANC versoek om te verklaar waarom hy 'n openbare veroordeling
       doen oor die toekomstige leier van Zimbabwe, terwyl die ANC teenoor
       die huidige leier, mnr Mugabe, die beleid van stille diplomasie
       toepas; en


  (3) die ANC herinner aan wat in Spreuke 26:17 staan: Hy wat hom inmeng
       met 'n ander se rusie, is soos een wat 'n verbylopende hond aan die
       ore gryp.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the AEB:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the statement by the Leader of the Opposition in Zimbabwe, Mr
           Morgan Tsvangirai, demanding the resignation of Mr Mugabe; and


       (b)  that on 4 October the ANC tabled a motion in this House in which
           Mr Tsvangirai was condemned for his public statement;


  (2) requests the ANC to explain their public condemnation of the future
       leader of Zimbabwe while they maintain a policy of quiet diplomacy
       towards the present leader, Mr Mugabe; and


  (3) reminds the ANC of what is written in Proverbs 26:17: He who meddles
       in a quarrel not his own, is like one who takes a passing dog by the
       ears.]

Mr J S MGIDI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the data released by Andrew Levy and Associates shows that the
           number of working days lost as a result of industrial action is
           at its lowest level; and


       (b)  the consultancy's latest quarterly strike report shows that 350
           000 labour hours were lost in nine months,  ending in September,
           down from 2,5 million last year;


  (2) believes that the low tide in industrial action is a result of the
       laws introduced by the ANC-led Government to normalise the industrial
       relations system in our country;


  (3) welcomes the report; and


  (4) calls on the opposition to accept the fact that strong industrial
       unions are important in normalising the industrial relations system
       and desist from their union-bashing agenda.

[Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
       with regard to the Department of Justice, wherein it was indicated
       that -


       (a)  the deterioration in the financial management of the department
           during the previous years should be halted immediately;


       (b)  the standing committee expressed concerns over the shortcomings
           in financial management in the department for the past two
           years; and


       (c)  due to the lack of any improvement, this fact has led to the
           chaotic state of financial management within the department; and


  (2) calls on the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to
       urgently improve the activities of the Department of Justice or make
       way for someone who is capable of managing this department.

Prof H NGUBANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that 17 October, the International Day for the Eradication of
       Poverty, is scheduled by the Department of Social Development for the
       launch of its flagship programme at Bhambanani in KwaZulu-Natal to
       assist unemployed women with children under five;


  (2) congratulates the Minister on reaching out to unemployed women, even
       if this is within a pilot scheme to eliminate poverty;


  (3) emphasises that the upliftment of the poor in South Africa must begin
       first and foremost with women, the single most marginalised group in
       South Africa;


  (4) calls on the Minister to pursue, with great vigour, similar
       programmes in the rest of South Africa so that the message of hope
       and support reaches every woman in every corner of our land; and


  (5) supports the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, and
       hopes that, finally, the goal of eradicating poverty will be reached.
       EXTENSION OF PERIOD OF OPERATION OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON GENERAL
                       INTELLIGENCE LAW AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That paragraph (5) of the resolution adopted by the House on 14 September
  2000 whereby the Ad hoc Committee on General Intelligence Law Amendment
  Bill was established, be amended by extending the date by when the
  committee has to complete its task from 5 October 2000 to 30 October
  2000.

Agreed to.

                        ALLOCATION OF SPEAKING TIMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 106, the following times be
  allocated to parties for comment on the statement by the Minister of
  Education today on World Teachers' Day:

    Minister: 10 minutes; African National Congress: 4 minutes; Democratic
    Party: 3 minutes; Inkatha Freedom Party, New National Party and United
    Democratic Movement: 2 minutes each; all other parties: 1 minute each.

Agreed to.

               CONGRATULATIONS TO HON MEMBER ON BIRTH OF BABY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that Mrs Wilma Newhoudt-Druchen, member of Parliament, has
       given birth to Nicole, a healthy baby girl;


  (2) notes that our Parliament has led the way for most countries in
       ensuring a proper gender balance, promoting the equal status of women
       and improving the quality of life of women in South Africa; and


  (3) congratulates Mrs Newhoudt-Druchen on the birth of her new baby and
       wishes them a happy life together.

Agreed to.

                        ALLOCATION OF SPEAKING TIMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 106, the following times be
  allocated to parties for comment on the statement by the Deputy President
  today on achievements of the Government:
       Deputy President: 35 minutes; African National Congress: 8 minutes;
       Democratic Party: 5 minutes; Inkatha Freedom Party, New National
       Party and United Democratic Movement: 4 minutes each; all other
       parties: 2 minutes each.

Agreed to.

                         ACHIEVEMENTS OF GOVERNMENT

                                 (Statement)

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker and hon members, when the people of
South Africa went to the polls for the second time, last year, they
believed that all of us in this House were best placed to provide a better
life for them. We have all been hard at work, since June last year, to meet
the expectations of our various constituencies. It is necessary that we
take stock of our combined efforts that have contributed to improving the
lives of our people in the past year.

As Leader of Government Business, I am of the view that this process of
reporting back to this House, on an annual basis, will further strengthen
the relationship between the legislature and the executive. I want hon
members to understand that this report is by no means a comprehensive
account of all that has been done. It is, rather, a brief account of some
of the achievements of Government in the period under review.

This year, Government has continued to prioritise the transformation of our
education system so that it better fulfils the requirements of our society.
By the end of the year, we will have completed our programme of moving
teachers from well-staffed schools to more needy ones. Some 23 000 teachers
are part of this programme.

National norms and standards for school funding, which set out the policy
that ensures the allocation of resources to schools based on need, were
implemented from 1 January 2000. This will ensure that the poorest schools
will receive about seven times more nonpersonnel funds per learner than the
richer schools. Government has further sought to improve school
effectiveness and educator professionalism by initiating a monitoring
programme to ensure accountability of schools for their performance and to
develop individual school profiles.
Recognising that effective learning cannot take place in an environment
where safety is not ensured, we have initiated a campaign to mobilise
stakeholders, including communities, to work towards making our schools
crime-free zones. This programme is due to be unveiled this month.

Donor funds totalling R118 million have been secured for the reconstruction
of flood-damaged schools. International assistance of R180 million has been
received for the development of infrastructure in schools in KwaZulu-Natal,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape and Eastern Cape.

A necessary element for a conducive learning environment is safety. We have
therefore embarked on a campaign to create safe schools by mobilising
stakeholders, particularly communities.

Programmes to accelerate access to health services are continuing. Primary
health care infrastructure was further expanded in the past year with 59
new clinics built between April 1999 and June 2000. Currently, over 5
million South Africans have benefited from the clinic-building and
upgrading programme, resulting in an average of 125 000 more patients per
week now making use of these essential services.

This programme has also ensured that pregnant women now have easier access
to our health care system. In the past, expectant mothers, particularly
those in underdeveloped areas, had little or no access to medical care. As
a result of our initiatives, 94% of these women now attend antenatal
clinics. This is just one example which shows that we are succeeding in
improving the access of the poor to essential health care services.

Another example is the commitment of R400 million this year to priority
projects in the health sector. In addition to this, R440 million has been
spent on the new Durban and Umtata academic hospitals during the current
financial year. Government is making progress in building a truly
integrated and unitary health system which is based on the comprehensive
primary health care approach.

The mass immunisation campaign conducted against polio and measles during
the period May-June 2000 resulted in a national vaccine coverage of over
80%. The community service programme for medical practitioners has now been
extended to dentists from July this year. We remain convinced that the
universal provision of and easy access to basic primary health care of good
quality is the single most important contribution the health sector can
make to the fight against disease.

With regard to the HIV/Aids campaign, we are encouraged by the success of
the awareness programmes which we have put in place. The effectiveness of
our campaign is illustrated by the increase in the level of awareness,
which is estimated to be 93%. The high level of HIV/Aids awareness among
South Africans is evidenced by the increase in the demand for free condoms
to 350 million this year. We are proud of the fact that South Africa is
ranked by international health organisations as one of the leading
countries with regard to HIV-Aids educational campaigns. [Applause.]

As previously indicated in the House, Government has various programmes
based on the HIV-Aids and STD strategic plan, which is constructed
according to the following areas: prevention; treatment, care and support;
human and legal rights; and monitoring, research and surveillance. Our
President has tirelessly led the Aids campaign and has been recognised as
one of the leading figures in the world ... [Interjections.] [Applause] ...
to have actively and openly campaigned against the pandemic.

Contrary to the minority view that this Government is not taking the fight
against HIV-Aids seriously, our actions indicate the reality. We reiterate
our call to all South Africans to take responsibility for their own lives
and take to heart the ABCs of Aids: abstain, be faithful and, if you cannot
do either, use condoms.

Government's social assistance programme provides benefits to over three
million South Africans. This includes older persons, persons with
disabilities and children under the age of seven. In spite of logistical
challenges facing our social security systems, social relief programmes are
continuing. Beneficiaries of the child support grant have increased from 36
000 in April 1999 to 376 135 by August 2000. We have also made a concerted
effort to bring more people into the social security net, particularly in
rural areas.

With all these successes, challenges are inevitable. We introduced a
process of reregistration of beneficiaries, with the aim of cleaning up the
database and eliminating fraud. Regrettably, legitimate beneficiaries were
incorrectly removed from the system. Where this has occurred, provincial
departments have taken the necessary steps to reinstate these
beneficiaries, and the majority of provinces have made good progress with
the reregistration.

Although we have a continuing social programme in place, Government's view
is that in the long term it is crucial to ensure that whilst giving the
people fish, we also empower them to catch their own fish. We have
therefore prioritised the three poorest provinces, namely the Eastern Cape,
KwaZulu-Natal and the Northern Cape, for development projects. A total of
R147,2 million has been disbursed to projects managed by the Independent
Development Trust on behalf of the Government.

We are conducting 72% of our poverty relief programmes in rural areas, and
these have resulted in the creation of 25 956 jobs, with women accounting
for 65% of them. Government sees shelter as a key basic need. Having
attained our target of building one million houses, Government's focus is
now on the provision of housing in rural areas. We have set up a Rural
Housing Loan Fund, with the aim of improving access to credit. Through this
fund, a total of R55 million has been disbursed.

In line with the principles of the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of
Unfair Discrimination Act, women have been targeted as major beneficiaries
in the housing delivery process. The housing policy actively promotes
gender equality by recognising housing ownership for women-headed
households.

In our continuing efforts to restore dignity to our people, we have, this
year, made it possible for 208 111 people to have their own postal
addresses. This is in addition to the roll-out last year of 818 612 postal
addresses, of which 76% were in the rural areas. Many of us take having
addresses for granted, and therefore may not be able to imagine the
isolation, inconvenience and humiliation of not having one.

Considerable progress continues to be made in the provision of clean water
to South Africans. Government's community water supply programme has
improved the lives of over 6 million people since 1994. Since 1 April 2000,
33 schemes have been completed, with 420 000 people gaining access to
water.
Construction worth R430 million in Jagerdam, on the Sabi River catchment
between Northern Province and Mpumalanga, is nearing completion. The
communities of towns like Thulamahashe and Dwarsloop are already assured
that they will never again go without piped water for weeks on end, as
happened during the crippling drought in 1992.

Since June 1999, Government has electrified more than 300 000 households,
60% of which were in rural areas. We can never undermine the impact of
energy as an engine for development. Government has prioritised development
in rural areas, and the processs of finalising the integrated rural
development strategy is almost complete. However, work on the ground has
been ongoing.

In the past, planning by departments was done in an isolated fashion, with
planning decisions being based on information from different sources. This
is now something of the past. The departments have formed committees to co-
ordinate their activities in rural areas.

I previously reported to this House that pilot projects would be identified
in the three poorest provinces. In consultation with the relevant
provincial governments, these areas have been identified. They are
Qawukeni, in the Eastern Cape and Nongoma in KwaZulu-Natal and, indeed, in
the Northern Province, the area is about to be finalised.

Profiles of population, existing Government infrastructure, available
services, and economic potential of the areas have been compiled. To
facilitate easy and co-ordinated planning, these profiles have been
computerised to allow departments and developmental agencies access, at the
touch of a button, to all the relevant data.

It has become apparent, through this process, that these pilot areas cannot
be isolated from the surrounding districts. An example of Government's
services available in these areas include the provision of financial loans
to farmers, development of self-sustaining villages, telecentres aimed at
promoting access to information and communication services, the renovation
of schools, and the provision of health, water and electrification
services.

As we are aware that the buy-in of the affected communities is crucial for
the sustainability of projects, we have met different affected groups
within these communities, in particular women, traditional leaders and
church groups, as well as emerging farmers. Whilst we acknowledge the
challenges of the successful implementation of this project, the response
has been enthusiastic. We are now exploring, with the community, ways in
which to stimulate economic development. We have been able to encourage
business to participate in the upliftment of our people in remote rural
areas.

Owing to the progress made with the planning of the pilot areas, we have
begun to conduct this profiling exercise in other areas where pockets of
poverty have been identified. The recently released poverty report of
Statistics South Africa will be a useful tool in this regard. The ongoing
commitment of Ministers and their departments to the policy of developing
rural areas, which has formed the cornerstone of our rural development
programme since 1994, is commendable.

This year, we succeeded in putting R9,8 billion back into South Africans'
pockets by cutting tax rates significantly and restructuring the income tax
brackets. With this, we clearly and firmly placed the achievements of South
Africa before the eyes of the world. The start of the implementation of the
Public Finance Management Act on 1 April is already revolutionising the way
we manage public finances by ensuring greater accountability and
performance-driven financial management.

Over the past year, we have intensified the war against crime. For the
first six months of this year, the following very significant decreases in
crime were noted: the murder rate is down by 16%, attempted murder by 7%,
arson by 18%, motor vehicle theft by 7%, stock theft by 7%, and burglary in
business premises is down by 6%. [Interjections.]

The four higher profile types of robbery, namely hijacking of trucks and
cars, bank robberies and cash-in-transit heists have all stabilised. This
downward trend is continuing, which indicates the success of the
Government's fight against crime. We have also succeeded in reducing prison
escapes through our national anti-escape plan.

In conclusion, I would like to align myself with those hon members who,
earlier this afternoon, paid tribute to the role of our armed forces in
humanitarian activities. Visions of their swift response to the
humanitarian disaster during the Mozambican floods will remain with us for
a long time to come. This was an example of Africa at work to resolve its
own problems. With this we clearly and firmly placed the achievements of
South Africa before the eyes of the whole world. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, at the outset, I would like to
thank the New NP and the FA for their time in this debate. May I say that
in a rather turgid exchange of letters between the hon the President and
myself, which is published today, I am accused ... [Interjections.] Yes, it
is shameful, I agree. That member is not on my side either. Perhaps they
should speak in their own caucus meetings.

There is a discussion by the President in one of the letters in which he
accuses us of living on different planets. I respectfully, after hearing
the report of Government today, agree with him. We do. And, of course, what
today's debate is about, is nothing more than a transparent attempt to give
parliamentary respectability to what I suspect is soon to be a glossy GCIS
taxpayer-funded pamphlet ... [Interjections.] Am I wrong? Am I wrong?
[Interjections.] ... closely coinciding with the commencement of municipal
elections. Their Deputy Minister, having failed to silence the editors of
London, is now trying to silence the opposition. South Africa is going to
fail on both scores.

Today, if we had a bit of useful candour there might be some purpose in
this exercise, but instead we had Government, as usual, being evasive on
the major challenges we face and self-congratulatory on its minor
achievements. Now, this is very typical, because the ANC Government, or ANC-
led Government, has managed to contrive, simultaneously, great arrogance
and great weakness. Indeed, it is beyond dispute that this Government, or
the party which governs, is politically strong. But that immediately begs
the question: All that power, but to what great purpose? In the end, to
what end?

Now, of course, we are usually told, when it comes to opposition
confronting the Government, that we should be quiet and grateful that South
Africa, today under the ANC, is better off than it was under apartheid. But
better than we were is no way near as good as we might be. And that should
actually be the crux or the fulcrum of a debate such as this.

But this Government, of course, does not really want a debate at all. It
seems to want to silence its critics with whole categories of people being
consigned into some sort of all-purpose political dustbin. During the
President's recent Oliver Tambo speech, apart from attacking the so-called
``white politician'', he also threatened the native intelligentsia not to
become -


  ... footlickers of the whites nor to become an obstacle to the further
  development of our own revolution.

Now, the implication of those words - about which there is a chorus of
usual agreement as there is in this House - is that anyone, black or white,
who dares to criticise the Government is considered illegitimate.
[Interjections.] Now that is the necessary inference of those words. But I
wanted to say something. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: What?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: This Government tries to question the
patriotism of its opponents at every turn and at every opportunity. That is
a very old and horrid chapter. But I think it is true to say that the
opposition should give credit to the Government where that is merited ...
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We do not want it.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: ... and I intend to do so today. That hon
member might not want it, but I will never take instructions from him on
how to do my job. [Interjections.] He should perhaps take a few lessons on
how to do his, then we would have a better Parliament.

Firstly, I think the Minister of Finance has done a very good job to keep
our finances in order and our deficit below 3%.  [Interjections.] I am only
too happy to congratulate him on that without reluctance or qualification,
unlike his apologies to Parliament.

Secondly, I think the next success for which credit should be given to the
President, the Deputy President and Chief Buthelezi, is the continuing
détente between the ANC and the IFP in KwaZulu-Natal. That has, at least,
made that province a much less terrifying place than it was not so many
years ago, and I think the whole country has benefited from that.

Thirdly, I think we should also thank the Government for marginalising the
Communist Party of South Africa. [Interjections.] That, of course, is not
an achievement that they like to boast about. Indeed, only a week ago the
hon the President said: ``We need a strong Communist Party.'' But we all
know that he actually meant the opposite of that, and has indeed achieved
that. [Interjections.]

Fourthly, contrary to the impression that might exist, I happen to believe
that there are some very competent Ministers, and some very competent
components of this Government and its alliance. [Interjections.]

Unfortunately, most of them are on the wrong job. Firstly, the only ANC
Minister, for example, who had the courage to state the blindingly obvious,
that HIV does cause Aids, should probably be made the Minister of Health,
and then we might have some real achievements in the fight against Aids.
[Injterjections.]

Secondly, I believe that Cosatu's designation of the Minister of Education
as ``one of South Africa's worst employers'' is probably an excellent label
from which he could tackle head-on the much-promised but nowhere sighted
labour market reform of which we have heard all too much about but seen no
response.

I would also like to say - in the interest of fairness and opposition-
government rapprochement - that on the subcontinent the voices of Cosatu
and the SACP sometimes prevail in a moral sense, where nothing at all is
heard from the governing party. Here I specifically refer to Zimbabwe,
because I notice that in the report there is nothing about foreign affairs.
Perhaps there is nothing to say, hon Deputy President.

But it seems that our foreign policy has become an ethics-free zone. So the
fact that we have some right people in the wrong jobs and some wrong party
saying the right things does not diminish the fact that we should draw
attention to those good things when they happen.

However, I think one of the greatest issues and challenges which is not
dealt with properly at all by Government comes from a new element in our
public discourse. It is a danger. Crudely put, it amounts to stifling and
shooting the messenger. So we have jiggery-pokery being played with the
rules of Parliament in order to sideline Question Time, to lessen the
accountability of the executive to the people.

We have attempts to banish the parliamentary press, courtesy of the Chief
Whip, from the pricincts of Parliament itself. [Interjections.] And the
Deputy President is a gifted and lucky man because he has crime statistics
which the rest of the country does not have at its disposal. There is
determination to actually suppress information, because it is feared that
it might be misused. I would only say that that leads us in the wrong
direction. It damages the democratic fabric, but it is no doubt done
because it intends to control the domestic arena while the Government is
failing on many fronts.

However, the weakness in this strong-arm approach ... [Interjections.] ...
is visibly self-evident. The effect on foreign direct investment, which is
driven by confidence, self-evidently comes from overseas. Mr Pahad might
have noticed in his recent foray to London - which, I understand, was very
unsuccessful - that the tea leaves there are far more difficult to read,
almost impossible to control and are not subject to his normal combination
of bullying and flattery which we are so used to at home. [Interjections.]

However, on the subject of control, let me quote an expert in such matters,
the Marxist academic, Anthony Holiday, who wrote last weekend.
[Interjections.] He went to jail, I understand, for being a Marxist, while
the Minister guffaws with laughter. He says there is a Leninist style of
centralised leadership that Mr Mbeki has insisted on adopting, whereby all
the meaningful levers of power are concentrated in his Office. This
arrangement is, doubtless, intended to increase power and hence
effectiveness. Sadly, he says, the system has had the opposite of its
desired effect.

Now the issue of centralised control, democratic centralisation or whatever
euphemism prevails, seems to be giving us, with respect, the worst of both
possible worlds. [Interjections.] I am sorry, but the world's greatest
living Marxist is sitting in front of us and I should defer to him. We have
seen the removal of democratic transparency on the one hand, without a
measurable improvement in delivery and efficiency on the other hand.

Let me say that we do not have a false argument, putting up ``Auntie
Sallys'', to quote the Minister of Education. Everyone, including the
opposition, wants an effective and compassionate Government. But we do not
have that. We have in many instances the opposite. Everyone, including the
opposition, wants joined-up government, where the left hand - never mind
the left wing - is actually in sync with the right hand. Instead, in
crucial areas we have the polar opposite: a Government which parrots the
mantra of a better life, but extends it primarily to itself, to the few and
not to the many.

Let me just tell hon members something about where we are right now. I went
to Mpumalanga the other day and we heard that the hon the Minister of
Finance has given them, from the exchequer's or taxpayer's money, R91
million to go and relieve the victims of the floods, about which we spoke
earlier. They have only spent 15% of it. The roads are finished. There are
exposed electrical cables and their children are at risk. [Interjections.]
Yet that province, with vast interventions from central government, is
spending R800 million on a new legislative building. [Interjections.]

Let us get our priorities right. If we want to turn South Africa around, we
should start doing a few things well, not many things very badly. So then,
let us actually get on with tackling the tough issues, not through evasive
excercises and self-congratulation, but by actually saying: We do need to
raise our levels of investment, we do need more growth, we do need more
confidence; and we do need more effective and more controlled government.
And we will get it by doing the right things in the right way, not the
wrong things in the wrong way. [Applause.]

Mr M D MSOMI: Madam Speaker, Wendell L Wilkie, a philosopher who lived in
the 19th century wrote, and I quote:


  Whenever we take away the liberties of those whom we hate, we are opening
  the way to loss of liberty of those we love.

The effectiveness of our Government must be based on certain inviolate
principles. These principles must be woven into the fabric of our
Government and civil society. It is the duty of Government to uphold,
protect and defend the rights of all people of the land, minorities
included. Furthermore, the principle of oversight and accountability must
prevail. Public officials should not be serving a bureaucracy, but should
be serving the people. If the will of the people is paramount, the
Government should be spearheading a Marshall Plan to declare a social war
against poverty, ignorance, diseases, landlessness and homelessness.

The Government has not succeeded in instilling a sense of partnership and
trust with the people yet. This constitutes the weakest link in the chain.
We have created pieces of legislation aimed at overhauling, modernising and
changing the way things are done in this country. We did that, but did we
follow it up? Where was oversight? Where was delivery? When the poverty-
stricken majorities who are trapped in the rural hinterland say that their
basic needs have been answered, we can say that Government has succeeded.
Until then, it is no shame to recognise our failure. In fact, it is our
obligation to accept this.

The present focus of Government must be altered urgently. We must broaden
the oversight role over the executive and over all spheres of government.
This, and only this, will contribute to a delivery of goods and services to
the populace. There must be a total and single-minded commitment to
uplifting the poor and the impoverished.

We cannot fail in this endeavour because the alternative will unleash the
untold anger of our people, fuelled by discontent, and strain the social
accord that we have achieved. People's confidence must be maintained.
Retrieving that confidence, if it is ever lost, will be nigh on impossible.


As a first step, I would urge the hon the Deputy President, Msholozi, to be
a catalyst to compell life and retirement companies to commit a small but
specific percentage of their total assets towards productive investment in
areas of national priority over an adjustment period.

Something extraordinary must happen to stimulate a socioeconomic plan, to
create capacity amongst blacks and to create wealth by expanding a range of
small industries and commercial enterprises. The priority, however, must be
given to curbing  massive unemployment, mainly in the rural areas, and to
accelerate skills development programmes as part of the socioeconomic
Marshall Plan driven from the Government level.

The Government must manage its huge pool of human resources, talents and
experience to turn it into the building blocks of a secure future in our
country. Members of Parliament must be allowed and encouraged to play a
full role in the business and cultural life of the society which they seek
to represent. All representative institutions should allow MPs to engage in
their profession or discipline. Safeguards against abuse can be built in by
developing strict reporting procedures to their constituency, Parliament
and the public in general.

We should not forget that the Government has achieved much in the past six
years, since 1994. We in the IFP have been proud to make our contribution
to these successes, as part of the Government of National Unity.
Nevertheless, we must acknowledge that the road ahead is still long and
hard.

The IFP will march every step of that road to bring prosperity and true
liberation to all our people. Under the leadership of our President, Dr M G
Buthelezi, who has given so much to this nation, the IFP has played a
leading role in Government by contributing radical ideas and pragmatic
solutions which are so vital to building a proud, prosperous and free South
Africa. [Applause.]
Mr B H HOLOMISA: Madam Speaker, Deputy President and hon members, a
tradition in other countries and, surprisingly, also in the previous
regimes here, is for annual Cabinet reshuffles based on individual Cabinet
member performances, and to avoid corruption in the process. Such a system
will be a healthy addition to our democracy.

I will, therefore, comment on each department's performance. The first
department I will comment on will be the Department of Agriculture and Land
Affairs. The Minister inherited a huge backlog of land claims that she
seems in no hurry to address. We would like to see the Minister spending
more time on empowering emerging black commercial farmers, and creating
mentorship programmes linking them to established farmers to ensure the
sustainability of these ventures.

Concerning the Department of Communications, the Minister has fared
dismally in managing the third cellular licence bid. We believe that the
greatest victim in this process will be black economic empowerment.

The Minister of Correctional Services is responsible for the prison system,
whose population outstrips capacity by a staggering 84%. The reality of
this situation is that there is no form of correction or rehabilitation
possible where prisons are completely overcrowded.

With regard to the Department of Education, the Minister cannot be faulted
for the vigour with which he has set about performing his new task.
However, his reported lack of consultation with all stakeholders is cause
for concern. On the plus side, we commend the surprise inspection visits to
institutions of learning, and his stance that schools are places where
teachers will teach and learners will learn.

Coming to the Department of Finance, the Minister can be commended for the
tax collecting performance of the SA Revenue Service that is constantly
improving.

Concerning the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Minister seems to be
disappearing for months on end. What seems true is that her portfolio is
handled by the President. [Interjections.] I hear Mr Pahad making noises
from his seat, yet he is little more than a glorified aid to the President.
[Interjections.] [Laughter.] In that regard, he has fared well.
[Interjections.] We would like to see the Minister develop a foreign
affairs policy that truly reflects and is realistically informed by our
domestic needs.

With regard to the Department of Health, regardless of whatever else the
Minister has attempted in the past year, those actions have been
overshadowed by the HIV/Aids debacle. Of course, this deepens the legacy of
Government's complete fumbling of the issues dating back to the Sarafina 2
debacle.

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development has succeeded in
antagonising the judiciary on various occasions. The backlog of cases,
currently estimated at around 200 000, shows no sign of dissipating. I ask
the Minister to focus on improving the dismal prosecution rate in the
country.

Regarding the Department of Public Service and Administration, we would
like to see the Minister being held accountable for the mess she left
behind in her previous portfolio, with hundreds of millions in poverty
relief funds not being spent.

Regarding the Department of Trade and Industry, for sheer perseverance in
the face of the European Union's intransigence, the Minister deserves
praise.

The Department of Welfare and Population Development remains a huge
dissappointment to millions of South Africans who unwittingly expected more
from a new democratic state with such a progressive Bill of Rights.
Sengigqibile. [I have finished.] [Time expired.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, and members, it is encouraging
to note that according to the latest Unctad report, South Africa is listed
among the top five African countries which are the most attractive
locations for foreign direct investment. This is as a result of our strong
and sound macroeconomic policy which holds a strong attraction for foreign
investors.

The Unctad report scores markedly better than the Merrill Lynch survey,
which put South Africa 26th out of 35 countries that show long-term growth
potential, even if the two surveys cannot be accurately compared.

The question that we need to address today, as we look at survey results
such as these, is: What kind of message do we, as South Africans, give to
foreigners when they visit our country? Are we our own worst enemy when we
have to promote our country overseas? Are we the prophets of doom and gloom
of our own nation? Yes, we must not be afraid to speak home truths to each
other in this House. We must call Government to account and we must remain
vigilant, but when we leave the shores of our country to visit other
nations, let us not indulge in self-flagellation.

South Africa is a beautiful country with great potential, and it is this
great potential which we must highlight to the nations of the world when we
visit them. Like every family, every nation will have its unique problems.
There will alway be needs, shortcomings and problems, irrespective of who
governs this nation.

Yes, we have the problems of unemployment, poverty, homelessness, hunger,
the rampant HIV/Aids epidemic, crime and many others, but as political
leaders, we must give our people hope, and hope comes not by exposing the
weaknesses of others in order to elevate ourselves, but by telling the
truth to our people about our strengths and weaknesses. But, once said, we
must move on.
Our hope can be found in faith: our faith in our Creator, our faith that
there is a future for us and our children here, our faith that ``a better
life for all'' will not remain a slogan, but will become a reality in our
lifetime. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, agb Adjunkpresident, ek wil graag
eers konsentreer op iets wat die Adjunkpresident na my mening uit sy
verslag gelaat het. Dit gaan oor die kwessie van positiewe leierskap ten
opsigte van samewerking en versoening en die resultate daarmee behaal, want
ek vind in die land en ook in hierdie Huis op die oomblik 'n negatiwiteit,
'n negatiwiteit wat negatiewe gesindhede 'n kenmerk van ons samelewing
maak.

Daar is te veel blaam en te min begrip, te min ubuntu en te veel
viktimisering in die gees en in die onderlinge gesprek. Ons is nie besig om
onderlinge vertroue na te streef nie en ons konsentreer te veel op wraak en
blaam oor die verlede. In plaas van begrip, het ons dus eintlik vergelding
op die brein. Agb lede fokus te veel op die verlede en kyk daardeur die
toekoms mis.

Ons moet dus ook fokus op die hele bevolking en nie net op een deel van die
bevolking nie. Dit is goed en dit is baie eerbaar dat 'n regering goed sorg
vir die armstes van die armes, maar 'n regering moet ook nie die
entrepreneurs - en ek praat nie van wit entrepreneurs nie, ek praat van
álle entrepreneurs - miskyk nie. Ek wil graag aansluit by die agb Holomisa
oor wat hy in dié verband gesê het.

Ten opsigte van dienste wil ek graag sê dit is goed dat die Regering
daarmee spog, maar ek vind 'n basiese benaderingsfout in die Regering se
beleid ten opsigte van dienste. Hulle maak 'n fout met die groot
welsynstaatbenadering wat hulle nastreef, want in plaas daarvan om die
mense te leer hoe om vis te vang gee hulle vir die mense die vis verniet.
Hulle skep 'n nasie wat altyd die Regering se spesiale speen sal soek om
aan te suig.

Die Regering moet die mense leer om die geleenthede aan te gryp wat op die
oomblik in Suid-Afrika bestaan, en om harder te werk en meer te spaar, om
minder eise te stel en eerder te streef na hoër produktiwiteit, om sodoende
te streef na uitnemendheid. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, firstly I would like
to concentrate on something which, in my opinion, the Deputy President left
out of his report. It deals with the issue of positive leadership with
regard to co-operation and reconciliation and the results achieved in this
way, because currently I am experiencing in the country and also in this
House a negativity, a negativity which makes negative attitudes a
characteristic of our society.

There is too much blame and too little understanding, too little ubuntu and
too much victimisation in the spirit and in mutual conversation. We are not
striving for mutual trust and we are concentrating too much on revenge and
blame about the past. Therefore, instead of understanding we actually have
retribution on the brain. Hon members focus too much on the past and in so
doing miss seeing the future.

We must therefore also focus on the entire population and not only on one
section of the population. It is good and it is very honourable that a
government should take good care of the poorest of the poor, but a
government should also not ignore the entrepreneurs - and I am not talking
about white entrepreneurs, I am talking about all entrepreneurs. I would
like to associate myself with the hon Holomisa in what he said in this
regard.

With regard to services I would like to say that it is good for the
Government to boast about it, but I find there is a basic error in approach
in the Government's policy with regard to services. They are making a
mistake with the large welfare state approach they are striving for,
because instead of teaching people to fish they are giving people fish for
nothing. They are creating a nation which will always look to the
Government to meet its needs.

The Government must teach the people to grasp the opportunities which
currently exist in South Africa, and to work harder and save more, to make
fewer demands and rather to strive for higher productivity, in so doing to
strive for excellence.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, the current policy
approaches to reconstruction and development are incongruous with the
originally articulated vision of a better society for all, as contained in
the RDP policy document which was later abandoned in favour of Gear. This
has resulted in policy contradiction in implementation as evidenced by
Government's inability to direct resources to areas in urgent need so as to
address the socioeconomic challenges the country is faced with.

The Government in general, has displayed a shoddy performance for the past
six years of democratisation, especially in areas that matter most such as
education, health, job creation and land distribution. We would like to
believe that this is largely due to lack of visible commitment to effective
good governance and practices, especially at a provincial level.

However, there are areas that merit being mentioned in favour of the
Government that reflect the Government's achievement. Those areas are:
managing the sensitive stages of transition from an apartheid state to a
democratic state; the introduction of the most advanced Constitution in the
world even though, as a party, we have certain reservations about certain
sections of it; the management of race relations by the Government; the
establishment of the elite Scorpions; improvement of the pension fund for
the aged; the integration of our education system and the provision of
clean running water to rural areas.
The UCDP is ready and willing to assist the Government in addressing
current and future challenges facing the country. The UCDP brings with it,
to Parliament, a track record of development and delivery to the people.
The party's development approach is pragmatic and people-orientated.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, human life in our country continues to be
insecure. Our women live in fear of rapists. Crime has not abated. There is
murder and political thuggery all round. A criminal occupied a presidential
residence for four days, dining and wining undetected. The Governor of the
Reserve Bank has been robbed in broad daylight. Corruption is rife in
Government departments.

The idolatory of Gear, privatisation and the sale of state assests are the
policies of this Government. This ruthless pursuit of moving wealth from
the poor to the rich is the highest form of state violence. Statistics
confirm that the poorest 20% of people access only 3% of the total income
compared to 63% of the total income which goes to 20% of the richest.

In many parts of this country, people either do not have water or pay
expensively for it, or it is cut off when they fail to pay. Roads in the
rural areas are graves. The African people's livelihoods are being sold off
to appease the Washington consensus. The dilly-dallying and shillyshallying
on land redistribution is this Government's greatest betrayal of the
continuously land-robbed people of this country.

What is the logic of opening land claims from after June 1913 when our
people began to lose land before that time? This national asset is
fundamental to the economic empowerment of the poor in this country. That
is why African traditional leaders are opposed to this eurocentric
demarcation in the rural areas. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, at intervarsity games, they usually have what
we call ``the big brag'', when the different leaders come together, in the
evening, to say how their team is doing and what it is going to do. This is
the big brag. This is the Deputy President's opportunity and we think that
he is entitled to do that. It is our job to put a little dampener on that.
Die Adjunkpresident het verskeie sake bespreek. Daar is gebiede waarop die
Regering wel gepresteer het. Kom ons wees eerlik, dit help nie ons bluf
onsself in hierdie Huis nie, maar dit is nou nie my werk om dit te
onderstreep nie.

Daar is egter sekere gebiede wat kritiek verdien. Ek gaan dit weer noem, en
die Regering moet asseblief hierna luister, want dit is vandag die heel
belangrikste saak wat in die harte van ons mense leef, naamlik die
veiligheid van ons boere op die plase. Dit is die heel belangrikste kwessie
wat die grootste krisis bring.

Ek wil ook vra of die Regering dringend kan kyk na die dieselprys, want die
saai-, plant- en oestyd lê voor. 'n Mens kan eenvoudig nie vandag boer nie.
Dit is so goed 'n mens koop iets vir R1 en verkoop dit vir 80 sent. Daar is
ook sake soos Zimbabwe en vigs, wat ek nie wil noem nie. Dan het die
Adjunkpresident ook nog iets gesê. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The Deputy President discussed various issues. There are areas in which
the Government did in fact do well. Let us be honest, it serves no purpose
to fool ourselves in this House, but it is not my job to highlight that.
There are, however, certain areas that deserve to be criticised. I am going
to mention it again, and the Government must please listen to this, because
this is the most important issue that our people have on their minds today,
namely the safety of our farmers on farms. This is the most critically
important issue.

I also want to ask whether the Government could urgently look into the
price of diesel, as sowing, planting and harvesting time is approaching.
One simply cannot farm these days. One could just as well buy something for
R1 and sell it for 80 cents. There are also issues such as Zimbabwe and
Aids, which I do not want to go into. Then the Deputy President said
something else.]

He spoke of our combined efforts that have contributed towards improving
things. I must say to the Deputy President that we do not actually have
experience of these combined efforts.

Ons ervaar iets eensydig, ons ervaar eerder 'n gevoel van as die
meerderheid gepraat het, is die saak afgehandel, behalwe oor  kosmetiese
sake, waar ons baie keer vir rubberstempels gebruik word.
Daarom vra ons ook dat ons die verskeidenheid in ons land moet kan
verdiskonteer en aan minderhede regte gee. Waarom is die artikel 185-
kommissie nog nie in plek nie? Is dit 'n teken van die prioriteit daarvan
by die Regering? Daar was 'n paar positiewe seine in hierdie Huis dat die
kwessie van rassisme en minderhede aangepak word, maar daar buite ervaar
ons mense dit nog nie. Ons vra dat die Regering hierdie belangrike saak
takel, en dan kan hulle dalk volgende keer meer rede hê om die ``groot
brag'' in te sit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We are experiencing something unilateral; we have a feeling that the
matter is settled once the majority has spoken, except in the case of
cosmetic issues, when we are often used as rubber stamps.

That is why we also want to ask that we should be able to deal proactively
with diversity in our country and give rights to minorities. Why is the
section 185 commission not yet in place? Is this a sign of its being a
priority with the Government? There were a few positive signs in this House
that the issues of racism and minorities are being dealt with, but our
people out there are not yet experiencing it. We are asking that the
Government tackle this important matter, and then perhaps next time they
will have more reason to indulge in the ``big brag''.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, in this debate, once
more, Tony Leon has proved that he is an expert on empty rhetoric,
verbosity and extreme arrogance whilst contributing absolutely nothing to
this important debate in this House or to practical programmes that seek to
alleviate the problems that are faced by this country.

In last year's election the ANC promised to build upon what had been
achieved since 1994, to speed up delivery of services by removing blockages
to change and to ensure that Government became more effective and more
efficient. We also promised we would work together with the nations of
Africa and progressive forces in the world to realise democracy, justice
and economic development.

The ANC-led Government has put in place one of the most progressive and
democratic constitutions in the world. We have removed all the laws which
discriminated against people on the basis of colour, religion, sex and
creed. We have passed a host of laws, putting in place a legislative
framework to undo the effects of apartheid - whether those hon memnbers
like it or not.

We have provided many millions in rural communities with safe water and
sanitation. Close to a million houses have been built and subsidies
approved. Our education system is being transformed to reflect the values
of a democratic society. The public health system now reaches those in the
rural areas.

Our Government works tirelessly for peace, stability and prosperity in the
region and the continent. Our President has become a voice of the poor and
developing countries, articulating their interests in institutions of
global governance.

A lot has been done, as the Deputy President has said, and yet more must
and will be done. First, we must reverse the vicious cycle of poverty. Why
do those hon members not applaud that? Our Government has developed an
integrated social security system by extending social welfare grants to
those who need them most:  child grants, job creation projects and
programmes which ensure that our people are covered by the social net. We
note with satisfaction that food security remains a cornerstone of
Government's programme to eradicate poverty.

Our second challenge is to confront the spread of HIV-Aids in our country
and region. The President and Government have never denied the link between
HIV and Aids. Government has undertaken campaigns to persuade people to
change their lifestyles. Government's campaign is based on the causal
relationship between HIV and Aids. Hundreds of millions of rands have been
allocated to take care of those affected, the Aids orphans, research into a
vaccine and the investigation into drugs to deal with mother-to-child
transmission.

The opposition parties and media are aware of this, yet some have chosen to
be playful and vexatious on the issue, but the poorest of the poor continue
to be terrorised by this pandemic. Media, the religious community, unions,
business, political parties, Government and all South Africans must unite
in their mission to intensify the Aids awareness campaign by spreading the
message: Abstain, be faithful and use condoms! I will state the message
very clearly: Real men use condoms. It is cool to use condoms.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The third challenge we face is to fight racism and the legacy of apartheid.
We have managed to remove racist laws from our Statute Book, yet subtle and
often unconscious racism continues to drive us apart as South Africans.

The SA Human Rights Commission conference on racism was an important
milestone in combating racism. It has forced us to face the fact that our
society is still bedevilled with racial prejudice. Racism is not just an
issue for conferences and parliamentary debates; it requires a oncerted
campaign by all South Africans.
 
If Tony Leon and the DP think that we are not going to continue attacking
racism, then they are making a terrible mistake. [Interjections.] The ANC
has emerged as the leading agent for social change. When the ANC assumed
the position of leading Government in the process of social change in our
country, it introduced a new paradigm of managing state and society as a
whole.

We must continue to mobilise our people to be agents of change, to shape
the process of change in a manner that empowers them. Parliament is an
important avenue to harness people's participation in development. The
Constitution of our country sees the role of Parliament as providing
political oversight to Government policies, legislation and programmes
through, amongst other things, ensuring that the executive is accountable
to Parliament. The report of the Deputy President to this House today is a
living example of the accountability of this Government to this House.

The joy of being in opposition is that it is easy to criticise, because one
cannot be held responsible for delivery. The DP and Tony Leon have opposed
every piece of transformative legislation introduced in this House since
1994. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: At more than one point
during his speech, the hon Chief Whip has mentioned the Leader of the
Opposition without referring to him as``the honourable'' and I would
request that you ask him to do so. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Yengeni, could you please refer to the hon
Leader of the Opposition as the hon Tony Leon.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The New NP,
which was beginning to transform itself and once showed signs of grappling
with issues of rebuilding our country, has made a desperate retreat and has
entered into a desperate alliance, hoping to keep a few individuals
sniffing in the cage of a paper tiger. Yesterday, the hon Van Schalkwyk was
known as ``kortbroek'', but today, since he joined the DP, he is known as
the ``onderbroek''. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The hon Leader of the Opposition constantly attacks our President, huffing
and puffing with his doom-and-gloom vision, seeking to scare whites into a
laager and modeling himself on discredited apartheid leaders rather than
playing a positive role in enhancing our democracy. With every attack on
our movement and our President, whom we hold so dear in our democratic
country, he removes himself further from the people.  We must persuade and,
if need be, force the opposition parties to recognise the needs, the pain
and the aspirations of the poor, to fight poverty and to fight for the
development of our economy.

Our Deputy President must be thanked for his report. He must also be
thanked for initiating the interaction with the opposition parties.
Hopefully, the opposition parties will use this avenue with the
understanding that they also have responsibilities to this country.
[Applause.] [Interjections.]

Debate concluded.

                             WORLD TEACHERS' DAY

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker and hon members of the House,
today is World Teachers' Day, and I am pleased to have this opportunity to
mark the occasion in this House.

This is a day when teachers the world over celebrate their profession. It
is a day when nations pause and contemplate how fortunate they are to have
men and women of great integrity and dignity who dedicate their lives to
the total eradication of ignorance in their society and in the world, men
and women who give their lives, from day to day, to the service of the
nation and to the struggle for real freedom, freedom from having no hope
for the future.

So, today, we as a nation want to join hands with the rest of the world in
saluting teachers all over the world, especially those who are persecuted
for their beliefs, for their religion and their culture. We particularly
salute our own teachers in our own country, who continue to work under the
difficult circumstances, so as to ensure that our young people are given
the chance to get the best benefits out of our new emerging democratic
order.

Africa reveres its teachers. No better example illustrates this than that
of the late Julius Kambarage Nyerere of Tanzania. Nyerere was educated as a
teacher, led his country to independence and gave shelter and support to
our liberation movements. It was President Nyerere who promoted Swahili as
a national language of his country. In this way Tanzania became the first
country in Africa, and possibly in the world, to use an indigenous language
as the official language of the state.  Nyerere became affectionately known
as ``Mwalimu'', meaning ``teacher'' in Swahili. I mention him because he
was a friend of our country and this continent.

South Africa also reveres its teachers. We honour those whose names have
been lost through the passage of time. We honour the elders who guided our
peoples over the centuries, providing moral guidance and the skills needed
to survive in those climes. We honour the special group of our leaders,
people who fought side by side to liberate this country and who began their
working lives as teachers: Rev John Dube, Chief Albert Luthuli, my mentor,
Oliver Tambo, the science teacher, Robert Sobukwe, the professor, Matthew
Goniwe, Molly Fisher, Agnes Msimang and Sister Bernadette Ncube, who sits
in this House. These are just some of the names on a proud roll of honour.
Baruti, teachers, one and all. They served us well and we thank them.

Let us remember that under colonialism, generally, and under apartheid, in
particular, the range of occupations open to the colonised were limited -
nurse, policeman, foot soldier, spy and teacher were allowed. Not much
beyond this. But teachers were accorded high status by their peers and by
their communities. This was correct then. It should still be correct now.

Let us remember that it was our teachers who led the resistance to the
imposition of Bantu education, knowing that to allow this distorted
education was to condone a crime against our nation. They stood their
ground and we are grateful to them for leading the way to our liberation.

We are now six years into our new constitutional democracy. It has taken
that amount of time to carefully and, I hope, systematically dismantle the
apartheid edifice, that most cynical application of divide-and-rule. The
process of nation-building is under mway, and our teachers are central to
this vision of nation-building. Education transformation is driven through
our new curriculum, and teachers participate in this reconstruction through
the learning area committees that operate throughout the country.

I am sorry that the leader of UDM is not here, because everything we do
follows after consultation with all the interested unions and associations.
It is quite different to talk about negotiations. Negotiations in relation
to the actual content of education is a prerogative of this Parliament and
the executive. We shall consult broadly in accordance with the traditions
of our movement. But, in the end, the Government and the executive are
responsible for the content and direction of educational policy.
Of course, we all consider ourselves experts in education, but
occassionally, we get the baying of the wolves from certain parts of the
House. Having ourselves being either educated or miseducated at school, we
all have opinions on education. We argue with enormous conviction. Some of
us look back at our schooling with romanticised affection. Others look back
with disdain for the years and opportunities lost.

One should not ignore the words of - I do not normally quote him, because
of his political background, - B F Skinner, whose words here are very
significant: ``Education is what survives when learning has been
forgotten''. He refers to the intangible aspects of schooling - the values,
the atmosphere, the tone and the vision. It is these ingredients that, in
my view, account for those school communities that succeed under conditions
of deprivation. If one looks around here, these are people who were
educated under conditions of extreme deprivation, but because of the vision
of the teachers and the commitment of the young people, they are now
members of Parliament, having gone through the crucible of struggle and
liberation.

We are now, therefore, in the throes of the third industrial revolution,
that which is driven by the information sciences. In the unfolding
revolution, the manufacturing sector is being transformed throughout the
world. There are large-scale changes in restructuring in the traditional
areas of occupation - manufacturing, clothing, and so on.

What then, with the loss of jobs, is the future of the teacher? Some think
that computers will replace teachers. They call it ``virtual teaching'',
therefore, leading to massive gains in the productivity in education. On
this, I prefer to quote none other than Bill Gates, who should know
something about this:

  Technology is just a tool. In terms of getting the kids working together
  and motivating them, the teacher is the most important.

Members should not misunderstand me. I am not arguing against computers at
schools. On the contrary, I am emphasizing how important it is for teachers
to remain central to the teaching-learning experience with new methods of
work.
Our teachers are in loco parentis. By their deeds and example, they set the
tone for learners and the school as a whole. We have, in accordance with
the Constitution, given thought to the matter of school discipline and
alternatives to corporal punishment. A book that we published today at
lunchtime is a contribution to World Teachers' Day. This goes to the heart
of what it is to be a teacher. Knowing oneself and knowing one's subject
gives one an authority that does not require authoritarian behaviour,
although teachers deserve to have respect shown, on the part of students,
for their authority. What this vital ingredient does is to promote mutual
respect.

It must be quite clear that this House must assert the principle of respect
for authority by the pupils for principals and teachers. It is vital that
we give a sense of security to our teachers in our schools. One of the
greatest of the focus points is the respect for the authority - for
teaching, principals and the teachers.

One of the greatest sins of apartheid was its promotion of a certain kind
of false status amongst teachers, a status devoid of any real recognition
of the real importance of teachers. And, of course, they were consigned to
be part of the apparatus of apartheid. Professionalism, therefore, became
synonymous with docility in the face of oppression, and it was rightfully
rejected by many of our teachers.

But we have seen that this is a rejection now, unfortunately, of the very
notion of professionalism and intellectual vigour and commitment. Teachers
should be reasserting themselves as professionals, and their fight for
better conditions and recognition is, in many respects, a fight for their
professional status to be given real content. We must therefore, say that
we will support the whole school evaluation programme. We have to evaluate
the whole school in order to give the rightful place and recognition for
the role of the teacher in the community and to provide proper functioning
schools which parents demand. I want to say quite clearly that the teachers
will support this. Our commitment to the whole school evaluation process is
absolute. Let there be no doubt about this.

By the start of the next year, all teacher education students will be
studying in our universities and technikons, because of the transfer of the
quality of education. This process signals the importance we attach to
building quality education in our country. As soon as they are transferred
to the higher education institutions, I have instructed the National
Student Financial Aid Scheme to provide ring-fenced support, through
scholarships, for the eligible students who are already studying in higher
education institutions.

I end by referring to a recent letter from an Afrikaner teacher. He
reported frustration that he could not teach voluntarily in schools. He was
met with the polite civil service bureaucratic answer: ``It is receiving
attention''. Undeterred, he went and found his space to teach, ``nogal''
science and mathematics, at black schools in the townships. This is what
the new kind of teacher is doing - voluntary work and showing patriotism.
So, I want to encourage teachers in every corner of our country to be
forces of change, to work tirelessly and selflessly for a better life for
all, for a better education, and for a better quality education for all.

Accordingly, today we celebrate the teacher, onderwyser, morutisi,
utitshala. Long live the teachers of our country! Khula thishela, khula!
[Applause.]

Mr R S NTULI: Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and hon members,
``no person shall be condemned by the order of a Government official''. So
says the Freedom Charter. This noble thought was stated so often by the
liberation movement that it became a source of comfort and inspiration to
those unsuspecting people.

In an incredible twist of fate, Government officials managed to persuade
the hon the Minister of Education that psychologists were not needed in
schools. In Parliament, on Wednesday, 13 September 2000, in a reply to a
question raised by me. the Minister replied: ``Psychologists are not really
needed in schools, as matters that learners face are social issues''. Two
months before that, the Deputy Minister of Education, whilst addressing a
conference attended mostly by psychologists,  challenged the private sector
to participate in addressing the problems faced by the learners and
teachers in this country.

In this instance, it is clear that the Minister and his deputy did not
communicate with each other, and that they, on these issues at least, do
not know what they are doing or are deliberately causing more confusion and
chaos, the brunt of which our teachers have to bear. Be that as it may, the
present Government, under the direction of the hon the Minister, now
aggravates the massive problem created by the apartheid system by ignoring
the tensions and the high stress levels in schools.

The DP acknowledges the most valuable contributions made by the teachers.
Our children spend most of the day in the presence of teachers who
inevitably exert much influence on them. The attitudes, value system and
the work outlook of teachers often have a lifelong influence on our
children. In essence, teachers impart knowledge, information and assist our
learners to develop their thinking.

For these cognitive and social processes to take place, the school
environment needs to be conducive both to the teacher and the learner.
Under the present system, teachers and learners are traumatised by the
never-ending inefficiencies, maladministratiion and confusion that reigns.
The teachers work for poor salaries, have to deal with overcrowded
classrooms and even teach under trees, including in so-called ``rich''
provinces such as Gauteng. When the problems are reported, they are
ignored.

Cosatu boasts that Sadtu is one of their largest unions. The fact that it
is so large and militant is a direct indictment on the Government. The
message is very clear that they are doubtful that the Government is capable
of dealing with their problems effectively.

Finally, teaching has always been a noble profession. Our appeal to the hon
Minister is that he give back to the teachers the honour they deserve, and
rightfully so. When teachers make a call and their call falls on deaf ears,
it is a disgrace to the nation.

Adv A H GAUM: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: I would like to know
whether it is parliamentary for an hon member to refer to the hon Mr Ntuli
as a ``chihuahua''. Is he implying that he is a dog? Is that parliamentary?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I think the
Speaker has ruled in this House that any reference to any creature in
connection with any hon member is not acceptable. It is not parliamentary.
So, if any member has made such a reference to the hon Ntuli, would he
kindly withdraw it?

An HON MEMBER: It is the hon Tony Leon ...

Adv A H GAUM: I do not know the hon member's name.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, do sit. There is a
tradition in the House that, when an hon member makes a reference, because
we presume that that member is honourable, we do not point to any member.
The hon member then stands up and whoever that person is acknowledges and
withdraws the comments. It is not the prerogative of the Chair to ascertain
who it was. Now, is there such a member? If there is no such member, I must
ask the speaker at the podium to continue.

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Mr Chairperson, and hon Minister, World Teachers'
Day is a good reminder to all South Africans and the world that teaching is
a noble profession. All of us in this House went through the hands and
guidance of teachers.

On this day, we honour the teachers the world over. Our special compliments
and praise go to the preprimary school teachers and those teachers who
handle children with disabilities and disadvantaged learners. We appeal to
the teachers to make the best use of the facilities at their disposal. We
have no doubt that our 29 000 schools in South Africa will benefit from the
transformative actions brought about since 1994.
On World Teachers' Day, we encourage teachers to boost their morale and to
remember that they have an important role to play in the development of
young personalities. Teachers should therefore continue the good work of
serving as good role models, walking tall, being proud of their profession,
and continuing in a zen-like spirit.

The IFP encourages excellence in the teaching profession, and requests that
there be a reduction in school violence. It was encouraging to hear the
Deputy Speaker here today assuring the House that steps are being taken to
make our schools more conducive to learning and more secure.

Ngithi: Unwele olude kothisha bonke emhlabeni naseNingizimu Afrika! [I say
long live the teachers of South Africa and all the world!]

Long live the teachers! To this day, I do not regret that I am a qualified
teacher. Once one is a teacher, one dies a teacher.

Adv A H GAUM: Mr Chairperson, I want to start off by telling the hon
Yengeni that I am a member of the DA and I am proud of it, and so are
millions of South Africans. [Interjections.]

Today we honour those people who are entrusted with the greatest
responsibility of all, the teachers of this country. While much has been
said lately about the problems concerning underqualified, irresponsible and
lackadaisical teachers, we must never forget the thousands of extraordinary
teachers out there who are eventually responsible for making the wheels of
our country turn. These teachers possess three of the most important
characteristics of an excellent teacher: in-depth knowledge of the subject
matter, commitment and enthusiasm.

A teacher who is fully conversant with his or her subject matter will find
it easy to adapt methods to the needs of learners and will teach learners
how to identify, analyse and solve problems in an objective and a critical
way. A teacher who is committed will inspire learners with a love for
learning, a desire to achieve and, thereby, a sense of responsibility. A
teacher who is enthusiastic will instil in learners originality, creativity
and the desire to explore.

In order to supply our children with more excellent teachers,  the DA
believes that the Government should do its utmost to retain excellent
teachers; make it attractive for bright matriculants to enter the
profession; ensure that in-service teacher training becomes a top priority
in every province; try to lure retrenched teachers with a record of
excellence back into the profession in order to play a constructive role,
especially in rural areas where we do not have enough qualified teachers;
reward achievement and qualifications through financial or other means;
consider additional allowances for teachers in subject fields where there
is difficulty in finding  qualified people, and ensure the speedy and
effective implementation of evaluation of schools and expand it to include
the evaluation of teachers. The overarching principle is that achievement
and commitment should be rewarded, but indifference and failure should meet
with appropriate consequences.

The DA acknowledges Minister Asmal's attempts to establish a higher level
of accountability and commitment among all teachers. However, we regret the
spanners that are constantly put in his works, especially by Sadtu and
other obstructionists within his own ranks.

A few days ago, Minister Asmal announced a school evaluation plan. The very
next day, Sadtu declared its opposition to the plan. Not very long ago, the
Minister's counterpart in Gauteng, Mr Craig Padayachee, called on teachers
in underperforming schools to give extra classes in an endeavour to improve
achievement. Sadtu responded by ordering its members not to participate.

The DA calls on the Minister not to give in to the irresponsible forces who
are undermining his efforts to break the back of the education crisis in
our country. If we want to make progress, all teachers should be willing to
join forces. Those in underperforming schools must walk the extra mile and
give extra classes. Those in privileged positions should reach out and
assist where assistance is desperately needed.

Die DA salueer al die onderwysers wat te midde van moeilike omstandighede
en ten spyte van beperkte beloning merkwaardige toewyding toon. [The DA
salutes all the teachers who are showing remarkable dedication in the midst
of difficult circumstances and despite limited rewards.]

In this regard, I want to single the Dira ka Natla High School in the North
West which will have its first matric class this year. Amidst dismal
conditions, the teachers of this school aim for a 100% pass rate. They told
me that they wanted to earn and better facilities and resources through
achievement. This is the kind of attitude we need. If such committed
efforts bear fruit, all of us should fight on the teachers' side in order
to ensure that they are rewarded.

Mr S J DE BEER: Mr Chairperson, World Teachers' Day was launched in 1994 by
Unesco to raise consciousness about the role of teachers. Quite rightly,
Unesco believes that teachers practice one of the most important
professions in the world. Unesco's message to the world today is: Recognise
the primary role of teachers in shaping tomorrow's world, and give them the
recognition and practical support they need to accomplish their vital task.


Rewarding teachers appropriately and sustaining their work with the
necessary resources are investments that we must be prepared to make if the
challenge of worldwide sustainable development is to be met, and if the new
century is to mark a new departure on the path to a culture of peace and
social justice.
The world we live in and the world that we leave to our children depends,
in a large measure, on the children we leave to our world. Teachers have a
pivotal role in realising the goal of making education accessible to all,
wherever they are, regardless of socioeconomic circumstances, race, creed
or gender.

Many of our hopes for a more socially just, more sustainable, more tolerant
and more peaceful world rest on the shoulders of the teaching profession.
Teachers bear the responsibility for the education and training and in many
ways for the upbringing of each new generation.

For us, here in South Africa, this message is of special relevance. So many
teachers here have to carry out their work under adverse conditions. On
this special day, we must pay tribute to those teachers who, under
difficult circumstances, continue to do their task with dedication - those
who struggle constantly to obtain basic education tools, books, chalkboards
and even chalk and those who perform their profession in remote rural
regions and dilapidated inner city schools.

Eighty percent of South Africa's teachers have not received proper
training, and many of them have received inappropriate preparation for
their work. Our teachers are daily being confronted with new curricula and
policies without proper training and sufficient support.

Worldwide, teachers' salaries no longer reflect the importance of their
profession. Often teachers are paid late or only partially. A recent
example is the case in the Eastern Cape   involving several hundred
substitute teachers, which is on the verge of becoming a legal battle.

Our challenge is to ensure that teachers are fully equipped to understand
and communicate to children and adults the skills required to build more
sustainable livelihoods in a world in which technological change and
globalisation are continually changing the nature of work. And I want to
say ... [Time expired.]

Mr L M GREEN: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and members, I cannot say much
in a minute, but let me just start off by saying that we would like to
congratulate and honour our dedicated and committed teachers, all our
teachers, on World Teachers' Day. We need to lift the morale and integrity
of our educational system. We want to commend the good work that has been
done by the Minister of Education and his department but, of course, many
educational challenges still face our nation.

It is difficult to celebrate World Teachers' Day when the ratio of teacher
to pupils still averages about 1:40 in many of our schools. We still have a
problem of gangs or violence in our schools which results in little
educational activity going on at our schools.

It is time that we return to the basics of education and allow the teachers
to teach with dignity and pupils to learn with discipline.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the fifth of
October is set aside to remind governments and the public of the role of
teachers. They need to improve their status and working conditions, and
show appreciation for their work in preparing the next generation to take
their place in the world.

When one takes into account that the number of teachers in the world
exceeds 55 million, and that they serve over 1 billion students, it becomes
clear that these people need great and tender care from governments and the
public. These are, after all, the people who hold the future of our
children in their hands. One sometimes sits back to think about the
thankless job that the teachers are doing. When the learners fail, it is
the teacher who is to blame. When they pass, accolades go to their
grandparents and uncles from whom they inherited their intelligence.

In my life in the education sphere, I noticed that teachers differ. The
mediocre teacher tells, the good teacher explains, the superior teacher
demonstrates and the great teacher inspires. A teacher affects eternity,
and no one can tell where his influence stops.

It is said that one king called all the villagers together. Once they were
assembled, he asked them to give an account to the elders of the village on
what they were doing for the community in terms of their education.
Politicians, in their usual animated and charismatic manner, stated how
they brought potable water and electricity to the area. Engineers told how
they built roads and bridges. The doctors told how they healed the sick.
All other professionals gloated about their high-profile jobs. And the king
looked at the teacher and said, ``What about you?'' The teacher replied
proudly yet humbly, and said: I taught them all. This is the influence of
the teacher. Long live teachers, long live! [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, every single teacher in the
world has contributed to the continuous, dynamic and unique evolution of
the human race. It is established that over 55 million teachers worldwide
are currently grooming the hearts and intellects of approximately 1 billion
students to sustain and develop this intricate universe.

In South Africa, World Teachers' Day must not just be commemorated as any
annual event, but the status of teachers must be promoted and understood,
beyond the bounds of the conventional classroom. Teachers have the creative
gift and power to keep the beauty of freedom alive, strengthen the economy
and build a dignified political and social system.

Mr L M KGWELE: Mr Chairperson, hon members, our former President, Comrade
Nelson Mandela, captured the importance of education when he said:


  Education is the great engine of personal development. It is through
  education that the daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, that the
  son of a mineworker can become the head of the mine, that the child of
  farmworkers can become the president of a great nation. It is what we
  make out of what we have, not what we are given that separates one person
  from another.

As the ANC, we value and appreciate the contributions of teachers in the
development of individual learners' potential in all aspects, that is,
mental, social, physical, emotional and psychological, so that they can
become valuable, integrated and productive members of society.

World Teachers' Day reminds all of us of the role of teachers and the need
to improve their status and working conditions. Above all, it is an
opportunity to show appreciation for their work in preparing the next
generation to meet the challenges of the 21st century in order to function
efficiently in an ever-changing world.

The founding of the SA Council for Educators was a positive step in the
reconstruction and development of our education system, and the development
of the culture of learning and teaching in our sites of learning. The
founding of this body to regulate the profession is likely to inculcate a
sense of duty and responsibility among our educators, and help them develop
a professional attitude towards their learners. It will ensure that we
begin to move away from the externally regulated profession to self-
regulation and ownership of the profession by its own members.

It is worth noting that the resolution to establish this body was taken in
the Education Labour Relations Council which is supposed to deal with more
``union'' and ``professional matters''. What this tells us is that all
educators in this country are as interested in the dignity of their
profession as they are in their conditions of employment. There is no
contradiction between the two. In fact, the two can complement each other
very well.

The Sace can begin to establish in the minds of many that educators are
really worth the improvements they expect in their conditions of service,
while improved conditions of employment can enhance the sense of self-worth
among educators. It is also a coincidence that the SA Democratic Teachers'
Union also celebrates its 10th anniversary this week. On behalf of the ANC,
I wish to congratulate the first nonracial, nonsexist and democratic
teacher formation on their achievement. [Applause.] Their contribution to
the transformation of education, teacher unity and nonracialism should be
emulated by other formations.

Apart from Government, learners and parents also have a role to play in
supporting our teachers. Far too many reports of teachers being
disrespected litter the newspapers and other media reports. Teachers, who
are the engine in the process of developing the human resources of our
country, deserve to be respected and honoured on a daily basis. From
learners we expect nothing less than discipline, diligence and sheer hard
work to realise our objective of excellence and high achievement. The ANC
calls on all our learners to demonstrate this mood through regular and
practical school attendance, acceptable behaviour, showing respect to their
teachers and parents, and applying themselves to their education tasks.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I am certain that
all of us who have, at various stages, belonged to the challenging world of
education and enjoyed the high calling of teacher or educator will support
the sentiments expressed by all hon members on World Teachers' Day.

I am also certain that hon members will concur with the sentiment which
says: Once a teacher, always a teacher.

Debate concluded.

            LOCAL GOVERNMENT: MUNICIPAL STRUCTURES AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted and Bill, as amended, agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:25.
                                 ___________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

The Speaker:

1.    The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:


     Ad hoc Committee on Pan-African Parliament:

     Appointed: Benjamin, J; De Lange, J H (Alt); Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E
     (Alt); Lobe, M C; Lockey, D; Mahlangu, G L; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N;
     Mokaba, P R; Sithole, D J (Alt); Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B H; Yengeni, T
     S.

     Discharged: Doidge, G Q; Ebrahim, E I; Kalako, M V; Lekgoro, M K;
     Magazi, N M; Maphalala, M A; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Masithela,
     N H; Ncube, B N Z; Ntuli, B M; Ramotsamai, C M P.

2.    Ms N N Mapisa-Nqakula has been appointed as chairperson of the Ad hoc
     Committee on General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill with effect from 5
     October 2000.

3.    Ms G L Mahlangu has been appointed as chairperson of the Ad hoc
     Committee on Pan-African Parliament with effect from 5 October 2000.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Amendment Protocol on Trade in the Southern African Development
         Community (SADC), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendment Protocol.

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority
     for 1999-2000.

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy:
      
     Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity Regulator
     for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 1999-2000.

4.    The Minister of Health:


     Report of the Medical Bureau for Occupational Diseases for 1999-2000.


