---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 January 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-01-21
---

FRIDAY, 21 JANUARY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 10:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, welcome back to Parliament. Have a
happy new year, and may Africa have a good century.

Ms N V CINDI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the tragic loss of life at the Orkney mine in North West;

  (2) commends all those who battled so valiantly to save the lives of the
       surviving miners;

  (3) extends its condolences to all the family and loved ones of those who
       lost their lives so tragically; and

  (4) calls upon the mining industry to heed the calls of the National
       Union of Mineworkers to conduct research into the hazards of pillar
       mining.

[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the voters of South Africa who continue turning out in
       by-elections at local government level to express their democratic
       choice and, in doing so, have time after time shown confidence in the
       DP; and
  (2) expresses the hope that this will continue throughout the forthcoming
       year.

[Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the Minister of Education, Prof Kader Asmal, for his
       efforts to put right what is wrong in education; and

  (2) condemns the killing of teachers in the Eastern Cape which took place
       recently.

[Applause.]

Mnr J DURAND: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek met die
volgende sitting van die Huis namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) die nasionale sokker- en krieketspanne gelukwens met hul prestasies
       tot op hede; en

  (2) die spelers alle sukses toewens met hul wedstryde vandag en m√¥re.

[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J DURAND: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the national soccer and cricket teams on their
       achievements so far; and

  (2) wishes the players every success in their matches today and tomorrow.
[Applause.]]

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) acknowledges and gives serious consideration to the request of
       traditional leaders that Government clarify and define their role,
       functions and powers;

  (2) supports a call by traditional leaders for the establishment of a
       portfolio for traditional affairs and culture, to be placed under the
       Office of the Deputy President;

  (3) furthermore supports a call by traditional leaders for the
       introduction of an enabling Act that will grant them jurisdiction to
       decide over certain criminal and civil matters; and

     4) resolves to ensure that such legislation does not violate the
        provisions of the Constitution.

Prof S M MAYATULA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Minister of Education, Prof Kader Asmal, on 13 January
       published his department's plan - Tirisano or Working Together - to
       get education and training in South Africa on the road;

  (2) further notes that this will focus on HIV/Aids, staff
       professionalism, literacy, further education and the organisational
       effectiveness of the national and provincial education departments;

  (3) recognises that education in this country poses some of our most
       serious challenges in making South Africa competitive and productive
       in the world economy;

  (4) commends the Minister and MECs for their decisive action in dealing
       with problem schools since the start of the school year; and

  (5) calls on all teachers, learners and parents to support and promote
       this ground-breaking programme.

[Applause.]

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with regret the controversies in which Commissioner Selebi has
       been involved; and

  (2) trusts that they will now cease so that the commissioner will be able
       to pay full attention to the fight against crime.

[Interjections.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its shock at and condolences on the loss of property in the
       devastating fires in the Cape Peninsula and other areas;

  (2) expresses its appreciation for the courageous and detailed work done
       by the firefighters; and

  (3) hopes that they will be rewarded in the future.

Dr A S NKOMO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that Government is to substantially increase its spending on
       medical research by doubling the budgets of the Medical Research
       Council and its Aids vaccine development programme;

  (2) recognises that the substantial increase to the core funding of the
       MRC is the first to occur in 30 years;

  (3) acknowledges, in the words of Dr Makgoba, head of the MRC, that
       ``this represents a clear signal that the present Government
       recognises the critical link the MRC plays in national socioeconomic
       development, international competitiveness and national prosperity'';
       and

  (4) commends the Government for its investment in the future well-being
       of our nation.

[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with regret that a number of European Union countries retracted
       from their original position regarding the European Union free-trade
       agreement; and


  (2) appeals to all the respective role-players to honour the spirit of
       the original agreement and to implement the content thereof as soon
       as possible.
Mr S J LEEUW: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the inflation rate has fallen to a 30-year low and that
       interest rates continue to fall;

  (2) notes the confidence shown by the buoyant South African stock market
       and the predictions for increased economic growth and a further
       lowering of the inflation rate from a wide range of economic
       analysts, including the AHI and Morgan Stanley Dean Whitter; and

  (3) commends the Government and the Minister of Finance for guiding the
       economy through difficult world economic conditions so that we are
       poised to enter the new century with confidence and optimism.

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:
  That the House reaffirms its commitment to uphold and adhere to the
  Constitution and calls upon all parties, in particular the governing
  party, to do likewise.

Mr S B NTULI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent cowardly shooting of black bus commuters in
       Constantia Park, Pretoria, in which three passengers died and four
       more sustained injuries;

  (2) unreservedly condemns this heinous crime in the strongest possible
       terms;

  (3) urges the Department of Safety and Security, and the SA Police
       Service in particular, to speed up its investigation and bring the
       perpetrators to book;

  (4) conveys sincere condolences to all bereaved families;

  (5) calls upon all communities to assist the police by blowing the
       whistle on criminals; and

  (6) calls upon community leaders publicly to condemn cowardly acts like
       this that only serve to retard reconciliation and co-operation in
       South Africa.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its regret at the fact that the matriculation results for
       1999 were poor; and

  (2) urges all concerned to ensure that in the year 2000 there is a
       perceptible improvement because our country cannot afford to waste
       its human and material resources on failure.

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -
  (1) is of the opinion that the exclusive vehicle hire services contract
       between Imperial Auto Services and the Departments of Water Affairs
       and Forestry, Labour, Health and Transport will have a detrimental
       effect on services due to huge budgetary implications; and

  (2) undertakes to investigate this situation to ensure that previously
       disadvantaged communities will not be further disadvantaged by these
       contracts as a result of increased costs of services or diminished
       services.

Ms M C LOBE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent undignified internal squabbling amongst the
       leadership of the DP in Gauteng;


  (2) further notes the inability of the party to manage its party caucus
       in 1999, as evidenced by its divided voting on Bills and its
       confusion in committees;
  (3) believes that as the official opposition the DP is demeaning
       democracy through its poor management of its internal affairs, which
       has led to an internal investigation into allegedly fraudulent
       membership lists of DP branches; and

  (4) urges the DP to recognise that it can never hope to have a coherent
       party while it attempts to gain voters by abandoning the humanist
       principles on which it was based, appealing increasingly to right-
       wing voters fearful of transition to a democratic society.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay the imminent closure of the National Symphony
       Orchestra;

  (2) further notes the NSO's contribution to cultural enrichment and
       development in musical education in South Africa; and

  (3) calls on national Government to provide financial assistance to the
       NSO.

[Applause.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat daar nog geen inhegtenisnemings was met
       betrekking tot die bomaanvalle in die Wes-Kaap nie; en

     2) 'n dringende beroep doen op die Minister van Veiligheid en
        Sekuriteit om alles in sy vermo√´ te doen om toe te sien dat diegene
        aangekeer word wat daarvoor verantwoordelik was.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move
on the next sitting day on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that no arrests have yet been made in respect of the bomb
       attacks in the Western Cape; and

  (2) urgently calls on the Minister of Safety and Security to do
       everything in his power to ensure that those responsible for the
       attacks are apprehended.]

Ms M VERWOERD: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the resignation from politics of the UDM's former driving-
       force, Roelf Meyer, and the subsequent defection of a stream of other
       members from the UDM;


  (2) recognises that the almost weekly resignations of high-ranking
       members from the UDM since the last months of 1999, in conjunction
       with Mr Meyer's lack of confidence in that party, clearly indicate
       its complete demise;

  (3) acknowledges that this is due to sharp divisions within the UDM, its
       dismal performance in Parliament and its lack of coherent policy; and

  (4) calls on all South Africans committed to building a nonracial,
       democratic South Africa to join hands with the ANC.

[Applause.]

                              NATURAL DISASTERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House ‚Äì


  (1) notes with sadness the natural disasters, ranging from killer floods
       to out of control fires, that have struck the Western Cape, KwaZulu-
       Natal, the Eastern Cape and Northern Province in recent weeks;

  (2) expresses its sympathy and support to all the victims of these
       disasters;

  (3) commends the South African National Defence Force, the Police,
       emergency services and members of the public for their united action
       in fighting these life-threatening and life-wrecking catastrophes;
       and

  (4) calls on all South Africans to remain united in this time of crisis
       for many.

Agreed to.

                              HOURS OF SITTING

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move section 1 of the draft resolution printed in his name on the
Order Paper, as follows:
  That, notwithstanding Rule 23, the hours of sitting of the House on
  Tuesday, 25 January 2000, shall be as follows: 11:30 to adjournment.

However, I request that subsections 2(a) and 2(b) fall away.

Agreed to.

      RATIFICATION OF SPEAKER'S DECISION TO ESTABLISH AD HOC COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move the draft resolution printed in his name on the Order Paper,
as follows:


  That, in accordance with Rule 214(2), the Assembly ratifies the decision
  by the Speaker to establish an Ad hoc Committee on Report No 13 of the
  Public Protector.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                            (The late Mr A B Nzo)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the death on 13 January 2000 of former Minister of Foreign
       Affairs, Mr Alfred Nzo;

  (2) recognises that Mr Nzo devoted his life to the service of the people
       of South Africa;

  (3) believes that the contribution that Mr Nzo made to the transformation
       of South Africa to a democratic rights based society was
       immeasurable;

  (4) mourns the passing of one of South Africa's finest children, whose
       loss will be sorely felt; and

  (5) extends its heartfelt condolences to his family and loved ones.

Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon members, the people of South
Africa learnt with shock of the untimely departure of Comrade Alfred Nzo.

Comrade Nzo passed away exactly six months after the second democratic
elections in our country. He also passed away at a time when the ANC and
the people of South Africa were bracing themselves for the daunting
challenges of the new century, the African century.

He was born into a working class family in 1925. His father was a mine
clerk at Modderbee mine, which would be later converted into Modderbee
prison, where Comrade Nzo would later be incarcerated.

Comrade Nzo received a missionary education in the Eastern Cape. After
completing his matriculation certificate, he enrolled at the University of
Fort Hare and left the institution a year later. It was at Fort Hare that
Comrade Nzo became active in politics. He returned to the then Transvaal,
where he lived and worked in Alexandra township as a health inspector.
Comrade Nzo's daily exposure to the bad living conditions led him to be
politically active in the community of Alexandra. He was active in
organising the Defiance Campaign in the 1950s. As a volunteer of the
movement, he was involved in a campaign to interview the people about the
kind of society they would like to live in. It was this campaign that
culminated in the famous Congress of the People.

His talents and commitment to the ANC were quickly spotted, and in 1956 he
became the chairperson of the Alexandra branch of the ANC. In 1958 he was
voted into the regional and national executive committees of the ANC. It
was due to his political work that the people of Alexandra walked to work
every day for five months, protesting against high bus fares.

Comrade Nzo lost his job as a result of this political activity. He became
a full-time worker of the ANC. He also continued with his political work in
Alexandra although being fired in those days meant that one could lose the
permit to live in urban areas. Comrade Nzo was arrested several times and
was eventually sentenced to imprisonment for five months for not having a
residence permit.
When the apartheid security forces embarked on a clamp-down on the
liberation movement in the early 1960s, Comrade Nzo was placed under house
arrest. In June 1963, he was detained for a period of 238 days. In 1964 he
was ordered by the ANC to join the contingent of ANC leaders in exile and
to assist in rebuilding the ANC. He took up posts in various countries,
including Egypt, India, Zambia and Tanzania, where he represented the ANC.
At the Morogoro conference, Comrade Nzo was elected secretary-general of
the ANC, a position he held for 20 years. He became the longest-serving
secretary-general of the ANC.

Following the unbanning of the ANC, he was part of the ANC delegation that
participated in talks with the apartheid regime. After the first democratic
elections in 1994, Comrade Nzo became the first Minister of Foreign
affairs, a portfolio he used to ensure that our country occupied its
rightful place in international politics.

Comrade Nzo lived and died in struggle. His love for his country and his
people led him to adopt an unwavering commitment to the struggle for the
liberation of our people from apartheid colonialism. He was a tried and
tested leader of our movement and an ANC cadre committed to the attainment
of a free, nonracial, nonsexist and democratic South Africa. During the
dark days of apartheid repression, he was able to lead the movement,
together with Comrade Oliver Reginald Tambo and other ANC stalwarts, to
being a powerful force that was at the head of the struggle for liberation.

Despite harassment and prosecution by the evil forces of apartheid and the
hardship he endured as a result of the system of apartheid, Comrade Nzo
taught the young generation the importance of peace and reconciliation, the
need to forgive and continue the struggle for the reconstruction of our
country and the building of a new nation. He was a humble person, always
willing to listen to the opinions of others and patient to educate the
younger generation. He always listened attentively to attacks by opposition
parties and the media, but was never derailed or diverted from doing his
work diligently. His ability to master diplomatic work as the leader of the
ANC in exile and Minister of Foreign Affairs earned him the respect of the
international community.

His family, friends, comrades and the people of South Africa will miss
Comrade Nzo. The ANC joins the people of South Africa as they mourn the
untimely departure of this great hero of our land.

We vow that Comrade Nzo's name will never be forgotten by us and our
people. We will pick up his spear and continue the battle to achieve the
noble ideas for which he lived and died. We pledge that with our people
united behind the ANC's programme of democratic transformation of our
country, no force, no matter how powerful, will derail us from this
historic mission. [Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, the DP is very glad to associate itself and
all its supporters with this motion.

The late former Foreign Minister Alfred Nzo was someone the cartoonists
loved because of those droopy eyes of his, and they could play around with
his surname by putting in a lot of Zs and imply that he was very dozy. And
because the cartoonists loved him, I think very many people in South Africa
became fond of him as well. He was somebody who was a person, somebody in
that new Cabinet that one could recognise.

We had a joke which we all appreciated very much and this resulted from a
lunch which was given by the late Alfred Nzo for Mwalimu Nyerere. During
the course of this lunch, which was attended by my hon leader, Mr Nzo was
talking about toasts. He said: ``It is time for toasts.'' As he stood up to
propose a toast to Mwalimu the waitress came in through the door carrying a
rack of toast for him, and, because he was so imperturbable, it just did
not put him off. Obviously, he was the quintessential diplomat.

We knew him as a man of integrity. Certainly, from 1994 onwards, in our
dealings with him, there was never a case in which we, or the public, for
that matter, felt that he was untruthful. He had an enormous commitment to
the liberation struggle. Because of the role which he played before 1994,
he had unique access to leaders in Africa and the Third World, and because
of that he was able to open doors for our country.

Despite the imperturbability and the reputation, I, personally, always
found him to be extremely efficient and accessible. I remember making
representations to him on a number of occasions, and in every case he was
well briefed, he knew what was going on and he was ready to help. I was
told one Friday night: ``Please phone the Minister's office early on
Saturday morning. This is the number, and we will find him for you.'' I
rang and I said: ``Good morning, I am looking for the Minister.'' A quiet
voice said: ``You have found him.'' That is how my dealings were with him,
and everybody in my party had appreciation for him.

We think that Abe Lincoln's words ``with charity towards all, and malice
towards none'' sum up the late Alfred Nzo. We feel for his party comrades,
his friends, his family and all those who loved him, and we also mourn our
late Minister. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Speaker, Neil Hart, in his
book The Foreign Secretary, writes:


  Of all the great offices of the state, the premiership alone excepted,
  the foreign secretaryship has been the most demanding and the most
  desirable. The great Lord Salisbury believed that of all the offices in
  the British Empire, only these two were beyond the powers of men of good
  and average ability.

Now the question is: Did we, as South Africans, the media and the public,
accord Mr Nzo the same respect and status? In hindsight, maybe we should
have. But then we will leave that for posterity to judge.

On behalf of the IFP and its president, Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi, who is
also the Minister of Home Affairs and who has known Mr Alfred Nzo for many
years, long before he became the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
democratic South Africa in 1994, I wish to convey to this honourable House
our sincere condolences to, firstly, the family and close friends of the
late Alfred Nzo on their loss of a father figure and a loved one.

Secondly, our condolences go to the ANC and its president, Mr Thabo Mbeki,
for the loss of a comrade-in-arms. Lastly, our condolences go to the South
African Government and the people of South Africa on the passing away of a
trailblazer of what was often debated in this House as an unorthodox
foreign policy for South Africa - a policy which inevitably attracted
international adversaries and admirers alike as Mr Nzo steadfastly put
South Africa as a reconciling cradle for the East and the West, and as he
also put the African continent as a priority for economic development,
conflict resolution and peace.

In The Elegy on Edgar Brookes, Alan Paton asks some of the fundamental
questions which, I believe, are also pertinent to our late honourable Nzo.
I quote:


  Tell me what road are you going now? Tell me what words are you speaking
  now? Tell me what men will go with you? Tell me what kind of cross do you
  want?

Then he concludes:


  Do not trouble to report to me. I know your answers already. But when you
  report to the Lord, offer this pen with your sword.

[Applause.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, during Julius Caesar's burial, Mark
Anthony said: ``I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.'' On behalf of
the New NP, I would like to say: I have not come to bury Alfred Nzo, I have
come to honour him.

Alfred Nzo was a politician and a gentleman. He always treated political
opponents with respect and never allowed differences in policy to end in
opponents being enemies.

As a Minister of Foreign Affairs, he established South Africa as a power of
note, not only in the region, but also on the whole continent. He also
played an important role in making Africa a nuclear-free zone. Under his
guidance the need for the promotion of democracy and human rights took root
on the continent, without which, of course, the whole idea of an African
renaissance would remain a pipe dream. We salute him as a worthy opponent.

We associate ourselves fully with the content of the motion before the
House, and we convey our condolences to his wife, his family and to his
party. [Applause.]

Mne M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, re re mahloko go
mokgatlo wa ANC; mahloko go Moporesidente wa ANC le go
Motlat≈°amoporesidente, mahloko go MaAfrika-Borwa ka moka, ao elego wona
mathomomayo a African renaissance. Mokgopo wo mogolo o wele, dithaga t≈°a
lla bo≈°ogo≈°ogo! (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, we wish to extend our
heartfelt condolences to the ANC, the President of the ANC, the Deputy
President, and all South Africans, who are indeed the point of departure
for the African renaissance. ``A very big tree that used to be a reliable
source of food, nesting and shelter for birds has fallen down and the birds
are now plunged into a state of restlessness and confusion!‚Äô‚Äô]

On behalf of the president of the UDM, the structures and members of the
UDM, one and all, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the
bereaved family of the late Comrade Alfred Nzo, an ANC stalwart, a cadre
who spent most of his life in the liberation struggle, fighting for the
emancipation of millions of the oppressed people in the former apartheid
South Africa, the first Minister of Foreign Affairs in the new democratic
Government who presented South Africans with a clear vision and mission of
building bridges of peace, harmony and political stability in the SADC
countries, Africa and, indeed, in the international community, a true
patriot and democrat.

He was not like his predecessors in the apartheid regime who today seem to
be hunting with the hounds and running with the hares, and who were, no
doubt, prophets and protagonists of doom and oppression. However, today
they are claiming, from somewhere in the corridors or backyards of
Pretoria, to have contributed much to the freedom of this country.

I met Comrade Alfred Nzo back in 1990. That was after the unbanning of the
ANC and other liberation movements and the release of political prisoners.
He was then the secretary-general of the ANC. He was among the leaders who
established the ANC-led Patriotic Front in Durban, which paved the way for
the Kempton Park multiparty negotiations.

Re tlo mo gopola le diketapele, baetapele, dipulamadibogo le
borat≈°hat≈°hat≈°ha ba temokrasi go leno la Afrika Borwa. Balapa la gagwe,
meloko le metswalle, mokgatlo wa ANC le mekgatlo ka moka, Mmu≈°o le rena ka
moka, a re homot≈°egeng, re tshedi≈°egeng. [Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi
paragraph follows.)

[He will be remembered alongside authentic leaders who pioneered and
championed the cause of democracy in South Africa. May his family,
relatives, the ANC and all their structures, the Government and all of us
be comforted and consoled. [Applause.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, Ministers and members,
the ACDP extends its sincere condolences to the family, friends and loved
ones of former Minister Alfred Nzo. It is indeed a sad day for us as MPs to
start this parliamentary session with the news of the passing away of
former Minister Nzo.

We also extend our condolences to the ANC, which has lost a dear friend, a
committed and respected community leader and a man who, as a Minister, made
a valuable contribution to the building of our nation.

May the peace of God be with the family and friends of the late Alfred Nzo
during this time of sorrow and loss. Politics often divides us, but when a
respected man and a devoted community leader such as Alfred Nzo passes
away, we all unite in mourning.

The ACDP fully supports this motion. [Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, ek praat namens die VF, en ek is ook
gevra om namens mnr Aucamp, leier van die AEB, te praat aangesien hy by 'n
portefeuljekomitee betrokke is. Daar is vir almal 'n tyd om gebore te word
en 'n tyd om te sterwe. By geboorte is daar vreugde; by afsterwe is ons
almal treurig en voel ons hartseer.

Daarom wil ek graag namens hierdie twee partye ons innige simpatie betuig
met die familie van die afgestorwe mnr Nzo. Ons wil hulle sterkte toewens,
en ons hoop dat hulle sy dood vinnig sal kan verwerk en die pad vorentoe
weer sal kan aanpak.

Wanneer 'n openbare figuur soos mnr Nzo egter te sterwe kom, iemand wat 'n
groot rol gespeel het, wat ho√´ aansien onder sy mense gehad het, wat sy
mense gedien het so goed hy kon, wat sy ideaal getrou bevorder het en wat
tot op 'n ho√´ ouderdom aktief in diens was ...(Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, I am speaking on behalf of the FF, and I
have also been asked to speak on behalf of Mr Aucamp, the leader of the
AEB, as he is involved in a portfolio committee. For everyone there is a
time to be born and a time to die. At a birth there is joy; at a death we
are all sad and full of sorrow.

For that reason, on behalf of these two parties, I would like to convey our
sincere condolences to the family of the late Mr Nzo. We want to wish them
strength, and we trust that that they will be able to come to terms with
his passing quickly and that they will once again be able to tackle the
road ahead.

However, when a public figure like Mr Nzo passes away, someone who has
played a great role, who was held in high esteem among his people, who
served his people as well as he could, who faithfully promoted his ideals
and who remained in service to an advanced age ...]

... then many more than just the family mourn and all decent South Africans
forget about party-political differences. We extend condolences, not only
to the family, but also to the people he served. This I say on behalf of
these two parties.

The memories that all treasure of this man, acknowledging his service, his
loyalty, his perseverance and his dedication to his cause and to his
people, will remain examples to his followers for generations to come.

We fully associate ourselves with the motion of condolence. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, hon members, very often people speak of a
great giant, and Mr Nzo was one. He was unassuming, yet focused on what was
at hand. While people talked and wrote about him, he went about what a
Minister of Foreign Affairs has to do to forge links with other countries.

As the first Minister of Foreign Affairs in the democratic South Africa, Mr
Nzo did his country proud. He succeeded in integrating officials of the
former independent states into his department without breaking hearts. One
recalls when this son of Africa led a delegation to the United Nations to
present his credentials to see to the readmission of this country to the
family of nations. What a solemn occasion this was!

Thanks to his dedication to the cause, our country had established
diplomatic relations with 164 countries by March 1999. Over the five years
of his term as Minister of Foreign Affairs, South Africa was visited by 73
heads of state or government, while our then President visited 83
countries. All these are the results of this unassuming giant. He was a
mover, a negotiator par excellence. He will surely be missed.

On behalf of the UCDP I express condolences to the Nzos, the next of kin
and the ANC.

Bantu bakuthi xolani, akuhlanga lungehliyo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Be consoled
people. This is not something that never happens. [Applause.]]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, I rise to convey sincere, heartfelt
sympathies to the family of Mr Nzo and to the ANC. An old friend of mine
once said when he was about to leave: ``I do not know what is going to
happen to this place. When I leave, this building might come down, because
my roots are everywhere under all the buildings here.‚Äô‚Äô

One has that sense when we have to say goodbye to an old veteran like the
late Alfred Nzo. One has the feeling that this building might come down,
because his roots are below it. His roots are below Shell House. His roots
are below South Africa.

We have come here to salute a real person, motho, motho, gentlemen. We have
come here to bid goodbye to a negotiator, somebody who has negotiated
successfully for this country. We have come here to bid goodbye to somebody
who has fought for this country. Many people who walk the streets and enjoy
freedom can easily forget that people like Nzo gave nearly all their lives
to fight for the freedom of this country. We mourn his passing and we just
want to express our sympathies to Mrs Nzo and the family, to the ANC and to
the nation. We hope that God will raise another Nzo to take his place.
[Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, it is sad when a country loses its great
sons. With them goes great experience.

Comrade Nzo was a great leader. His devotion and his service to the society
of South Africa will always be remembered. He left behind great memories,
he led the way we have to walk now.

The MF expresses its deepest condolences to our comrade Alfred Nzo's family
and also to the ANC. [Applause.]

Mna M A MANGENA: Mohumagadi Spikira, legatong la Azapo le baFA, bao ba re
kgopet≈°ego go ba bolelela, re re mahloko go ba gaNzo; mahloko go ANC;
mahloko set≈°habeng sa gabo rena ka moka ge re lahleget≈°we ke mogale yo.

Comrade Alfred Nzo o gafile bophelo bja gagwe ka moka gore a tle a ≈°omele
set≈°haba; a lokolle lefase le la rena kgatelelong. Bophelo bja gagwe ka
moka e bile motlhala go rena ka moka wa go laet≈°a gore gabotse boikgafo le
go ≈°omela set≈°haba sa geno ke eng. Re holofela gore motlhala wo a re
tlogelet≈°ego wona re tlo o latela ka moka ga rena le gore re tlo phela
bophelo bjo botelele gomme ra hlokagala re ≈°omela set≈°haba sa gabo rena.

Ge go hlokaget≈°e motho-fela re a lla; efela ge go hlokaget≈°e mogale, re a
bina gomme ra keteka, e le ge re leboga bophelo bja gagwe bjo bobotse le
bogale bjo a bo bont≈°hit≈°ego. Comrade Nzo bja gagwe bophelo o bo phedile,
gomme le ya gagwe tema o e kgathile, a be a e wet≈°a. Re re anke a robale ka
kgotso gomme le balapa la gabo ba kgotsofale, ba homot≈°ege. [Legofsi.]
(Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, on behalf of Azapo and our colleagues in
the FA, who have asked us to speak on their behalf on this matter, we wish
to extend our deepest sympathies and heartfelt condolences to the bereaved
family of Alfred Nzo, to the ANC and to all the people of South Africa, on
the passing away of this comrade-in-arms.

Comrade Nzo dedicated his entire life to the liberation struggle, fighting
for the emancipation of the oppressed people of our country. His life was
an example of what is meant by a meaningful sacrifice to one's country. We
trust that the footprints he has left will be an encouragement to all of
us, and that we too shall strive for the good cause of our people and
country until we pass away.

It has become normal procedure that whenever an ordinary person has passed
away, we are plunged into great sorrow as we mourn his or her loss.
However, if a cadre such as Comrade Nzo has fallen, we need to dance,
ululate and celebrate in honour of his tireless contribution to our common
cause, as well as for the brevity he has shown in his living years. Comrade
Nzo has lived his life, and has played and completed his part very well.
May he rest in peace, and may his family be consoled.]
Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.
               PREFERENTIAL PROCUREMENT POLICY FRAMEWORK BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, today we table in this
House the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill. This Bill is part
of the commitment that we made to the people of this country when we
drafted the Constitution four years ago.

Section 217 of the Constitution requires a system for procurement which is
fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost effective. These
principles must form the core of Government's approach to procurement. Yet
the Constitution also requires of us to effect, in legislation, a framework
which allows organs of state to establish a system of preferences. This
Bill addresses this requirement in the Constitution by trying to strike a
balance between the concept of value for money on the one hand and a set of
values on the other which includes, clearly, the need to address the vast
inequalities that obtain from our past.

Firstly, the Bill defines organs of state to which the framework will
apply. Secondly, it establishes the parameters for the preferences. For
contracts with a value above a prescribed amount a maximum of 10 points may
be allocated for specific goals. In this instance a maximum of 90 points
must be allocated for price. For contracts with a value equal to or below
this prescribed amount up to 20 points may be allocated for specific goals,
while a maximum of 80 points is allocated to price.

Thirdly, the Bill defines both the beneficiaries and the objectives of such
preferences. These include those historically disadvantaged by race, gender
or disability, and implementing the programmes of the Reconstruction and
Development Programme. To ensure greater transparency and accountability in
the tender process, these goals and points allocated to each must be
specified in the invitation to submit tenders.

Fourthly, the integrity of the preference framework is of paramount
importance. To ensure that these preferences are not open to abuse, the
Bill provides for any contract awarded on account of false information
furnished by the tenderer in order to secure preference points, to be
cancelled at the sole discretion of the organ of state without prejudice to
any other remedies that that organ of state may have. In other words, we
will not tolerate practices such as fronting.

Fifthly, the Bill allows the Minister of Finance to exempt an organ of
state from any or all of its provisions in the interests of national
security, where the likely tenderers are international suppliers or where
it is deemed to be in the public interest. This Bill will be supported by a
set of regulations which will be published for comment in the national
Gazette and provincial gazettes. These regulations will include, among
others, the formulae to be applied and other requirements set out in tender
policies including tax clearance certificates.

It is important that those who benefit from tenders awarded by Government
comply with the letter and spirit of the legislation passed in this
Parliament. This Bill is only a step forward in the process of procurement
reform. The process to ensure that the extensive procurement of goods and
services is compliant with all the provisions of section 217 of the
Constitution is ongoing.

This Bill has been considered by various committees at national and
provincial level over the past two months. It has been substantially
redrafted and benefited from the insights of members of Parliament, the
NCOP, provincial legislatures and the public as a whole. I would like to
express my sincere appreciation to the members of the ad hoc committee and
in particular the joint chairs, Ms Barbara Hogan and Ms Qedani Mahlangu,
for their hard work.

I have pleasure in proposing the adoption of the Preferential Procurement
Policy Framework Bill. [Applause.]

Ms B A HOGAN: Madam Speaker, this Bill, as the Minister has just said, went
through an enormous, vast and exhaustive process. It went to the provinces,
to committees in the provinces, to hearings in the provinces and to
hearings at national level. We had consultations at national level and in
the provinces. If ever there was a Bill that had extensive national input,
this Bill is certainly it.

It has been a very useful exercise. I think it has taught us the necessity
of consulting as widely as possible, and it has also brought, very
valuably, the experience the provinces have had with regard to tendering
procedures in the period since 1994 and, in particular, in relation to
preferential procurement. This, too, has informed the amendments which we
are bringing to this House.

Some of the amendments are incidental and some of them are substantial. I
would like to speak to a couple of amendments which I think fundamentally
shape this Bill. The first is the definition of the organ of state.
Preferential procurement in terms of this Bill will be applicable to
Government proper: Government departments, provincial departments,
municipalities and constitutional institutions.

In addition to that, the Minister has the power to designate other
institutions - almost quasi-state institutions such as parastatals and
museums. There are over 700 such quasi-state institutions. He will have the
power over time to designate which of those should fall within the
parameters of the Bill. This is necessary because of the particular
statutory legislation which founded these institutions.

However, if one looks at the parastatals, we are talking about the
necessity for more flexibility for the parastatals. In terms of their
procurement policy they are, after all, institutions which are there to
operate with a commercial motive. So there is flexibility within this Bill.
It is not a draconian Bill, which immediately draws everybody into the
framework. There will be a careful sifting through on that process.

Equally, the Minister has exemption powers. It was pointed out during the
hearings that, for instance, in Defence procurement, very often there are
only international suppliers and they obviously cannot be subject to these
preferential procurement policies. Therefore the Minister, in those cases,
will have the powers to exempt them. So there is flexibility within this
Bill, although the intention of the Government is surely to secure
preferential procurement, particularly for those who have been
disadvantaged in previous economic regimes.

We have another important addition, which arose out of the very vocal
submissions that were made to us. As hon members will recall, the initial
Bill said that 10 additional points could be granted to a tenderer on the
grounds of affirmative action, if one wants to put it in short terms. Many
representations were made to us in this regard. The considerations were
particularly price considerations, concerning the fact that the person who
would win the tender would be the person who would give the lowest price.
In considering that, we therefore have proposed an amendment which says
that above a certain amount those 10 additional points will prevail. Below
a certain amount 20 additional points can be allocated. This is to allow
for the entry of small and medium enterprises into the tendering process.

However, on the other hand, as we have pointed out, we have to measure
delivery and the cost of delivery against the economic empowerment of
people who submit tenders. Therefore, I believe that we have attempted to
address the complaints that were coming to us in a fairly measured way, by
adding on the 20 points below a certain amount.

Those are some of the major, I think, amendments which have been made which
in some way are giving some guidance to our procurement policy. But the
Bill states, and the Constitution states, that this Bill is a framework. It
is not actually a policy. And the Bill states that organs of state must
determine a preferential procurement policy.

What do we mean by a policy for preferential procurement? My submission is
that a policy for preferential procurement cannot be drawn up without a
full understanding of what we mean by black economic empowerment, what we
mean by empowerment of women and disability. Without that common
understanding, the tender boards can have very little direction on how they
are supposed to apply the framework which is enunciated in this Bill. Let
me give members an example. Many people argued that one should qualify in
terms of preferential procurement if there is a 100% black ownership or
significant black ownership.

We are aware in terms of the debate about black economic empowerment that,
in a sense, we have gone beyond the debate that black economic empowerment
only means equity ownership. We have learnt through experience both at
national and provincial level that only taking equity ownership into
account means that this often leads to fronting, where as someone called it
in the committee, ``renting a black'' becomes the issue. To have the right
face or the right women on the committee was the only necessity. We are
talking about far more fundamental conceptualisations of black economic
empowerment. We are talking about managerial empowerment. We are talking
about a whole range of issues here that has to inform our tendering policy.
Furthermore, a question was raised from some quarters. We had the demand
that there should only be 100% black ownership. Now, if one talks about
what our long-term vision of the economy is, are we then saying that we
want white companies and black companies? Obviously, this is not what we
are saying. We are saying that companies must reflect the demographics of
this country. We are not simply talking about, in a very simplistic way,
dividing companies between black ownership and white ownership. It is a far
more fundamental issue.

This leads me to another fear that was consistently raised by various
parties in the committee, and that is a question of what happens to white
entrepreneurs. Does this eliminate white entrepreneurs? Are they put at a
disadvantage? The point that I want to make is that this Bill is, firstly,
aimed at being inclusive. It is about bringing people who were never
allowed into the tendering process, into the tendering process. So, to say
that it is exclusive is wrong. It is actually redressing a previous
exclusivity, by making it inclusive. [Interjections.]

However, the question then arises: Does this inclusivity over time mean
that whites get excluded? Of course not. We are not talking about 100%
black ownership. We are talking about creative engagements. We are talking
about bringing forth the full entrepreneurial skills and abilities of all
our people in different partnerships and different arrangements that
reflect the demographics of this country, but certainly unleash the
entrepreneurial and job creating potential of our economy.

Certainly, this Bill is designed to grow the economy and to assist small
entrepreneurs and medium-sized entrepreneurs to benefit from state
procurement policies. It is not designed to simply, and in a very arbitrary
way, say: Blacks will have access and whites will not have access. That is
certainly not the intention of this Bill. Certainly, in the regulations and
in the policies which the organs of state develop in terms of procurement
policy, I would assume that these would be the issues that we have to deal
with.

Finally, I wish to say that procurement policy is not the only mechanism to
assist small and medium enterprises to develop in this country. We are very
aware that there are a number of state practices that militate against
small and medium enterprises. When they complete a tender many small and
medium enterprises are only paid nine months after the completion of a
contract. That throws them straight into bankruptcy. The state has to be
far more responsive to these enterprises. Again, there are a number of
changes which have to be brought about which can assist small and medium
enterprises to fulfil their mandates better.

Finally, with regard to the question of delivery, it is absolutely
essential that delivery continues. The state is going to be firm on the
issue that preferential procurement does not mean inferior procurement. In
many instances we have already seen that black tenderers have delivered far
better than previous incumbents, and the intention is both to maintain
standards and to deliver to the poorest of the poor through a preferential
procurement policy that is enlightened, and to assist those who were
previously discriminated against. [Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, among the most important challenges facing
South Africa are poverty and inequality in our society. Simply removing
statutory racial discrimination is not enough. We cannot expect people who
have suffered impediments for decades to be able to compete and prosper
without taking some deliberate steps to enable them to do so.

Hence the Constitution provides for some carefully defined deviations from
its equality provisions. One of these deviations is contained in section
217, which is the one dealing with procurement. Subsection (1) of that
section provides the basis for procurement and requires that contracts for
goods and services must be in accordance with a system which is fair,
equitable, transparent, competitive and cost effective.

The next two subsections make provision for exemptions to this basic rule
and require Parliament to prescribe an enabling framework within which
preferential procurement can be implemented. They provide for general,
undefined categories, such as local content, which entitle people to
preference, and specifically mention persons disadvantaged by unfair
discrimination.

The DP believes it is desirable to assist certain categories of people, but
that circumstances will differ widely. These variations will include the
nature and financial position of an organ of state, the type of goods and
services being procured, and the profit margins normally made on the goods
and services being procured.

South Africa needs a growing economy, which will have to include a thriving
small and medium business sector if it is to be sustainable. This will and
can only happen if those disadvantaged by unfair discrimination are able to
play a major role.

When one looks at addressing the challenges of poverty and inequality,
action taken in some circumstances addresses both the problems of
inequality and poverty. However, on other occasions one has to make a
choice as to whether addressing poverty or addressing inequality should
take priority as they may be in conflict. Procurement policies can fall
into this category.

The Minister, in his meeting with the portfolio committee, pointed out the
need for a balance between empowerment and efficiency, and added that the
issue of value is central. Having said that, one readily acknowledges and
welcomes the fact that many new businesses are as or more efficient than
their more established competitors and are able to compete on equal terms.
It is for these reasons that the DP was delighted that its view prevailed
and substantial changes were made to the Bill at the last minute, which has
enormously increased its flexibility and ability to deal with different
circumstances. [Interjections.]

We did not support the ANC view that the same policy should be applied to
all organs of state in respect of all tenders, irrespective of the goods
and services required. For example, the DP would consider that when one was
buying exercise books for schoolchildren and did not have enough money, one
would give priority to maximising the number of books one obtained, rather
than attempt to empower some disadvantaged suppliers by paying a premium
price and so getting fewer books for those children.

Also, a bankrupt local authority would need to give priority to obtaining
goods and services at the lowest possible price. A policy of one-size-fits-
all would not be appropriate. One has to achieve a balance between the
needs of the poor to obtain goods and services, such as housing, education
and health, and the desirable aim of encouraging small and medium
businesses, particularly those run by people disadvantaged by unfair
discrimination, be that on the basis of race, gender or disability.

The DP does have reservations in respect of this Bill. First of all, we
have some concerns about the constitutionality of some aspects of the Bill.
These concern some of the ministerial discretions provided for and the
qualification for disadvantaged persons. The legal advisers in the
committee indicated that they were satisfied that that was not a problem,
and we trust that their opinion is correct.

We have a concern that the clause providing for the Minister to grant
exemptions contains, as one of the reasons, the expression ``if it is in
the public interest''. This is rather vague, but we accept that it is
difficult to define all the circumstances in which an exemption may be
desirable, and the committee was advised that the Minister could be
required by a court of law to justify his exemption as being in the public
interest if it were challenged.

A third reservation we had was that we believed that new legislation, which
was untried and aimed at achieving certain goals, should be reviewed from
time to time. One needs to ask whether it is working and whether a balance
is being achieved, or whether it has been abused, for example, by fronting
and enabling people to circumvent the intentions of the Bill. The DP
accepts that the parliamentary portfolio committees can, and should, review
many pieces of legislation from time to time and require the relevant
Minister or department to report on whether the legislation is working
satisfactorily or not. However, one must caution that, in practice,
committees allocate very little time for this responsibility, and the
danger always exists that that monitoring may seldom take place.

In addition, there is the question of whether we are going to reach the
correct targets. The Minister has used the analogy of helping a baby learn
to walk and pointed out that at some stage the baby needs to be able to
discard the walking ring and stand on its own two feet. In terms of this
legislation, the questions arise of who should qualify and how often they
should be entitled to the preferences provided for in the Bill.

The DP believes that the preferences should be aimed at small and medium
businesses which are not already firmly established and prospering. The
targets should not be established, highly profitable and successful
businesses, irrespective of who the owners of those businesses might be.
For this reason, the DP did not support the addition of the word
``historically'' to qualify unfair disadvantage in clause 2(1)(d).

If people, to their credit, have succeeded in overcoming their historic
disadvantage, they should not be the beneficiaries of these preferences, as
one is then addressing neither inequality nor poverty. On the contrary, one
is continuing to disadvantage other disadvantaged persons, because they
will not be able to compete effectively with those firms which are already
successful. In addition, we must never forget that paying 11% or 25% more,
means fewer houses or fewer schoolbooks for the poor.

Secondly, the DP believes that there need to be restraints on particular
persons or businesses receiving preferences over and over again. However,
objective criteria, which are contained in clause 2(1)(f), can be used to
prevent this from happening.

Finally, in respect of the correct targets, the DP believes that there
should be a ceiling on the value of tenders, because if one is capable of
contracting and tendering for tenders running into tens or hundreds of
millions of rands, one can hardly claim to be a struggling small or medium
business.

We believe that this Bill is socially and economically desirable and is
required by the Constitution. We did not agree with the conformity
previously required, but although we do have some reservations, we believe,
on balance, it has a good chance of achieving the desired objectives that I
have outlined.

The DP will therefore be supporting the Bill, and I hope that the Minister
will take care to ensure that the regulations he promulgates are realistic
and workable. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Speaker, the IFP will be supporting this Bill. We will
be supporting this Bill, even though we, as with everyone else, do not know
if it is going to produce more positive than negative results. In an
essential way it is much like the situation which existed when the new
labour legislation was passed in this House in 1998. Our support was
something of an act of faith. Faith that once implemented, the effects of
the new legislation would be monitored and that amendments would be made
should it, on one hand, not achieve its desired effects and, on the other
hand, cause undesired effects which become too costly. I think that recent
developments on that front - on the labour front - suggest that our faith
is being rewarded.

The desired effects I referred to regarding the Preferential Procurement
Policy Framework Bill are, of course, those that section 217 of the
Constitution intends when instructing the occurrence of the Bill. This, as
alluded to by previous speakers, is a desire to effect some correction in
the composition of the private-sector business space in the country, and it
seeks to achieve this by offering enhanced opportunities for categories
within the business sector which are today disadvantaged through the denial
of opportunities in the past. If the Bill has the methods and formulae
right then these desired effect are altogether possible. In addition, there
could be some positive economic spin-offs through a broadening of the
productive base and the stimulation of competition and job creation
possibilities that comes from an enlarging, small business sector.

However, there are the possible undesired effects that this Bill could give
rise to which, in the main, would arise from the interventions and
manipulations that it imposes within the macroeconomy. International
thinking warns us against such approaches, especially those that meddle in
price mechanisms. But as we agree, we in this country, because of our
special circumstances, have to take that risk.

However, what unwanted, undesirable effects could there be from this
exercise, which contrives to shift business from the big and more
established sector to the small and less established sector? What
distortions, what disincentives and what costs would the Bill cause if has
wrongly estimated critical business propensities and business behavioural
tendencies? I will not go into such possibilities, but I will repeat our
contention that no one can be sure what this Bill, once enacted, will or
not achieve.

What might have helped our committee's deliberations to be a little more
considered and constructive would have been the availability of a lot more
relevant information. The availability of information such as the sectoral
and rand value breakdown of the state's tender business, the established
operating margins of industries typical to those sectors and some research
indicators of small, black business activity within those sectors, would
have been useful. This would have gone some way towards improving our
understanding of the desirable and undesirable possibilities I have been
referring to.

Regretfully, the department did not volunteer such information to support
the rationale they formulated into the Bill. It seems that under the time
pressures we were subjected to, no one in the committee had had the time to
undertake that type of research. In a similar vein - and in retrospect -
perhaps the active participation of the Department of Trade and Industry in
the committee's discussions would have been useful. They must have some
relevant insights and information which might have helped us in our
contemplation of the evasive future consequences of the Bill.

The absence of little besides committee members' notional appreciations and
theoretical understandings caused us to spend many hours in the realms of
speculation, in particular when it came to methods and formulae upon which
the preference is to be given. This, together with a reluctance of some to
accept the inherent unpredictability of this type of corrective
legislation, saw us spending so much of our time entertaining imaginary
devils and ghosts in the Bill's detail.

However, notwithstanding this, I would like to commend the hon Hogan and
the hon Mahlangu for the purposeful way in which they drove the process
forward. The process, at the end of the day - as has been said - did
achieve some very useful amendments.

Using our general understandings, our instincts and our broad fear of
pertinent proportions, the IFP's sense is that the criteria for preference
which the Bill provides should arrive close to the critical balance of
effects which is necessary to take business away from the traditional
tenderers and to give it to the targeted emerging small business sector,
with minimum harm to the former and maximum gain to the latter.

But as hinted upfront, our commitment to the Constitution and what it asks
us to do must go beyond the simple production of this new law by the
required date of 4 February 2000. More than that, it asks us to try to
achieve a particular development in the country which is important to the
national interest. Given all the uncertainty about the Bill's future
effectiveness, we owe it to the Constitution to ensure that, within a
realistic timeframe, the desired developments are indeed being achieved;
and if not, then we owe it to the Constitution to note such failure and to
amend the legislation until it does what is required of it. And here we
would agree with the hon Ken Andrew.

This will require a periodic assessment of the new Act's impact by the
department. Such assessments will need to go beyond the monitoring of just
the simple statistical trends which emerge from such monitoring. There will
need to be an investigated dimension which exposes the devious and
manipulative practices which will inevitably be attempted. The
possibilities for new variations of fronting and price collusion will need
to be curbed if we are to get a true picture of the Bill's effectiveness
and to make correct amendments, if necessary.

With our understanding that the Minister will adopt such an approach, we
support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr N M NENE: Madam Speaker, Deputy President of the Republic of South
Africa and hon members, the Bill before us today is one of the most crucial
ones in realising our goal of a better life for all. The exclusion of a
section of our people from the mainstream of the economy did not happen by
accident, but by discriminatory legislation which now has to be undone by
putting in place mechanisms and policies that will address these
imbalances.

In its preamble, the Bill provides that it will give effect to section
217(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. This it does
by, inter alia, providing a prescribed formula of allocating points when
the tender process is being administered. This formula proposes that 90
points are for the price component of the tenders which are above a
prescribed amount, and 10 points for the other elements, that is the local
content, RDP principles, historical disadvantage, disability and so on. For
contracts below the prescribed amount, 80 points are allocated for the
price and 20 points for the other elements.

This goes a long way to address the concerns of a number of organisations
that made submissions during our public hearings. As may be expected, the
perpetrators of this ghastly situation, which the ANC-led Government seeks
to address, are not too happy about it. Their argument is none other than
the cost factor. In the 90/10 formula the premium, which is the cost to the
state, is 11,1%, and in the 80/20 the cost is 25%; and that we feel is
fair, especially in the light of the fact that Government has a
responsibility to affirm the people who were deliberately and unfairly
discriminated against by the apartheid system.

The proposed Bill fully recognises the cost-effectiveness factor as
enshrined in the Constitution. Therefore the element of price remains the
dominant factor. We believe that this Bill will enable the SMMEs to get
into the mainstream of our economy. For the small contractors the 90/10
formula was really a tall order, and the 80/20 is, to some extent, quite
enabling for them.

Since the Bill is only a framework, we would have recommended that the
formula be in the regulations rather than in the Bill itself. The ANC fully
supports this Bill and urges all nonracial parties to support the Bill in
order to realise our dream of speedy delivery of a better life for all our
people. We also would like to urge the architects of this unfair system to
become part of the process that seeks to redress what has benefited them so
much in the past. [Applause.]

Adv D P A SCHUTTE: Madam Speaker, it is a great privilege for me to take
part in this debate because it is, in fact, the first debate of the new
millennium in this House. I would like to briefly refer to the economic
imperatives of the new millennium, because I believe they impact on this
Bill.

This new millennium has started with a new world of globalisation and
disappearing borders; a new world with renewed emphasis on free trade and
market-related competition which has brought great prosperity to hundreds
of millions of people not only in the developed world, but also in certain
developing countries. We are also in a new world in which the electronic
media, mass communications and effective, global transportation will, in
the long term, not tolerate impediments to free trade and competition.

It has been estimated, indeed, that with the limited free trade,
competition and industrialisation in the last 250 years, more prosperity
has been created than in the preceding 10 000 years. Sadly, this prosperity
has to a large extent bypassed Africa and it must be clear that the African
renaissance which we all yearn for cannot be built on the handouts or the
aid of others. Of that it has already had its fair share, without results.
It cannot be built on the goodwill or the excellence of others. If there is
to be an African renaissance, it will have to come about as a result of
Africa's own merit and excellence, and this cannot be achieved without
exposure to free trade and competition.

I am grateful and would like to commend the Government for acknowledging
the importance of globalisation, free trade and market-related competition
as being essential for our economic wellbeing in the new millennium. The
Government has done so by signing the Commonwealth Accord in Durban
recently and through its commitment to globalisation, free trade and market-
related competition. I must immediately add that I also support the
reference in this commitment to greater equity for all countries in the
world markets. The fact is that we have had the recent experience of
demands for trade liberalisation which turned out to be nothing more than
part of a very aggressive economic imperialism which has, in fact,
devastated many Third World countries.

But the fact of the matter is that one cannot compete internationally if
one's economy does not promote excellence internally by promoting market-
related competition. It is in this regard that I believe we should all
applaud the fact that our Constitution actively promotes free trade and
market-related competition and, as a result, excellence in the economic
sphere. The same applies with regard to the procurement policy and system
to be followed by the organs of state. Transparency, competitiveness and
cost-effectiveness are specifically laid down as the governing principles
as far as this is concerned in section 217(1) of the Constitution.

Of course, in this Bill we are dealing with the exception to the governing
principles, namely preferential procurement, which is dealt with in section
217(2), and in particular the framework of the policy, which is dealt with
in subsection (3). Having been part of the drafting of the Constitution and
having supported these particular sections, I am pleased to say that the
New NP will also support the legislation before us.

We support the Bill for the following three reasons: First of all, it is an
exceptional instrument which can be used to heal the injustices of the
past, and if it can play a role in this regard, it must be supported.
Secondly, it must be an instrument which can be used to promote more equal
and cost-effective competition eventually. The aim must be for this to
create more and better competition in the economic sphere in future, and
not less. Thirdly, in line with the Constitution, this regime should remain
the exception to the governing principle, which remains market-related
competition. Organs of state should have the option to implement a
preferential procurement policy or not - it should not be peremptory.

We are satisfied that when clause 2(1) is read with the Constitution - and
it should be interpreted with the Constitution - it will be clear that that
is the only reasonable interpretation. It must be clear that in the
interests of our own internal economic wellbeing and of international
economic competitiveness, this legislation should not be a permanent
feature of our economic landscape. We believe that there is unanimous
support across party lines for this legislation to be reviewed every few
years and that there should be a commitment in this regard by the Minister.

This legislation should also not be used to benefit the very big
conglomerates or corporations who have already made it and who, in the
words of the Minister, have progressed beyond the walking ring and are able
to walk on their own, economically speaking. They could have done so with
the aid and assistance of this particular legislation, but they no longer
need it. They are able to stand on their own feet and be totally
competitive in the marketplace without outside assistance. We also believe
that there is appreciation for this, and that it should be dealt with in
the regulations.

Two other matters that, in our opinion, should be dealt with in the
regulations are, firstly, that this legislation should not be used to
discriminate against South African concerns in order to favour foreign
enterprises which had nothing to do with the past injustices or
discrimination in this country. Secondly, it should also be made clear in
the regulations that, in order to qualify as a tenderer, the enterprise
should be in good standing with the Receiver of Revenue.

We support the power given to the Minister in this legislation to grant
exemption from all or certain provisions to certain organs of state. This
discretion, we believe, should be utilised to ensure that our huge public
corporations, such as SAA, remain competitive globally and internally. It
must be appreciated, in the final analysis, that the preferences envisaged
in this Bill will, in the long term, only weaken the uncompetitive and
ineffective, and further strengthen the competitive and effective
enterprises.

In the end it must be regarded as the exception to the sound principles of
cost-effectiveness and market-related competition enshrined in the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, Mr Deputy President, hon members, the Bill
before us is characterised by two features, namely the unsatisfactory
process that was followed in order to put the Bill before us, and the
desirability of the Bill and its intention.

Firstly, the process that this Bill followed can be summed up as crisis
management. There can be no excuse for the delaying of constitutionally
required legislation since 1997. Even as we discuss the Bill today, we have
not yet seen a White Paper on procurement policy. In virtually all
submissions to the finance committee by stakeholders during public
hearings, criticism was levelled at the Government on the way it has
handled this legislation.

The acceleration of Bills through Parliament and provincial legislatures
may give rise to mistakes in legislation. In the past three days the Bill
before us has changed from a prescriptive policy to a framework, based on
two legal opinions that were obtained. This Bill may still be open to
challenge in the Constitutional Court. This is totally unacceptable.

Owing to the accelerated way in which this Bill was pushed through, the
finance committee could not determine what the financial implications for
the state would be in rand value. We do not know, for example, what the
rand value of additional premiums for the state will amount to for the
coming financial year. It is now up to the Minister of Finance and
provincial legislatures to budget for additional premiums for preferential
procurement, only a month before the Budget is introduced in this House.
The ANC Government has to take full responsibility for the unsatisfactory
way in which this Bill was handled.

Secondly, I want to make a few comments on the content of the Bill. The aim
of the Bill is to create empowerment legislation, and the UDM gives its
full support to this aim. The danger exists, however, that this legislation
will empower a few elitist persons, creating a few millionaires and leaving
the majority of small entrepreneurs behind. This will leave the masses poor
and unemployed. This will not promote entrepreneurial skills development,
neither will it remove a major obstacle in the way of small businesses in
order to compete for Government contracts. We must ensure that small,
medium and micro enterprises are empowered to create jobs. At the same time
we must make sure that people disadvantaged by unfair discrimination are
assisted on a broad scale.

We welcome the following provisions: Participants must be in good standing
with tax authorities. Secondly, there are penalties for tenderers supplying
false information. Thirdly, there is flexibility for organs of state to
implement their own preferential procurement policies within the parameters
set by national legislation. Fourthly, there is the preference point system
that will benefit small businesses, and lastly, the fact that regulations
must be published for comment before promulgation.

It is a pity that there is no time limit or phase-out period in this Bill,
because in a rapidly transforming society like ours, equality will be
achieved somewhere in the future. I trust that Parliament and its finance
committee will receive reports by the department on the implementation of
this Bill and progress made with its implementation and aims.

In conclusion, the UDM believes that we must narrow the gap between the
haves and the have-nots by empowering all through enterprise development.
This must be achieved through empowerment, rather than entitlement. Unless
opportunities are created for South Africans on a massive scale, real
empowerment will never occur. The gap between the haves and the have-nots
will widen, crime will flourish, social services will collapse, and people
will lose hope.

The access to capital must be promoted and encouraged. The majority of our
citizens do not have access to banking facilities, services, affordable
loans and working capital. Steps must be initiated to make such facilities
available on a broader scale so that many more potential tenderers may be
brought to the fore. We fully support the empowerment legislation that
seeks to benefit persons or groups disadvantaged in the past by unfair
discrimination and that also seeks to benefit small businesses.

In this process, the state must get value for money. In this regard, the
consumer, client and general public must be protected. This can be done by
not compromising on quality, standards and delivery. The UDM supports this
Bill. [Applause.]

Ms F B MARSHOFF: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, this Bill seeks to
establish a preferential procurement system which will be binding on all
organs of state, in all spheres of government and in any other identified
institution. The Constitution prescribes that such a policy should be fair,
equitable, transparent, competitive and cost effective. It also gives these
organs and institutions leeway to decide whether or not to implement such a
preferential procurement system. However, the Constitution requires that
national legislation must prescribe a framework within which this policy is
to be implemented. This is exactly what we are aiming to achieve in this
Bill.

During the public hearings which were held at national and provincial
levels, specific recommendations were made with regard to certain aspects
of this Bill. Some of my colleagues have already addressed some of these
issues, and others will address some of the more specific ones. Amongst the
recommendations made was the need to include an exemption clause that will
enable the Minister to exempt any organ of state from any or all of the
provisions in this Bill.

The reasons for this clause are quite obvious. As we are all aware, there
are hundreds of state organs functioning at various levels of society, each
with its own specific dynamics, both at financial and managerial level.
They therefore cannot all be subjected to the same criteria as envisaged in
this Bill. This clause allows the Minister to grant exemptions on the
following grounds: if it is in the interest of national security, if the
tenderers are international suppliers, and if it is in the public's
interest.

This amendment was supported by all provinces and most of the opposition
parties. During the deliberations of the joint committee, it became quite
obvious that we were going to have some opposition from some of the
opposition parties, especially to some of the contentious clauses in the
Bill. True to form, they did not disappoint us.

Mr K M ANDREW: [Inaudible.]

Ms F B MARSHOFF: Some of them - I will respond to Mr Ken Andrew soon -
especially the DP, wanted us to include a sunset clause in this Bill
stating that the Bill should be subjected to a five-year review. The ANC's
argument against this inclusion was that we did not need such an inclusion,
and that we did not want timeframes attached to this Bill, as all
legislation is subjected to periodic review in any case.

The implementation and outcome of this procurement policy is to be closely
evaluated and, when the need arises, which could be earlier than the five
years recommended by the DP, some of the major aspects of the Bill might be
amended. I am sure they would agree with us.

The ANC's opposition to the recommendations made by the opposition parties
was that there was no need for us to impose timeframes on this legislation.
The opposition could not really explain to us why they wanted to have
timeframes attached to it. We still do not know whether it is because they
do not want to see economic power being transferred to persons previously
denied access to the mainstream economy or whether they want to see us
remaining small forever, dependent on subcontracting from the major
companies which have always benefited from government procurement. At that
stage, there was no need for timeframes to be attached to these procurement
policies.

We have always known that the DP is a wolf in sheep's clothing. It claims
to support transformation, especially economic transformation, but when
proposals are put on the table to encourage black economic empowerment,
they always try to block it.

I should like to say to the hon Ken Andrew that I was quite encouraged to
hear that the DP was going to support this Bill. [Interjections.] The hon
member might be wrong.

Mr K M ANDREW: Would you like to join us?
Ms F B MARSHOFF: No, I would not like to join the DP. [Laughter.] I would
just like to say that the ANC supports the passing of this legislation
through Parliament. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister of Finance, Ministers and
members, at the heart of public procurement reform is finding ways to
address poverty and job creation. Governments are often called upon to lead
this process. Economic activity is what is expected as an outcome of
certain policy initiatives. The private sector may use some of its funds to
stimulate economic activity. Governments, on the other hand, may stimulate
such activity through certain works projects or the provision of certain
seed capital for communities to do so.

The use of public-sector procurement as an instrument of government policy
to achieve certain socioeconomic objectives can have significant outcomes
with regard to its social policy goals such as promotion of equal
opportunity. The use of procurement as an instrument of policy, however,
has not been immune to controversy.

A point of contention raised in the committee and by many political parties
was the retention of the words ``historically disadvantaged'' in the Bill.
The general argument against this provision is that it could affect the
principles of equality and fairness. This concern, however, must be
balanced with the reality that millions of people have been disadvantaged
by discriminatory legislation in the past.

Questions have been raised regarding the legitimacy and the effectiveness
of procurement as an instrument. All too often the beneficial effects of
policies which are promoted through procurement have been doubtful or
sometimes minimal. Even where benefits can be achieved, these must be
weighed against the cost of doing so through procurement, either in terms
of price, premium or a compromise on other matters such as time and
quality.

There has been limited research on and a lack of data regarding most
programmes to demonstrate the effectiveness of the use of procurement as an
instrument of policy. The intention of this Bill is good but we must
periodically monitor the outcome. What has been needed is a most effective
procurement system which promotes Government's socioeconomic objectives in
a definable, quantifiable, measurable, verifiable and auditable manner
within an equitable, competitive, cost-effective and transparent
environment, without overtaxing the administrative capacity of Government,
creating unfair competition, abusing or lowering labour standards and
compromising value for money.

To meet these requirements an innovative system of procurement has been
developed in South Africa. This system is known as targeted procurement,
which permits social objectives to be quantified, measured, verified and
audited. In other words, this system links social objective to procurement
against the principles of fairness, transparency, equity, competitiveness
and cost-effectiveness.

The question to be asked is whether this Bill adequately subscribes to this
system and whether implementation of the legislation will in fact meet its
objectives. In terms of its general application the ACDP believes that this
Bill answers to the principles and values underlying the target procurement
system. To what extent it can promote an equitable and fair system and
develop effective growth in economic activity is not clear.

One of the major issues that needs to be addressed is that of capacity
constraints, that is, a lack of competent infrastructures, especially
amongst upcoming entrepreneurs, to deal with complicated tender
requirements. Criticism has been voiced by a number of small business role-
players, namely that the tender advice centres set up by Ntsika are not
sufficiently qualified to help small businesspeople grow.

The Bill aims to assist the historically disadvantaged, but unless strong
capacity initiatives and training facilities, and ongoing management
systems, are incorporated to assist the sector, the development of a
competent and efficient small to medium business system will suffer great
economic and management pressures.

With these words, the ACDP supports this Bill, but we must also warn
against dangers like entitlement, nepotism, efficiency and the threat of
capacity constraints. [Time expired.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, hierdie wetsontwerp herinner my aan
die WVK-wet. Daardie wet was gebaseer op 'n mooi bewoorde kodisil in die
tussentydse Grondwet van 1993. Dit was 'n mooi duidelike grondwetlike
bepaling wat terloops voorsiening gemaak het vir nasionale wetgewing om die
uitvoering daarvan te omskryf.

Die WVK-wet het toe die gees van die kodisil ge√Øgnoreer, die opdrag van die
kodisil gemis en so ook die doel van die wetgewing. Vandag sit ons met
gebrekkige versoening, 'n halwe waarheid en probleme om die proses af te
sluit.

Die bepalings van die artikel wat ons vandag oorweeg, naamlik artikel
217(1) van die Grondwet van 1996 is net so mooi duidelik gestel. Die
verkryging van staatsorgane moet 'n stelsel h√™ wat regverdig, billik,
deursigtig, mededingend en kostedoeltreffend is. Dit is soos dit hoort;
baie mooi woorde.

Subartikel (2) van artikel 217 is egter 'n skuiwergat wat
voorkeurtendertoekennings aan en bevoordeling van sekere persone toelaat.
Dit is met enige tendersituasie altyd riskant. Die doel van die tenders is
kompetisie om uitnemendheid van diens teen die laagste moontlike tarief te
verseker. As tenderaars 'n stelsel raaksien wat hom tot manipulasie leen,
is daar altyd 'n gevaar van korrupsie aan beide kante.
My party glo dat die gees van artikel 217(1) nie suiwer weerspie√´l word in
die wetgewing voor die Huis nie. Om in klousule 2 van hierdie wetsontwerp
byvoorbeeld spesifiek aan te dui dat histories benadeeldes die voordeel van
voorkeurtoekenning van tenders moet kry, is myns insiens onnodig, maar dit
is veral onbillik. Al word die woord ``mag'' gebruik, wat die deur vir
ander op 'n skrefie ooplaat, gee hierdie woord 'n politieke angel aan die
wetsontwerp wat my ondersteuners verder sal vervreem.

Kom ons neem die wit jong man wat in April 1994 16 jaar oud was, nog nooit
gestem het en ook nie die vorige bewind gesteun het nie. Vanwe√´ sy velkleur
word hy nou deur hierdie wetsontwerp deel van 'n nuwe kategorie
benadeeldes. Binne jare mag hy 'n tenderaar wil word, maar as gevolg van
hierdie wetsontwerp mag hy nie op 'n gelyke voet met sy swart technikon- of
universiteitsvriend meeding nie. Dit is moderne rassisme, onbillik en nie
in die gees van artikel 217(1) van die Grondwet nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson, this Bill reminds me of the TRC Act. That
Act was based on a well-phrased codicil in the interim Constitution of
1993. It was a very clear constitutional provision which, incidentally,
provided for national legislation to define the enactment thereof.

The TRC Act then ignored the spirit of this codicil, missed the terms of
reference of the codicil as well as the object of the legislation. Today we
have poor reconciliation, half truths and problems in concluding the
process.

The provisions of the section we are dealing with today, that is, section
217(1) of the Constitution of 1996, are just as clearly phrased.
Procurement by organs of state should involve a system which is fair,
equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective. That is how it
should be; very fine-sounding words.

However, section 217(2) constitutes a loophole allowing benefits and
preferential tender allocations in respect of certain persons. There is
always a risk involved in any tender situation. The object of tenders is
competition in order to ensure excellent service at the lowest possible
tariff. If tenderers detect a system that lends itself to manipulation,
there is always the danger of corruption on both sides.

My party believes that the spirit of section 217(1) is not clearly
reflected in the legislation before the House. For example, to provide
specifically in clause 2 of this Bill that previously disadvantaged persons
should receive preference in the allocation of tenders is, in my view,
unnecessary, and specifically unfair. Although the word ``may'' provides an
outside chance for others, it also gives a political sting to the Bill,
which will alienate my supporters even further.

Let us take, for example, the young white man who was 16 years old in April
1994, never voted before and did not support the previous regime either.
Because of the colour of his skin, he now becomes part of a new category of
disadvantaged persons as a result of this Bill. In a few years' time he may
want to submit a tender, but because of this Bill he is not allowed to
compete on an equal basis with his black technikon or university friend.
That is modern racism, it is unfair and it is not in line with the spirit
of section 217(1) of the Constitution.]

This argument emphasises the need for a sunset clause, which was refused in
the portfolio committee. The legislation is therefore a blank cheque to the
majority for legal discrimination and renewed job reservation for an
indefinite period. I am not against the constitutional provision for a
system to help those who have suffered from unfair discrimination. One can
sincerely hope that this legislation will enhance the creation and
development of a black entrepreneurial corps in our country. What I do warn
about is the repetition of the same mistake of racial discrimination,
causing new categories of disadvantaged young people, and I do object to
the open-ended character of the remedial legislation.

On more than one occasion in the House, my party has pleaded for the
identification, empowerment and development of the country's human
potential in the field of entrepreneurs. This legislation will no doubt
assist black entrepreneurs and we are very happy about this. But it is a
heavy blow to the other entrepreneurs from other groups and my own
supporters. The overriding requirements of job creation for the masses are
dependent on entrepreneurs. My forecast is that this legislation will
influence many able professional South African youths to hunt for
opportunities abroad.

In conclusion, may I warn that this kind of legislation is gradually adding
to the totalitarian power of the majority party, and it will be a negative
incentive to the tradition of excellence that we so badly need for greater
efficiency in performance. We oppose the Bill on behalf of the newly
created disadvantaged group of young people.

Mr G E BALOI: Mr Chairperson, the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework
Bill aims to be the national legislation that will provide for a framework
in terms of which preferential policy as contemplated in section 217(2) of
the Constitution of South Africa is to be implemented by organs of state in
all three spheres of government. The Constitution does not forbid the
organs of state from implementing the preferential system. However, section
217(2) does not put an obligation on an organ of state to have a
preferential system. This poses a tricky problem in trying to come up with
a policy of this nature.

According to the WTO Ministerial Conference held in Singapore in December
1996, trade Ministers agreed to establish a working group to conduct a
study on transparency in government procurement practices, taking into
account national policies and based on a study of the development element
for inclusion in an appropriate agreement. One has to look at the factors
in the WTO agreement on government procurement that would pose problems in
the implementation of this Bill.

Looking at the conditions of the agreement, implementation of this
legislation, if South Africa was to sign the agreement, could become very
difficult. This is because, according to the preferential procurement
policy, any invitation to submit a tender contemplated in subsection (1)
must clearly define the persons or categories of persons disadvantaged by
unfair discrimination to be protected and advanced.

Clearly, subsections 2(a) and 2(b) of section 217 of the Constitution
indicate that preference will be given to local-based business concerns and
service providers. This is inconsistent with the World Trade Organisation's
agreement on government procurement. However, Article 5 of the agreement
spells out the special treatment that developing countries, such as our
beloved South Africa, will be afforded.

The state law advisers are of the opinion that the Bill must be dealt with
in accordance with the procedure established by section 76(1) of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The UCDP supports the Bill
accordingly.

Dr S E PHEKO: Mr Chairman, the PAC welcomes the Preferential Procurement
Policy Framework Bill. It is in accord with section 217(1) of the
Constitution which, inter alia, reads:


  When an organ of state in the national, provincial or local sphere of
  government, or any other institution identified in national legislation,
  contracts for goods or services, it must do so in accordance with a
  system which is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-
  effective.

As South Africa is passing through a developmental stage, state
intervention in the economy is essential in order to redress the
inequalities of the past which were caused by deliberate injustices. The
Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill is therefore a welcome
instrument in the process of creating a just society and an economy that
serves all. It will take a long time and deliberate policy to achieve a
position of parity. It is important that we remain vigilant in the
application of the provisions of this new Act.

Ignoring the interests and aspirations of those that were discriminated
against in the past, and therefore economically oppressed, would mean
ignoring the whole purpose of the struggle that ushered in the present
political order. However, there is another reason why these aspirations
should not be ignored. If the victims of apartheid disempowerment are not
brought into the mainstream economy, their resentment will build up to such
an extent that we would find ourselves sitting on a time bomb. It is
therefore in the interests of everyone that we view the empowerment of the
categories of people identified by the Constitution for preferential
treatment as being in the interests of the rest of the country.

Although the enactment of this instrument has been prescribed by the
Constitution, we cannot take for granted that its provisions will be
applied justly without political interference. We have observed that
benefits were unjustly awarded in the past. This happened in relation to
both the tendering for and the allocation of state jobs. One does not have
to look too far to realise that such possibilities have already been
created by the Bill. This Bill states that the contract must be awarded to
the tenderer who scores the highest points. This is fair if the principles
of transparency are going to be applied. The Bill, however, goes on to say:
`` ... unless objective criteria ... justify the award to another
tenderer''. This is where abuse becomes a possibility. For example, reasons
may be contrived to favour a tenderer preferred by the ruling party.

We urge the present Minister, and any future Minister, to take care that
ministerial regulations prevent such possible abuse. The PAC urges that the
``sound reasons'', envisaged in the Bill, be clearly spelt out in the
awarding documents. In that way we can avoid any possible abuse that would
replace the racial discrimination of the past with political
discrimination.

The permanent political stability of this country depends very much on the
social and economic emancipation of those who were dispossessed through
colonialism, apartheid and racism, and who continue to get a raw deal
economically, in this country, even at this moment in time.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the next speaker, that
is the hon Mr M Lekgoro, will be making his maiden speech. [Applause.]

Mr M M S LEKGORO: Chairperson and members, after everything has been said
and done, the bigger picture remains - the socioeconomic realities of our
country are characterised by the legacy of colonial apartheid. The bulk of
the wealth of the country is owned by established white conglomerates and
white medium-sized corporations. This economic order is the outcome of
apartheid policies designed to benefit white males.

The dawn of democracy and the ascendance of the ANC to power constitute,
amongst other things, a declaration of confidence in the policies of the
ANC to address the economic needs of the poor and the historically
marginalised. We cannot claim to have achieved this until we have evened
out the spread of our national wealth among all national groups and
affirmed black people, women and the disabled in the economic sphere.

The wrongs of our economic order will not rectify themselves nor will they
be rectified by the market forces as others would like to believe. We need
to take proactive steps to turn around the fundamentals of the economy in
order to benefit the weak and the marginalised. We ought to feel offended
and undermined when black people in general, and Africans in particular,
continue to experience deprivation and impoverishment on the one hand,
whilst the white phenotypes continue to be richer and richer on the other
hand. We ought to feel insulted when black small and medium enterprises
fail to make it to the mainstream of the economy due to structural and
traditional impediments.

The introduction of the preferential procurement policy framework is a step
in the right direction. This policy framework unlocks possibilities and
potentials for small and medium enterprises of historically disadvantaged
people to be awarded Government tenders.

During the hearings different black organisations complained that they were
refused tenders because certain established white enterprises were
traditionally recognised and seen as efficient. This happened even in
situations where the emerging small enterprises could prove that they could
provide the product at a lower cost. It also emerged from these hearings
that certain officials, especially white officials, distrusted emerging
black enterprises and were hooked on the mentality that white was better.
This Bill gets to the bottom of that problem. It compels those responsible
for awarding tenders to favourably consider persons and categories of
persons who have been historically disadvantaged by unfair discrimination.

We deliberately chose to use the term ``historically disadvantaged'' in the
Bill to ensure that there would be no ambiguity about the intentions of the
Bill. The purpose of this Bill is to address the imbalances of the past and
the legacies that these have left. The Bill in front of us also raises
sharply the issue of the empowerment of black and white women and the
disabled in the economic sphere. This is because we believe that any
affirmation or empowerment programme that falls short of economic
empowerment is meaningless.

The empowerment of the historically disadvantaged, particularly blacks, is
not a matter on which we need to reach consensus. It is an obvious and
glaring need that calls on all of the South African nation to join forces.
Political parties should be at the centre of this effort. It is actually
disappointing and shameful to hear a leader of a national political party
represented here saying that they object to or abstain from an effort to
enhance the economic state of the historically disadvantaged.

It is time for the opposition parties, especially those that object to the
Bill, to awaken to the fact that the total freedom of the people they
purport to represent is intrinsically linked to the economic freedom of the
black people and Africans in particular. The economic freedom of black
people is fundamental to the sustainability of our democracy and the
freedom of generations to come.

It is naive to believe that an emphasis on the expression ``historically
disadvantaged'' means the exclusion of others. The fact of the matter is
that the historically disadvantaged have been excluded for many decades
past. The aim of this Bill is to include them and bring them into the
mainstream of the economy.

This Bill also gives muscle to the Reconstruction and Development
Programme. It creates an environment for the implementation of the
objectives and principles of the RDP in the economic sector. These
objectives will be enhanced by the Bill in that it demands that the
awarding of Government tenders should not be based on price only. The Bill
requires that organisations competing for tenders should also demonstrate
their will and capacity to carry out the principles of the RDP. In this
way, these organisations will be compelled to create jobs for the
unemployed and valuable and sustainable human resource development
programmes for those that they employ.

With these few words, we support the Bill. [Applause.]

Dr L LUYT: Chairperson, hon members, the FA supported this Bill at the
finance committee deliberations. However, it was not unqualified support.
We, together with other parties, voiced our concern about the inclusion of
the wording ``historically disadvantaged''. Wording has the habit of
outliving its usefulness and objectives. The fact that in section 2(1)(d)
the word ``may'' is carefully couched not to offend the Constitution does
not take away the general implication of this Bill.

This is an empowerment Bill and must be treated as such. One has to be
mindful, though, of its general effects. Will this proposed legislation
create people who will forever have to be sustained through some kind of
subsidy? Do economics and self- respect not also dictate that this type of
legislation should surely be of limited duration? The FA therefore finds it
strange and rather unsettling that the ANC would not give consideration to
a sunset clause or the revisiting of this Bill after a certain period has
expired. It was a very small concession we sought, and it would have sent
out the right signals and messages to would-be foreign investors.

To subsidise takes money, and money is obtained from one source only -
taxes. Hon Minister, taxes! Here we are going to have a wonderful analogy
with Voltaire's maxim: To take away as much money as possible from one
class of citizens to give to the other. Nobody can and will deny that
people were disadvantaged because of colour. These unfair practices were
carried over to other parts of society as well, but the main sufferers were
the people of colour, and this must be rectified.

We have already seen what unemployment can do to an economy. In fact, the
ravaging results are still there for everybody to see. To attack
unemployment and create an environment where school-leavers can also be
accomodated, South Africa has to grow. To achieve growth we certainly
cannot afford the luxury of subsidies for ever and a day - and this is what
the Bill entails, that is, a form of subsidy.

I do not know of any firms where the black component is not by far the
greater part of the workforce. Unless this proposed legislation is applied
skilfully - and I think it will be, I have that faith in the Minister - a
lot of people will be disadvantaged even further. A sunset clause or review
situation would have served to make people realise that they have to come
up to standard in a certain time and create a society of equals, and not
exchange one unequal society for another. A bad law is the worst form of
tyranny.

South Africa wants to be a world player in the international business
community. This is a community which does not protect the weak and the
ineffective. This is a community that does not take prisoners. Our
competitiveness will be tested again and again, and the only way to
withstand this ruthless onslaught will be through productivity.
Productivity can only be achieved by competitive means. We simply have to
facilitate productivity somewhere on the wider economic horizon.
As I have said already, I want to warn again about the sustainability of
this legislation which the country will, in the long run, not be able to
afford. Would it not be wonderful if the ruling party aligned itself with
the period for this proposed Bill to run and then to phase it out?
Everybody would then take note that South Africa indeed intended to remain
number one in Africa. As a nation, we can do this in an equal and unbiased
society.

The FA supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, Deputy President, hon Ministers and
members, the birth of a new political dispensation has placed specific
expectations on the new South African Government. Among these are the
development of our health care services, housing, education and job-
creation facilities. These areas of priorities, which I have just
mentioned, are competing for scarce resources which, unfortunately, puts a
strain on our economic development.

The Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill commits Government
tenders to promote small, medium and micro businesses. It is compulsory
that the Government creates economic opportunities for the historically
disadvantaged to empower themselves. Small and medium businesses are
facilitated to bid for multimillion rand contracts. The survival of small
businesses is absolutely necessary to continuously generate job creation
and economic growth.

A compulsory preferential procurement policy ensures that organised market
intelligence increases bargaining power through large purchases, simpler
management and control over the quality of products and uniformity in the
awarding of contracts to tenderers. The new political dispensation will not
work unless it strategises a successful economic model or system.

Economically, South Africa has comparative advantages such as good
infrastructure, abundant mineral resources, important trade routes, a
beautiful climate, gold for bilateral trade swaps, sophisticated financial
services, the ability to handle large projects, proximity to its markets
and medical skills.

It is the medium to small business and informal sectors that will produce
the bulk of employment. For the employment opportunities to manifest
themselves, a symbiotic relationship between the big enterprise and the
small enterprise must be established. The big business must subcontract
smaller activities to the smaller businesses.

The best way to kick-start the preferential procurement policy is to embark
on a massive housing programme using the small contractors. After all,
people will not use the underlying moral fibre as the only criterion to
judge the political system, but also how much extra money it delivers into
their pockets.

The MF supports the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill.
[Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, hon members, may I use this opportunity,
during the first sitting of this House in the new year, to wish all hon
members a prosperous, healthy and productive year 2000.

With regard to the present debate, I must inform hon members that lately I
have spent the bulk of my time trying to save South Africa from the equity
Bill and, as a result, my remarks on the Preferential Procurement Policy
Framework Bill must be regarded as prima facie, on first sight, and are
subject to correction, should more facts come to my attention.

In evaluating this Bill the point of departure must be the requirements of
the Constitution. The obligation placed on the state, in its business of
contracting for goods and services, is stipulated in section 217(1) of the
Constitution. The key words are fair, equitable, transparent, competitive
and cost effective.

Although section 217(2) allows for the implementation of a procurement
policy, such a policy must still meet the requirements of section 217(1).
This is clearly indicated by the ``must'' in subsection (1) and the
omission of ``must'' in subsection (2). Having applied this test to the
present Bill, I am afraid that the proposed procurement policy will not
pass.

By die eerste oogopslag klink dit nie te erg nie. 'n Gewigstoekenning van
90/10 aan die nie-ekonomiese deel van 'n staatstender klink heel matig. In
die meeste gevalle skakel dit instansies wat laag op die punteskaal van
regstellende optrede l√™ prakties egter heeltemal uit. In die re√´l is die
winsmarge op verskaffing aan groot instansies soos die staat baie klein, en
sal die 10%-penalisering baie tenderaars heeltemal uit die bus haal. Daar
is eenvoudig net nie genoeg beweegruimte in die netto winssyfer in
besigheid om die 10%, of 'n groot deel daarvan, goed te maak nie.

Die gewigstoekenning van 80/20 in die geval van kleiner besighede sal 'n
sekere sektor van die besigheidsmark nog meer nadelig raak. Hier dink ek
veral aan besighede wat heeltemal afhanklik is van die besigheid van 'n
plaaslike owerheid. In menige gevalle is koste aangegaan, infrastruktuur
opgerig, addisionele personeel in diens geneem en ander offers gebring,
juis om die tender van 'n plaaslike owerheid te kan bedien. Die verlies aan
besigheid wat die implementering van hierdie wetsontwerp gaan meebring, kan
inderdaad hierdie besighede so nadelig tref dat besigheid gestaak sal moet
word. Ek kan dink aan definitiewe voorbeelde in die dorp waarvan ek
afkomstig is.

Verder is daar vir my 'n teenstrydigheid gele√´ in die feit dat die
arbeidswetgewing tereg erken dat kleiner besighede eenvoudig nie oor die
middele beskik om regstellende optrede voluit toe te pas nie, en hulle dus
van die verpligtings onder daardie wet vrygestel word, net sodat hulle deur
hierdie wetgewing op 'n ander wyse met die langsambok bygekom kan word.

In die lig hiervan kan ek nie sien hoe hierdie wetsontwerp die toets van
regverdigheid kan slaag nie, terwyl die beginsel van mededingendheid ook in
die slag bly. Hierdie wetsontwerp kan enorme implikasies h√™ op die staat en
daardeur ook op die belastingbetaler. Dit spel die memorandum by die
wetsontwerp ook uit as 'n bykomende premie van tot 25%.

Die wese van hierdie wetsontwerp is dat die belastingbetaler 'n aansienlike
las moet dra om sekere tenderaars te subsidieer. Ek is oortuig daarvan dat
indien dieselfde geld gebruik sou word om regoor die linie selfs net by
agtergeblewenes ontwikkeling te laat plaasvind, veel beter resultate behaal
sou word. Verder merk ek op dat daar geen voorsiening in die wetsontwerp
gemaak word vir die geleidelike uitfasering van hierdie voorkeurbeleid nie.
Daar is geen sogenaamde ``sunset''-klousule nie.

Die AEB se beleid is dat kunsmatige ingrype in die vrye ekonomie nadelig is
vir al Suid-Afrika se mense. Laat ons konsentreer op die basiese beginsels
van kostedoeltreffendheid, mededinging en meriete. Ons kan veel eerder deur
positiewe programme van ontwikkeling die agtergeblewe besighede in staat
stel om mededingend te raak as om hulle met die kruk van bevoordeling
teenoor staatstenders afhanklik van uitsonderingsmaatre√´ls te hou. Ons moet
groei stimuleer, misdaad bekamp, Suid-Afrika 'n aantreklike beleggingsveld
vir oorsese beleggers maak, en sodanige besighede sal op vaste grondslag
veel sterker ontwikkel as deur partikuliere sporadiese bevoordeling.

Ek ontken nie dat daar in die verlede onregmatige benadeling was nie, maar
die beginsel van ``two wrongs don't make a right'' staan vas. Ons kan nie
ontwikkeling steun wat gebou word op die benadeling van en diskriminasie
teen 'n groot deel van die entrepreneurs in Suid-Afrika nie. Die AEB kan
hierdie wetsontwerp ongelukkig, ten spyte van die goeie bedoelings, nie in
hierdie stadium steun nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[At first glance it does not sound too bad. A points allocation of 90/10 to
the non-economic part of a state tender sounds quite moderate. However, in
practice this means that in most cases this totally eliminates those
organisations which are low down on the points scale of affirmative action.
Generally, the profit margins on supplying to large organisations such as
the state are very small and the 10% penalty will eliminate many tenderers
entirely. There is simply not enough room to manoeuvre in the net profit
figure of business to make good the 10% or a significant part of it.

The points allocation of 80/20 in the case of smaller businesses will have
a more disadvantageous effect on a certain sector of the business market.
Here I am thinking especially of businesses which are totally dependent on
the business of a local authority. In innumerable cases costs were
incurred, infrastructures put into place, additional staff employed and
other sacrifices made, precisely to be able to serve the tender of a local
authority. The loss of business, which the implementation of this Bill will
bring about, can indeed have such a detrimental effect on these businesses
that they have to close down. I can think of definitive examples in my home
town.

Furthermore, in my opinion, there is an inconsistency in the fact that the
labour legislation rightly acknowledges that smaller businesses simply do
not have the resources at their disposal to apply affirmative action fully,
and exempts them from the obligations under that Act, just so that they can
be punished by this legislation in a different way.

In view of this I cannot see how this Bill can pass the test of fairness,
while the principle of competitiveness will also fall by the wayside. This
Bill can have enormous implications for the state and hence also for the
taxpayer. The memorandum on the Bill also spells this out as an additional
premium of up to 25%.

The essence of this Bill is that the taxpayer will have to carry a
substantial burden in order to subsidise certain tenderers. I am convinced
that if the same amount of money were to be used across the board to
develop only the disadvantaged, much better results would be achieved. I
further observe that no provision is being made in the Bill for the gradual
phasing out of this preferential policy. There is no so-called sunset
clause.

The policy of the AEB is that artificial intervention in the free economy
will be to the detriment of all South Africa's people. Let us concentrate
on the basic principles of cost-effectiveness, competition and merit. We
could much rather, by way of positive programmes of development, enable the
disadvantaged businesses to become competitive rather than keeping them
dependent on exemption measures with the crutch of an advantage in respect
of state tenders. We should stimulate growth, combat crime, make South
Africa an attractive investment field for overseas investors, and such
businesses will develop far more strongly on sound foundations than through
special sporadic preferential treatment.

I am not denying that there was wrongful prejudice in the past, but the
principle of two wrongs don't make a right, remains true. We cannot support
development built on the prejudicing of and discrimination against a large
number of the entrepreneurs in South Africa. Unfortunately the AEB cannot
support this Bill at this stage, despite the good intentions.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Mr Chairperson, members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen,
this Bill, which is the fulfilment of a constitutional requirement, is, in
my view, rooted in the first declaration in the preamble to our
Constitution, which declares: ``We, the people of South Africa, recognise
the injustices of our past.'' This is the key opening remark in our
Constitution.

For us, the ruling party, this piece of legislation, among others, is an
additional instrument to ensure that millions of blacks are no longer going
to be prevented from becoming entrepreneurs, although it starts by
reinforcing SMMEs. A major aspect of the injustices was the fact that the
majority of South African blacks were prevented by law from gaining access
to finance, skills and resources. This prevented personal fulfilment and
employment opportunities which denied them self-reliance and, rather
shamefully, even self-respect.

Even though in the processes leading up to legislation it was in some ways
reassuring that most parties supported the general thrust and principles
inherent in the Bill, it is important for us as parliamentarians, and the
people of South Africa generally, to take note of the DP's disquiet with
regard to certain fundamental aspects of it and, during this debate, of
certain aspects as propounded by the different parties.

The dishonest refrain of the DP which seeks to invoke the equality clause
and presenting its case as if this Bill will be in conflict with such
clause is, indeed, resistance to transformation. I am more than confident
that if the DP had its way, it would not allow the spirit of our
Constitution to be implemented. How else must we interpret the dishonest
refrain of ``equality amongst all South Africans''? [Interjections.] How
else must we react when those South Africans who are relatively rich, well
trained, well resourced, well housed, less diseased and adequately
bankrolled are, by definition of apartheid, white? [Interjections.] These
South Africans will have to share.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: You are a racist, man!

Mr M RAMGOBIN: I repeat - I refer this to Mr White Man - these South
Africans will have to share. [Interjections.] They will have to be prepared
to help underwrite the progress and upliftment of the poorest of the poor,
and of blacks generally, if they are serious about peace - and I repeat -
if they are serious about peace, the absence of crime and corruption,
nation-building and reconciliation. Let them pursue their path at their own
peril! [Interjections.]

Of course, this Bill is designed to give further meat to affirmative
action, and we in the ANC do not and will not make any bones about it. This
kind of affirmative action on the basis of social justice creates the scope
for harmonious relationships. On behalf of South Africa as a whole, this is
our guiding principle, and Parliament, as a guiding institution under the
leadership of the ANC, will not pander to the self-serving interests of the
DP and its supporters, nor to the opposition of the FF. [Interjections.]

The DP also wanted a review period, a cut-off time and a stipulation in the
Bill that after a stipulated period ...

Mr T S YENGENI: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: I noted a member of
the DP in the opposite benches who shouted: ``You are a racist!'' I want
you to rule on whether it is parliamentary for an hon member to refer to
another hon member as a racist.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, it is unparliamentary to
call other members racists. Please, let us resist calling each other
racists. [Interjections.]

I did not see the member, but I would like to know who it was. I appeal to
him to withdraw that remark. [Interjections.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Mr Chairman, I did actually say he was a racist, because
he specifically turned to us and called us whites. I thought race did not
enter into this! [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, all I am asking is that if you
said it, could you please withdraw it as it is unparliamentary.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Mr Chairman, I withdraw it. [Interjections.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Mr Chairperson, the DP also wanted a review period, a cut-
off time and a stipulation in the Bill that after a stipulated period this
preferential period, with regard to historically disadvantaged people, will
lapse or be reviewed. We in the ANC rejected this because we remain
unimpressed by such selfish, racial arguments. Such positions completely
ignore the existence of two competing socioeconomic systems within one
geographic state. [Interjections.] These systems were put into place by the
design ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr K M ANDREW: Chairperson, on a point of order: If it is unparliamentary,
as it is, to call somebody a racist, surely to allege that a political
party and in particular individuals in a political party are using racial
arguments, is exactly the same thing, just put in a different form.
[Interjections.] I am asking for your ruling on the matter. I am not asking
for the honourable crew on the far side to scream. If the hon member talks
about racial arguments, then surely the people using racial arguments are
by implication racist.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The way I heard it, the hon member is
using that from the argument of the debate. He is not actually pointing to
that as a racist issue but debating the issue which has been raised on the
subject. Carry on, hon member.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Mr Chairperson, I would like to help Parliament here and I
do not make any apology that my input in this case has racial connotations.
It does and I appeal to the members to listen to my argument.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, let us give Mr Ramgobin a
chance, please.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Such positions completely ignore the existence of two ...
[Interjections.] Please, I appeal to Ken to listen if he does not mind.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! You are protected Mr Ramgobin.
[Interjections.] Order! Hon members, let us conduct ourselves as hon
members. Carry on, hon member.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Mr Chairperson, I would like to put on record here the
exhaustion of my time.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! You are protected. Carry on.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Thank you. It is my belief that such positions completely
ignore the existence of two competing socioeconomic systems within one
geographic state. These systems were put into place by the design of fellow
South Africans who remain well trained, well resourced, well housed, less
diseased and adequately bankrolled.

If the implementation of a procurement policy within a prescribed
framework, uniform in its application and nationally determined for all the
organs of state as described in the Bill, is interpreted to be imposition
for the inclusion of historically disadvantaged people, then so be it. The
ANC in turn will ensure that there will be an unspecified period of time in
which to determine both the pattern and the pace to promote and advance the
achievement of equality with all the rights and obligations inherent in it.

At this stage, I would like to address the issue to the Minister that
perhaps there is a historical precedent for the nonspecification of a time
limit. In the reconstruction of East Germany, as early as 1990, the West
Germans, over and above spending US $500 billion, prescribed for an
indefinite period - to the best of my knowledge and I stand to be corrected
- a 7,5% solidarity tax to reconstruct East Germany.

To contest the definition of historically disadvantaged people by unfair
discrimination as being primarily and essentially indigenous African people
is indeed for me a contestation and a denial of the first declaration made
by the people of South Africa in the preamble to our Constitution. I would
like to urge those leaders who are in this Parliament and who happen to be
not black and in opposition, to revisit this intellectual political
aberration in their way of thinking.

In conclusion, I would like the Ministry to take into account the
possibilities of subcontracting. But before the concluding remarks on
subcontracting, I want to make one plea - one plea as a fellow South
African to other South Africans but in this case directed essentially to
the DP and to those of our South Africans who oppose this Bill.
[Interjections.] I said the DP and those who oppose the Bill.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

An HON MEMBER: You have just undercut your own argument.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, I appealed for order,
please.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: It would be morally and legally good if the DP could do some
research in the future and present to Parliament all those entities and
individuals who will possibly be in breach of this piece of legislation by
means of fronting and other untrue declarations. This would be a good fight
from the DP's side, and I commit the ANC to engage in that fight with the
DP if it can identify and bring to Parliament and to the notice of the
police or the department, all those people, entities or individuals, who
will be in breach of this piece of legislation. [Applause.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Mr Chairperson, we may have a democratic Constitution and
may enact many laws to promote and enforce equality and democracy in our
country, but if we are not able to effectively tackle the gross economic
inequalities among the races, we are not likely to get very far.

The most dangerous threat to democracy and a good social order in this
country is the widespread abject poverty among the majority of blacks and
the obvious affluence among the minority white sections of our society.
Such a setup is unsustainable, as events in Malaysia and elsewhere
indicate.

The Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill, now before this House,
provides the state with a potentially powerful tool to democratise the
economic activity and wealth ownership in our country. It obliges all state
organs, from municipalities right up to national Government institutions
and Parliament itself, to award tenders in a way that favours those
sections of our population that have been oppressed, discriminated against,
shackled hand-and-foot and deliberately impoverished over several centuries
- not several years, but several centuries.

This will ensure, in a deliberate and measurable way, that a sizeable
portion of the more than R50 billion in tenders that emanates from the
state every year goes towards those who have been denied the opportunity to
participate in the economy of this land.

An important characteristic of this Preferential Procurement Policy
Framework Bill is that it has no element of hand-outs. It seeks to help
those who take initiatives to engage in tangible economic activities,
particularly in those areas of our country that need development. Thus, in
addition to the job creation potential, that activity could uplift
economically depressed sectors or areas in our country.

Obviously this Bill enjoys our wholehearted support. We would, however,
urge that monitoring mechanisms be strengthened through the relevant
regulations to ensure that the implementation of this Bill remains in our
focus all the time. We should know, quite publicly, year in and year out,
what percentage of tenders goes where and whether or not the objectives of
the Bill are being achieved. This will also enable us to assess whether the
90/10 or 80/20 formulae are realistic or not. If the formulas do not work
we should not hesitate to amend the legislation so that our society could
be propelled in the direction of greater equality and therefore deeper
democracy.

The monitoring mechanisms will also enable this Parliament, in its
oversight functions, to assess whether the different state organs apply the
legislation with the necessary diligence, rigour and fairness.

Although the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill is only two
pages long, it is a lot weightier than the other three lengthier
constitutional Bills still coming. Access by the majority of the people to
the resources of their country is a crucial element of their citizenship,
democracy and justice.

Mr G A J GROBLER: Mr Chairperson, before I get to my speech, just for Mr
Ramgobin's attention, if he had listened to the hon Ken Andrew's speech he
would realise that he has already said that we support the Bill.

Before I get to some positive or negative aspects of the Bill before us, I
would like to share some observations with this House. As a fairly recent
arrival to Parliament, I was generally surprised to see that the Bill
before us took nearly three years to be tabled before Parliament, and
according to all the relevant facts that I could lay my hands on, this Bill
should have been before Parliament in 1997. Only at the end of last year,
at very short notice, discussions started and at our last committee meeting
on 8 January 2000, fundamental changes were made, after the DP had insisted
in previous discussions on legal opinion being sought in regard to the
constitutionality of certain clauses.

At the end of a parliamentary session in 1999, it was decided that the
joint committee members had to come to Cape Town on 15 December 1999, from
all over South Africa at great cost to the taxpayer, only to discover that
some provinces had not managed to finalise any public hearings as was
expected of them. Fortunately most provinces did manage to do their
homework.

The Constitution requires this legislation to be on the Statute Book before
4 February 2000. The DP respects the Constitution of the country and we
acknowledge the fact that the Bill must be finalised before the stipulated
time. And we also acknowledge the positive aspects of the Bill, and I
mention the following. Section 2(1)(e) stipulates that any specific goal
for which points may be awarded, must be clearly specified in the
invitation to submit a tender, and a further clause that we are at ease
with is clause 2(2), which stipulates that any goals contemplated in
subsection 1(e) must be measurable, quantifiable and monitored for
compliance.

As we all know, the worldwide, acceptable principles of good governance of
an organ of state must be measured on the basic principles which can be
easily defined in a word ``tape'', that is transparency, accountability,
participation and equality. These are vital ingredients in a democratic
society, for which the DP has stood over the years as a party. Fortunately,
the DP did not have to change by way of adding new names to our party or
making changes in our policy to try to survive in the South African
political arena. [Interjections.]

The DP hope that the Minister and the role-players in the various state
organs will, in the regulations for tenders, make ample provision for all
goals as envisaged in the Bill before us. Although all measurable goals are
not specifically specified in the Bill, this could not be detrimental to
the obtainable aims of the Bill.

Another positive element is the fact that the regulations must be published
for public comments in the Gazette and also in every provincial gazette
before promulgation. Hopefully enough time will be made available for
public comment, and we in the DP think that this is vital as far as the
participation of the people of South Africa is concerned. Certain groups
before the committee made very harsh and sometimes not so friendly comments
regarding the time allocated for comments, and hopefully these groups will
have ample time for comments in the future.

There are quite a number of shortcomings in this Bill, as already mentioned
by my colleague Mr Ken Andrew. One other negative element in the Bill
before us is that the cut-off values of tenders qualifying for a maximum of
10 or 20 additional points are not stipulated in the Bill. But these values
will be included in the regulations stipulating the various goals set out
in the tender documents.

As mentioned earlier, the DP is aware of the stipulations in Section 217 of
the Constitution on procurement, and, although the DP is not 100% in
accordance with certain aspects of the Preferential Procurement Policy
Framework Bill proposed, Mr Ramgobin should note that we will support it.
[Applause.]

Mr A J FEINSTEIN: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, I will
attempt at the end of this long debate to be as brief as the Bill itself is
on paper. However, the Bill's brevity in no way reflects on its importance
which, as we have heard during this debate, is substantial.

I want to touch very briefly on only two issues. The first is that a
certain amount of confusion crept into both the discussions in the
committee and in this debate with respect to the matter of flexibility. A
number of parties, including the DP, have criticised the Bill for treating
all organs of state in a similar vein. Clearly, the Bill does not do this.
The complex definition of organ of state reflects this. Additionally, the
Bill gives certain constrained discretion to the Minister for exactly the
purpose of ensuring a degree of flexibility. Therefore stating that the
Bill remains too inflexible while rejecting greater flexibility applied
through the office of the Minister seems to me illogical.

The second area I wish to touch on is the criticisms that have been
levelled at the use of the word ``historically'' in the context of
disadvantaged and the issue of the sunset clause. The ANC component of the
committee inserted the word ``historically'' to make it clear that this
Bill refers to those who were disadvantaged by the system of apartheid in
all its manifestations.

Additionally, we do not accept the view that this Bill is a form of racial
discrimination to the disadvantage of young white males, because the
reality of life in South Africa today is that to be born white is still
overwhelmingly to have access to material comfort and security, and good
educational, cultural and employment opportunities that the vast majority
of black South Africans still do not have. [Interjections.]

What young white South Africans do have to deal with is greater competition
in the workplace than was the case in the days of job reservation and job
exclusion. However, this competition quite clearly is no material
disadvantage, as witnessed by the reality that unemployment amongst white
males under the age of 40 is around 4%, whilst for African males it is over
40%. [Interjections.] For similar reasons, we in the ANC rejected the
proposal of a sunset clause, because it is impossible for anyone in this
House or outside it to determine at what point in time the effects of
unfair discrimination will have been ameliorated.

An important example for us to consider in this regard is that of the state
of California in the USA. After almost 30 years of affirmative action
legislation, the state of California took the decision, after a referendum,
to declare unlawful the use of affirmative action legislation. Less than
three years after this decision was taken, most of the state bodies within
California are complaining that affirmative action legislation was removed
too early from the statute book. The effects of removing it have been
negative.

For us to suggest that we are in a position to decide now, as we draft this
Bill, when the effects of the system of apartheid will be behind us is
simply illogical. In addition, quite clearly, as with any other piece of
legislation, this House will regularly review all legislation and its
effects.

However, allow me to conclude by saying that it is extremely positive that
with the exception of a few parties and a few issues that have been
mentioned, after standing a great distance from each other, most parties
have managed to find significant common ground on this Bill. For this, I
believe we must pass a special vote of thanks to the two joint chairpersons
of the committee, the Ministry and the department for their innovative
solutions to the problems raised by the committee.

We in the ANC believe that this legislation will play an important role in
affirming historically disadvantaged communities while not detracting from
the efficient delivery of goods and services to Government, and we
therefore call on all parties committed to empowerment to support its
passage through this House. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Chairperson, firstly, I would like to thank
all the parties who are supporting this Bill.

There is an old maxim that says: ``Where you stand depends on where you
sit.'' That maxim was again proved to be correct by the way in which the
debate was conducted, because, certainly, those who argue that the wording
``historically disadvantaged'' does not deal with circumstances are the
same people who argue that we should have an escape hatch to get rid of the
Bill later. They are also the same people who argue that this will raise
the costs of state procurement. These are, in all instances, the same
people who sit in this House with distinct historical advantage as a result
of apartheid's past in this country.

This has shaped their perspective on the Bill. It is undeniable and was
argued across parties, and it stands there. But, notwithstanding those
issues, I thank all of those who have supported the Bill. This Bill,
clearly, notwithstanding its brevity, will place South Africa on the path
to a different future. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Freedom Front dissenting).

The House adjourned at 12:45.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 1999

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (i)     Financial Services Board Amendment Bill [B 62 - 99]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance
              - National Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (i)     Fire Brigade Services Amendment Bill [B 63 - 99] (National
              Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Portfolio Committee on Provincial and
              Local Government - National Assembly).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Education:


     Report of the Council on Higher Education for 1998-99.

2.    The Minister of Defence:
     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of France concerning Defence Co-
         operation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

     (2)    Agreement between the Department of Defence of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Federal Ministry of Defence of the Federal
         Republic of Germany on the Mutual Protection of Classified Defence
         related information, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (3)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Kingdom of Lesotho concerning the Status of Armed Forces
         in the Kingdom of Lesotho providing military assistance, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (4)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Singapore concerning the
         Status of the Singapore Forces deployed in the Republic of South
         Africa, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


     (5)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania concerning
         Defence Co-operation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (6)    Memorandum of Agreement between the United Nations Office for
         Project Services and the Republic of South Africa, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (7)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the United States of America concerning
         Security Measures for the Protection of Classified Military
         Information, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (8)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Department of Defence of the United States of America
         concerning Co-operation on Military Environmental Matters, tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (9)    Administrative and Technical Status Diplomatic Note Exchange
         between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
         Government of the United States of America, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (10)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
          Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho concerning the
          Status of Armed Forces in the Republic of South Africa
          participating in Exercise Blue Crane, tabled in terms of section
          231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Document, in terms of section 9(1) of the Promotion of National
         Unity and Reconciliation Act, 1995, regarding the remuneration,
         allowances and other employment benefits of the staff of the Truth
         and Reconciliation Commission.

     (2)    List relating to Government Notice for 5 November 1999.
4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Report of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry for 1998-99.

                         THURSDAY, 25 NOVEMBER 1999

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


          (i)     Intelligence Services Control Amendment Bill [B 46B - 99]
                 - Act No 42 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on
                 18 November 1999);

         (ii)    Abolition of Certain Title Conditions Bill [B 40B - 99] -
                 Act No 43 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on
                 18 November 1999);

         (iii)   Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 44B - 99] - Act No 48 of
                 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18 November
                 1999);

         (iv)    Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 55 - 99] - Act No 51 of
                 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18 November
                 1999);

         (v)     Second Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 58 - 99] - Act No
                 52 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18
                 November 1999);

         (vi)    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 59 - 99] - Act No 53 of
                 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18 November
                 1999);

         (vii)   Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 45B - 99] - Act No 55
                 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18 November
                 1999); and

        (viii)   National Student Financial Aid Scheme Bill [B 48B - 99] -
                 Act No 56 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on
                 18 November 1999).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 25
         November 1999 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Limitation of Legal Proceedings against Government
              Institutions Bill [B 65 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
              (Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
              - National Assembly) [Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Gazette No 20676 of 25 November
              1999.]


     (3)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 24
         November 1999 submitted the draft Cross-Border Insolvency Bill,
         1999, and the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select Committee
         on Security and Constitutional Affairs by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter,
         dated 18 November 1999, to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
         informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996, of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in terms of section 201(2)(c) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


         REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(3) 0F THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996) ON THE EMPLOYMENT
         OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN TERMS OF SECTION
         201(2)(c) OF THE CONSTITUTION, 1996, IN THE FULFILLMENT OF AN
         INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATION IN THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE


         1. This serves to inform the National Assembly that on 12 November
              1999, I authorised the employment of the South African
              National Defence Force personnel and aircraft in the Republic
              of Mozambique in fulfillment of an international obligation.
              This employment was authorised in accordance with the
              provisions of section 82(4)(b)(ii) of the Constitution of the
              Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act 108 of 1996), as well as
              section 201(2)(c) of the said Constitution of 1996, as read
              with section 227(1)(b) of the Constitution of 1993.

         2. This employment is in compliance with the Republic of South
              Africa's regional support to render logistical support to the
              Mozambican Government during their elections.

         3. The employment will consist of 121 members rendering support in
              terms of logistics, communications and medical. Seven Oryx
              helicopters, of which one will be in reserve in case of
              unserviceability, will be deployed. Other support aircraft
              will be required for the pre-deployment reconnaissance,
              deployment of equipment, placing of fuel, transport of
              election officials and deployment and withdrawal of personnel.
              These include Cessna 208, Casa 212, C-130, Boeing 707, Falcon
              50 and PC-12.

         4. The costs of the operation amount to:


              a)  Flying Hour Rates and R       15 903 828-00
                  Fuel costs for Oryx, C-208,
                  C-212, C-130, B-707, PC-12,
                  Falcon 50

              b)  Total Logistical Support    R          949 920-90
                  for a Temporary Air Base

              c)  Communications Support      R           34 999-98

              d)  Personnel Allowances  R          227 570-88
                  (121 personnel)

              e)  Medical Support  R           77 036-16
              f)  Total 21 193350-00
         5. I will also communicate this report to the National Council of
              Provinces and wish to request that you bring it to the notice
              of the Members of the National Assembly.

         With kind regards

         T M MBEKI
         PRESIDENT


     (2)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter,
         dated 18 November 1999, to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
         informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996, of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in terms of section 201(2)(c) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


         REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(3) 0F THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996), ON THE
         EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN TERMS OF
         SECTION 201(2)(c) OF THE CONSTITUTION, 1996, IN THE FULFILLMENT OF
         AN INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATION IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA


         1. This serves to inform the National Assembly that on 18 November
              1999, I authorised the employment of the South African
              National Defence Force personnel and aircraft in the United
              Republic of Tanzania in fulfillment of an international
              obligation. This employment was authorised in accordance with
              the provisions of section 82(4)(b)(ii) of the Constitution of
              the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act 200 of 1993), [which
              continues to be in force in terms of Item 24(1) of Schedule 6
              to the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act
              No 108 of 1996)], as well as section 201(2)(c) of the said
              Constitution of 1996, as read with section 227(1)(b) of the
              Constitution of 1993.

         2. This employment is in compliance with the Republic of South
              Africa's regional obligation for support. The presentation of
              this refresher diver training to members of the Tanzanian
              Peoples Defence Force over the period 10 November 1999 to 1
              December 1999 falls within the ambit of South Africa's
              regional commitments.

         3. The deployment will consist of the SANDF Diving Team, including
              a Diving Instruction, Diving Supervisor, and five Dive
              Technicians. One C-130B transport aircraft with eight
              crewmembers will be required to transport the SANDF Diving
              Team and equipment to and from Dar-Es-Salaam.

         4. The costs of the operation amount to:


              a.  Fuel costs R13,0670-00

              b.  Landing fees and overflight R15,600-00costs

              c.  Naval Group S&T R93,744-00

              d.  Total      R240 014-00


         5. I will also communicate this report to the National Council of
              Provinces and wish to request that you bring it to the notice
              of the Members of the National Assembly.

         With kind regards

         T M MBEKI
         PRESIDENT

                          FRIDAY, 17 DECEMBER 1999

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


        i  Sentech Amendment Bill [B 52 - 99] - Act No 44 of 1999 (assented
                 to and signed by President on 9 December 1999);


        ii National Water Amendment Bill [B 53B - 99] - Act No 45 of 1999
                 (assented to and signed by President on 2 December 1999);

        iii      World Heritage Convention Bill [B 42D - 99] - Act No 49 of
                 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 3 December
                 1999);

          iv      Rental Housing Bill [B 29D - 99] - Act No 50 of 1999
                 (assented to and signed by President on 9 December 1999);

          v Mutual Banks Amendment Bill [B 47 - 99] - Act No 54 of 1999
                 (assented to and signed by President on 9 December 1999);

          vi      South African Sports Commission Second Amendment Bill [B
                 61 - 99] - Act No 57 of 1999 (assented to and signed by
                 President on 2 December 1999);

          vii    Disestablishment of the Local Government Affairs Council
                 Bill [B 54 - 99] - Act No 59 of 1999 (assented to and
                 signed by President on 2 December 1999); and


          viii    Housing Second Amendment Bill [B 49 - 99] - Act No 60 of
                 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 9 December
                 1999).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 29
         November 1999 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill [B 66 - 99]
              (National Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Joint Committee on
              Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill) [Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Gazette No 20657
              of 22 November 1999.]


     (3)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (i)     Land Affairs General Amendment Bill [B 64 - 99] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and
              Land Affairs - National Assembly).
     (4)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant portfolio committees as mentioned below:


         (a)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Home Affairs and the Select Committee on Social
              Services for consideration and report. The papers are also
              referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
              Quality of Life and Status of Women:


              (i) Convention on the Nationality of Married Women, tabled in
                  terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


              (ii)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.


         (b)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Labour and the Select Committee on Labour and
              Public Enterprises:


             (i)  Report of the Compensation Fund for 1997-98.
             Unemployment Insurance Fund for 1998.


              (iii)    Report of the National Training Board for 1998.


         (c)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
              Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs for
              consideration and report:


              (i) Document, in terms of section 9(1) of the Promotion of the
                  National Unity and Reconciliation Act, 1995, regarding
                  the remuneration, allowances and other employment
                  benefits of the staff of the Truth and Reconciliation
                  Commission.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant portfolio committees as mentioned below:


         The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts:

         Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


         (i)     Group Annual Financial Statements of Mosshold (Pty) Ltd
                 and its subsidiaries for 1998-99 [RP 174-99];


         (ii)    Financial Statements of the Meat Board for 1997 [RP 166-
                 99];


         (iii)   Financial Statements of the Citrus Board for 1998-99 [RP
                 122-99];


         (iv)    Financial Statements of the National English Literary
                 Museum for 1998-99 [RP 119-99];


         (v)     Financial Statements of the National Hiking Way Fund for
                 1996-97 and 1998-99 [RP 118-99].


     (2)    The following member will vacate his seat with effect from 31
         January 2000:


         Schutte, D P A.


     (3)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Committees, viz:


         Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

         Appointed: Grov√©, S P; Nqodi, S B (Alt).¬†
         Finance:

         Discharged: Mangena, M A.

         Labour:

         Appointed: Dyani, M M Z (Alt); Malebane, H F.

         Open Democracy Bill:

         Appointed: Arendse, J D (Alt).

         Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
         Bill:
         Appointed: Taljaard, R (Alt).

         Provincial and Local Government:

         Appointed: Kannemeyer, B W (Alt).

         Public Accounts:

         Discharged: Mangena, M A.

         Public Enterprises:

         Appointed: Tsheole, N M (Alt); Smith, V G.

         Public Works:

         Appointed: Magubane, N E (Alt).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Eighth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 - Sport
     and Recreation for 1996-97 [RP 171-97] and 1997-98 [RP 204-98],
     referred to it, reports as follows:

     Unauthorised expenditure, R168 036 (1996-97 - R154 584; 1997-98 - R13
     452)


     1.     Women in sport - R136 330


         An amount of R136 330 was paid during the 1996-97 financial year
         in connection with the "Women in Sport" launch held in March 1997.
         As the applicable State Tender Board regulations were not complied
         with, the payment of R136 330 was regarded as unauthorised.


     2.     Travelling expenses - R11 080


         Travelling expenses amounting to R11 080 was paid to an official
         for travelling between his residence and headquarters, which was
         contrary to the Public Service Staff Code.


     3.     Overseas return ticket - R6 820


         As an official travelled in business class, the amount of R6 820,
         being the price difference between an economy and business class
         overseas return air ticket, was paid contrary to the Public
         Service Staff Code.


     4.     Purchase of gift - R354


         A gift amounting to R354 was purchased for an official in
         recognition of long service without any Treasury approval. The
         department purchased the gift under a previous Treasury approval
         granted for the purchase of gifts to foreign sports dignitaries.
         On 12 April 1996, the Treasury did not see its way clear to
         approve the granting of the gift to the said official.


     5.     Overtime remuneration - R11 854
         A total of 800 hours was authorised as overtime to enable
         officials from the Department of Sport and Recreation to complete
         the backlog of work in the Finance Division of the department. It
         was observed that records of overtime were captured on the Persal
         system by the Personnel Division of the department, who omitted to
         update the Persal system with the manual payments that were made.
         This resulted in an excess of 233,95 hours that were not
         authorised.


     6.     Daily remuneration - R1 598


         The Minister of Sport and Recreation appointed a task team on 1
         April 1997, consisting of five officials, to investigate various
         aspects of rugby in South Africa. An amount of R5 700 was paid to
         a member of the task team as remuneration for the period. In terms
         of Treasury directives, this payment exceeded the authorised
         amount by R1 598.


     The Committee wishes to express its dissatisfaction at the disregard
     for State Tender Board directives and is alarmed by the frequency with
     which unauthorised expenditure occurs in the department.

     Notwithstanding the above and due to specific exonerating
     circumstances, the Committee recommends that the amounts of R154 584
     and R13 452 be authorised by Parliament, as no misappropriations have
     been revealed.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

2.    Ninth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 36 -
     Transport for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 207-98], referred to it,
     reports as follows:


     A.     Non-compliance with Treasury Instructions


         The Committee noted that the government is continuously
         outsourcing certain functions in various departments.

         Accounting officers tend to underestimate the significance of the
         Treasury Instructions applicable to these transfers. In addition,
         due to poor planning and self-imposed pressure to effect the
         transfer, the assessment of the implication on accountability is
         often inadequate or non-existent. Consequently, accounting
         officers deliberately or unknowingly disregard these Treasury
         Instructions.

         This behaviour cannot be tolerated, as the non-adherence could
         potentially cost the State dearly. Despite the need for urgent
         decisions to be taken, proper control measures need to be
         implemented. It is essential that accounting officers familiarise
         themselves with the Treasury requirements and ensure that their
         subordinates are equally conversant therein.

         In the case of the Department of Transport, in excess of R3,3
         billion, or 92% of the department's total expenditure, consists of
         transfer payments to various agencies and provinces. Most of these
         agencies have been established in recent years to take over
         certain of the functions previously performed by the department.

         Transfer payments are regulated by Treasury Instruction K5, which,
         inter alia, provides that prior to rendering financial assistance
         accounting officers should satisfy themselves that beneficiaries
         submit documentation timeously. These documents should enable the
         accounting officer to assess whether the payments are made in
         compliance with the objectives for which the beneficiary was
         established.

         The Committee is dismayed that in many instances the department
         did not comply, and in some cases only partially complied, with
         these instructions. In addition, the department's application to
         the Treasury for approval of the non-compliance was disallowed.

         In his reply to the Committee, the Accounting Officer stated that
         provincial and government departments are not structured in a
         manner which make adherence to the specific Treasury Instruction
         possible. The Department of State Expenditure is of the opinion
         that there is a tendency with departments to ask permission for
         departure from specific Treasury Instructions without adequately
         applying their minds to the problems.

         The Committee wishes to stress that compliance with financial
         management requirements such as these should be incorporated into
         any restructuring plans of the department.

         The Committee took note of the steps the Accounting Officer has
         instituted to ensure that transfer payments to agencies fully
         comply with Treasury Instructions.  The Committee also noted that
         legislation is being drafted to change the mechanism of financing
         payments to provinces.

         The Committee recommends as follows:


         1. That any future transfer of activities or anticipated creation
              of statutory institutions be planned properly. This must
              include providing appropriate accounting and other control
              measures in the transition process.


         2. That the Accounting Officer provide the Committee with a
              schedule disclosing -


              (1) all agencies, institutions or other public bodies
                  receiving financial assistance from the department which
                  are subject to Treasury Instruction K5;


              (2) the date by which transfer payments to these beneficiaries
                  will be fully compliant with Treasury Instruction K5.


         3. That the Accounting Officer provide the Committee with an
              evaluation of the draft legislation that will clearly indicate
              that transfer payments to provinces will in future still be
              subjected to proper accountability measures, and that this
              information be provided to the Committee by not later than 31
              January 2000.


         4. That the Treasury ensure that new Treasury Instructions cover
              all aspects of outsourcing and devolving of functions,
              including monitoring and assessment requirements.


     B.     Unauthorised expenditure - R3 108 266


         Various payments during the financial year, amounting to R3 108
         266, have been classified as unauthorised due to non-adherence to
         Treasury directives and reported as such.

         The Committee wishes to express its serious concern at the fact
         that the Accounting Officer in many instances did not even apply
         for ex post facto approval for these payments. In addition, the
         Committee was not provided with sufficient information in the
         Accounting Officer's reply to written and verbal questions to make
         a proper assessment on whether or not to authorise the payments.
         The Accounting Officer undertook to provide the Committee with
         further evidence in writing in this regard.

         The Committee further wishes to express its dissatisfaction at the
         department's blatant disregard for State Tender Board directives.
         It is unacceptable that rules and regulations are contravened,
         even in cases where the projects achieve a desirable objective.

         The Committee took note of the undertaking by the Accounting
         Officer to limit the occurrence of transactions where ex post
         facto approval is required and to prevent the incidence of
         unauthorised expenditure.

         The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer provide the
         additional information by 31 January 2000.  The Committee will
         then, after evaluation thereof, make an appropriate
         recommendation.


     C.     Unresolved difference - R11,5 million


         Former employees of the department were transferred during the
         financial year to the National Road Agency (NRA), the Cross-Border
         Transport Agency (CTA), the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and the
         South African Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA). In this process
         the employees also withdrew from the Government Employees' Pension
         Fund (GEPF), on the basis of an agreement between the unions, the
         staff members and the department that the latter will finance any
         shortfall in the fund. The NRA's founding Act makes provision for
         the financing of this deficit by the department. This funding is,
         however, not permitted in terms of the current laws and rules
         regulating the GEPF. There are no similar clauses in the founding
         Acts of the CTA, the CAA and the SAMSA.

         Due to these contradictory requirements, it is clear that the
         intention originally envisaged by the department, namely funding
         the deficit, is no longer possible. Consultations between the
         department, the Department of Finance (representing the GEPF) and
         the staff members are on-going in order to resolve this impasse.

         The Committee wishes to express its concern about the preparatory
         work done to establish the NRA and that the benefits of employees
         may be at risk. It is indeed alarming that the establishment was
         effected and legislation passed without an agreement having been
         reached between all the affected parties and departments. This is
         essentially what has led to the current impasse, and the Committee
         wants to advocate strongly against this happening in future, since
         it can result in negative staff morale.

         The R11,5 million in the suspense account is the direct result of
         the lack of agreement between the department and the GEPF.

         The Committee appeals for further co-operation between
         departments, and recommends that all roleplayers resolve this
         matter urgently and report back to the Committee on the progress
         thereon by 31 January 2000.


     D.     Payment of levies by Regional Services Councils (RSCs)
         The Customs and Excise Act made provision for the introduction of
         a one cent fuel levy to be paid over by the RSCs to the
         department. Since the introduction of this levy, the department
         has experienced difficulty in managing the system, as some
         councils did not honour these commitments. This provision of the
         Customs and Excise Act was repealed in 1997.

         R21,8 million in respect of the financial years 30 June 1994 to
         1996 and an estimated R31 million in respect of the 1997 financial
         year remain outstanding to the department.

         The Accounting Officer has referred the matter to the State
         Attorney for advice on how to proceed with the recovery of these
         debts, which are in some instances more than five years old.

         The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently
         follow up on progress in this regard with the State Attorney, and
         urges the State Attorney to expedite the provision of advice to
         the Accounting Officer.
         The Committee further recommends that the Accounting Officer and
         the State Attorney report back to the Committee on progress made
         by 31 January 2000.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

3.    Tenth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 1 -
     President for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP174-98], referred to it,
     reports as follows:

     Unauthorised expenditure (R66 226,64) (Page 2, par 2.2)


     1.     Unauthorised expenditure of R66 226,64 was incurred during the
         year under review. This expenditure resulted from the non-
         compliance with normal procurement procedures by the former RDP
         Office and is therefore unauthorised in terms of section 33(1)(d)
         of the Exchequer Act, 1975 (Act No. 66 of 1975).


     2.     The above unauthorised expenditure has been listed by the
         Auditor-General, since the expenditure was not material or has not
         resulted in a loss to the State, or the question of mala fides did
         not arise, or the expenditure was only unauthorised due to
         technical contraventions of the regulations. Since the Auditor-
         General has indicated that the expenditure could be authorised
         legally without detracting from effective financial control, the
         Committee recommends that the amount be authorised by Parliament.

     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

4.    Eleventh Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:
     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 2 - Deputy
     President for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 57-99], referred to it,
     reports as follows:

     Unauthorised expenditure (R491 210,99) (Page 2, par 2.2.2)


     1.     Unauthorised expenditure of R139 118,86 was incurred during the
         year under review as a result of non-compliance with normal
         procurement procedures. An amount of R270 480,03 resulted from
         expenditure incurred without the necessary Treasury approval and
         expenditure to the amount of R81 612,10 occurred as a result of
         non-compliance with normal procurement procedures at the National
         Youth Commission. The total unauthorised expenditure of R491
         210,99 is therefore unauthorised in terms of section 33(1)(d) of
         the Exchequer Act, 1975 (Act No. 66 of 1975).


     2.     The above unauthorised expenditure has been listed by the
         Auditor-General, since the expenditure was not material or has not
         resulted in a loss to the State, or the question of mala fides did
         not arise, or the expenditure was only unauthorised due to
         technical contraventions of the regulations. Since the Auditor-
         General has indicated that the expenditure could be authorised
         legally without detracting from effective financial control, the
         Committee recommends that the amount be authorised by Parliament.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

5.    Twelfth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 17 - Housing
     for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP188-98], referred to it, reports as
     follows:

     Unauthorised expenditure (R8 778) (Page 5, par 2.2.3)


     1.     Unauthorised expenditure of R8 778 was incurred during the year
         under review. The expenditure resulted from non-compliance with
         normal procurement procedures and is therefore unauthorised in
         terms of section 33(1)(d) of the Exchequer Act, 1975 (Act No. 66
         of 1975).


     2.     The above unauthorised expenditure has been listed by the
         Auditor-General, since the expenditure was not material or has not
         resulted in a loss to the State, or the question of mala fides did
         not arise, or the expenditure was only unauthorised due to
         technical contraventions of the regulations. Since the Auditor-
         General has indicated that the expenditure could be authorised
         legally without detracting from effective financial control, the
         Committee recommends that the amount be authorised by Parliament.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.
6.    Thirteenth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 23 -
     Minerals and Energy for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 194-98],
     referred to it, reports as follows:

     Unauthorised expenditure (R137 990,63) (Page 6, par 2.2.4)


     1.     The department reported that expenditure to the amount of R137
         990,63 in respect of the appointment of a legal consultant had not
         been authorised.


     2.     The above unauthorised expenditure has been listed by the
         Auditor-General, since the expenditure was not material or has not
         resulted in a loss to the State, or the question of mala fides did
         not arise, or the expenditure was only unauthorised due to
         technical contraventions of the regulations. Since the Auditor-
         General has indicated that the expenditure could be authorised
         legally without detracting from effective financial control, the
         Committee recommends that the amount be authorised by Parliament.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

7.    Fourteenth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 28 - South
     African Communication Service for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 199-
     98], referred to it, reports as follows:

     Unauthorised expenditure (R92 638) (Page 2, par 2.2.2)


     1.     Unauthorised expenditure of R92 638 was incurred during the year
         under review. The expenditure resulted from non-compliance with
         normal procurement procedures and gave rise to five cases of
         unauthorised expenditure in terms of section 33(1)(d) of the
         Exchequer Act, 1975 (Act No. 66 of 1975).


     2.     The above unauthorised expenditure has been listed by the
         Auditor-General, since the expenditure was not material or has not
         resulted in a loss to the State, or the question of mala fides did
         not arise, or the expenditure was only unauthorised due to
         technical contraventions of the regulations. Since the Auditor-
         General has indicated that the expenditure could be authorised
         legally without detracting from effective financial control, the
         Committee recommends that the amount be authorised by Parliament.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

8.    Fifteenth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:
     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 5 -
     Agriculture for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 177-98], referred to
     it, reports as follows:


     A.     Production loan scheme for small and beginner farmers


         1. Recovery of outstanding loans


              In a previous resolution, contained in the Twenty-seventh
              Report of the Public Accounts Committee for 1998, that
              committee recommended that the department evaluate the
              recoverability of all loans made in terms of this scheme,
              which was terminated in August 1998.

              The Committee is pleased with the significant progress that
              has been made in recovering the loans since the previous
              report.

              The Committee, however, notes with concern that material
              amounts in respect of four mediators are still outstanding,
              and that the department has referred these matters to the
              State Attorney.

              The Committee further notes with serious concern that some
              mediators have been unable to pay the department, although
              repayments have actually been received from the farmers. The
              mediators have used these repayments to finance other
              expenses.

              The Committee finds this totally unacceptable, and recommends
              that the department take legal action in this regard.


         2. State Attorney


              In order to monitor the progress made with recoveries in
              respect of the matters referred to the State Attorney, the
              Committee requested the State Attorney to provide further
              evidence during the hearing.

              The Committee is extremely concerned about the length of time
              taken by the State Attorney to finalise matters referred to
              him. Difficulties in contacting the State Attorney prior to
              the hearing exacerbate this concern.


         3. Large companies as mediators


              The Committee notes with concern the possibility that large
              national and international companies may have received
              assistance in terms of this scheme.

              The Accounting Officer was, however, unable to confirm or deny
              this during the hearing, and undertook to reply to the
              Committee in writing on the concerns expressed.

              No response has been received at the time of finalising this
              Report, and the Committee will make an appropriate
              recommendation once a reply is received.

              The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently
              attend to this outstanding matter.


     B.     Internal control and financial management


         The Accounting Officer is at present the chairperson of the Audit
         Committee.

         During the hearing it became evident that there is confusion in
         the department regarding the functions of the Audit Committee and
         the Internal Audit Component.

         The Committee is of the view that the chairperson should be an
         external person who can support the Accounting Officer in her
         efforts to establish good governance in the department. The
         Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer, as a matter of
         urgency, appoint a capable external person as chairperson of the
         Audit Committee, as will be required when the new Public Finance
         Management Act comes into operation.


     C.     Agriculture Credit Account (ACA)
         Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP)
         The Committee is dissatisfied with the poor quality of information
         disclosed in the accounts. Due to the failure to apply proper
         accounting principles, the integrity and credibility of amounts
         disclosed are in doubt and even misleading.

         Some examples of poor disclosure are:


         1. With respect to the ACA, debtors were disclosed at more than R1
              billion, yet no provision was made for bad debts, even though
              there were serious doubts regarding recoverability.


         2. With regard to OBP, cost of sales was disclosed as a negative
              amount, thus leading to an overstatement of the asset value.


         The Committee takes cognisance of the inherent weaknesses in
         disclosure on the cash-based system and also that departments may
         not have the expertise in preparing financial statements on the
         accrual basis.

         The Committee is, however, seriously concerned about the departure
         from generally accepted accounting practice, and questions the
         professionalism of the department in actually presenting these
         statements to the Auditor-General and to Parliament.

         This concern is especially grave given the move towards
         corporatisation of OBP. Further to the proposed corporatisation,
         the Committee questions the value of introducing a new financial
         management system at this late stage.

         The Accounting Officer undertook to prepare appropriate financial
         statements for the two accounts mentioned and to submit them to
         the Auditor-General and the Committee by not later than 15
         December 1999.


     D.     Outstanding information


         During the hearing on 12 October 1999, the Director-General
         undertook to provide the Committee with additional information
         regarding the following matters, which were perused:
         1. Debtors management strategy.


         2. Loan securities.


         3. Large companies as mediators.


         As this information is only due on 15¬†December 1999, certain
         aspects pursued during the hearing could not be dealt with in this
         Report.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

   9. Sixteenth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
      Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 11 -
     Education for 1996-97 [RP 151-97] and 1997-98 [RP 182-98], referred to
     it, reports as follows:

     Unauthorised expenditure, R34 591 376

     For many years the former Department of Education and Training provided
     the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) with funds through
     transfer payments in order to broadcast educational programmes. No
     contracts were entered into and the SABC used its own discretion in
     respect of programmes broadcast.

     The current Department of Education continued to make use of the SABC
     for the broadcasting of educational programmes. In order to obtain
     proper financial control over the funds expended and also to be
     involved in the quality of the programmes produced and the monitoring
     thereof, the department formalised these services by entering into a
     written agreement with the SABC, as approved by the State Attorney.

     The department did not adhere to tender procedures, as it considered
     the SABC to be a government institution. During discussions with the
     Department of State Expenditure and the State Tender Board, the
     department concurred on the process that should have been followed.
     An amount of R8 626 108 was paid to the SABC during the 1996-97
     financial year and was reported as unauthorised by the Auditor-General.
     During the 1997-98 financial year, the department incurred further
     expenses amounting to R25¬†965¬†268, bringing the total expenditure paid
     in respect of this contract to R34 591 376.

     However, on 14 August 1998 the State Tender Board informed the
     Department of Education that it could not agree with the procedures
     followed and refused ex post facto approval of the expenditure.

     Despite the above, the department was still liable for the payment of
     all outstanding invoices and payment for work done by the SABC.
     Notwithstanding the fact that a firm agreement to regulate the matter
     and to safeguard the interests of the State was entered into, payment
     to the SABC could have continued as a transfer payment against the
     budget vote of the department.

     The Committee wishes to express its dissatisfaction at the disregard
     for State Tender Board directives. Notwithstanding this, the Committee
     recommends that the amount of R34¬†591¬†376 be authorised by Parliament,
     as no misappropriations have been revealed.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

10.   Seventeenth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 30 November 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 13 - Finance
     for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 184-98], referred to it, reports
     as follows:

     Unauthorised expenditure, R104 189 770


     1.     Interest payments: Closed Pension Fund - R104 104 617


         Since the 1994-95 financial year, interest payments (as listed
         below) were made on the outstanding balance of the remaining
         liability to the Closed Pension Fund. As section 9 of the Closed
         Pension Fund Act, 1993 (Act No. 197 of 1993), did not make
         provision for the payment of interest, the following payments were
         regarded as unauthorised:

         Financial year      Amount

         1994-95     R808 228
         1995-96 R39 933 088
         1996-97 R34 118 701
         1997-98 R29 244 600
         ------------------------
         TOTAL   R104 104 617
         ------------------------

         The Closed Pension Fund Act was amended by the Closed Pension Fund
         Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No. 41 of 1999), that was promulgated on
         1 October 1999. These amendments extend the State's remaining
         financial obligations to the Closed Pension Fund to include the
         payment of interest and to provide for an alternative method of
         payment. The implementation of these amendments is retrospective
         to 5 January 1994.

         The Committee notes that the payments were considered to be
         unauthorised due to the insufficient provisions of the Closed
         Pension Fund Act. As the said Act has subsequently been amended to
         include the payment of interest, the Committee recommends that the
         amount of R104 104 617 be validated by Parliament.


     2.     Exceeding of budget: Programme 3 - R85 153


         The budget of programme 3 (Exchequer financing) was exceeded by R2
         million, of which R85 153 is regarded as unauthorised as no
         virement was obtained from the Accounting Officer to authorise
         this excess, as required by Treasury directives.


         The Committee notes that the payment was considered to be
         unauthorised due to the procedural contravention of Treasury
         directives. As the contravention was of a technical nature, the
         services were rendered, the State suffered no loss and the Auditor-
         General has indicated that the expenditure can be authorised
         legally without detracting from effective financial control, the
         Committee recommends that the amount be authorised by Parliament.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.


11.   Eighteenth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 1 December 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 - SA
     Police Service for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 202-98], referred
     to it, reports as follows:


     A.     Introduction


         The Committee expresses its strong concern at the reaction of the
         Accounting Officer of the South African Police Services (the SAPS)
         to the public hearing held on 20 October 1999. The Accounting
         Officer's criticism of the Auditor-General's report is
         unprecedented, as is his criticism of the way in which the
         Committee exercised its oversight role on behalf of Parliament.
         The intimation that the Auditor-General incorrectly represented
         the state of affairs at the SAPS, and that the Committee had been
         unfair to the Accounting Officer and the department at both the
         hearings and in the press, is unfounded and without any factual
         basis. The Accounting Officer seems to have implied that the
         Committee displayed dishonesty and incompetence, and further that
         its members abused their parliamentary privilege.

         For the past number of years the state of financial management in
         the SAPS has not been of an acceptable standard, and the
         contemptuous attitude now shown towards the Committee because of
         its greater determination to have the SAPS address its
         shortcomings, is highly improper and altogether unbecoming of one
         holding such high public office. The Committee has been in
         communication with the Ministry in this regard.
         The Committee also noted that the SAPS only replied on 14 October
         1999 to the questions referred to them on 15 July 1999. The
         Committee wishes to recommend that the department in future reply
         to the questions referred to it within four weeks of the date of
         receipt of the questions or as indicated in the letter
         accompanying the question or inquiry.


     B.     Financial management


         1. Audit Committee and internal audit


              The Committee wishes Parliament to note that in spite of his
              verbal undertaking during the Committee's previous hearing on
              9 September 1998, and his written undertaking to the Committee
              on 29 January 1999 and again on 12 October 1999, the National
              Commissioner of the SAPS informed the Committee during the
              hearing on 20 October 1999 that an independent chairperson had
              not yet been appointed to the Audit Committee. The Committee
              is further concerned that the Commissioner did not comply with
              Financial Regulation 1(1)(m) by ensuring that the Audit
              Committee functioned properly during the period under review.
              In fact, the National Commissioner regarded it as "unnecessary
              for the Audit Committee to meet more frequently" despite the
              fact that he noted, at the time of approving the role and
              responsibilities of the Audit Committee, that that Committee
              should meet at least twice a year.

              The Committee noted that the National Commissioner during the
              hearing on 20 October 1999 committed himself to the
              appointment of an independent chairperson within the next two
              to three weeks.

              The Committee therefore recommends that -


              (1) particulars of the new chairperson, upon his or her
                  appointment, be forwarded to the Committee;

              (2) the Audit Committee meet under his or her chairpersonship
                  before the end of 1999; and

              (3) the minutes of the aforementioned meeting, as well as the
                  date of the next Audit Committee meeting, be submitted to
                  the Committee 21 days after the meeting.


         2. Decentralisation of financial management problems


              The Committee noted that in spite of the intended
              decentralisation process in the SAPS being modelled on the
              Park Road Police Station pilot project, the Commissioner could
              not provide convincing evidence, more than halfway through the
              two-year project, that it is succeeding and what important
              lessons had been learned in the process so far.

              The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer acquaint
              himself with the significance of the pilot project and its
              results, and determine whether decentralisation to the extent
              envisaged was a realistic solution to the financial management
              position of the SAPS, and that he report to the Committee as
              soon as possible, but not later than 31 March 2000.


         3. Withholding of payments


              The Committee noted the confirmation by the Chief Executive
              Officer of the SAPS that at the end of the 1998-99 financial
              year the department's payments to creditors were not
              outstanding for more than 32 days on average.

              The Committee recommends that the SAPS furnish supporting
              documents to the Auditor-General to substantiate the fact that
              the creditors are not outstanding for more than 32 days, and
              that the Auditor-General's evaluation be submitted to the
              Committee promptly.


         4. Debtor control


              The Committee noted the evidence from the Financial Manager on
              the new debtors system to be incorporated into the new Polfin
              system, which was being tested and which was to improve the
              turnaround time between the date of debt incurred and the
              commencement of recovery, as well as a new "loss control"
              policy that would minimise losses.


              The Committee recommends that it be informed of the date on
              which the new debtors system will be in full operation, as
              well as the results of the tests carried out.


         5. Guarantee scheme for housing loans


              The Committee wishes to commend the Accounting Officer for the
              progress reportedly made with regard to the substantial amount
              by which guarantees called up had decreased from the year
              under review to the next financial year.

              The Committee nevertheless recommends that the National
              Commissioner promptly submit the following information to the
              Committee:


              (1) Number and amounts of claims not recovered from the person
                  concerned as at 31 March 1998, together with an age
                  analysis as well as the number of cases not being
                  recovered.


              (2) Claims paid during 1998-99.


              (3) Amounts recovered during 1998-99 in respect of claims
                  outstanding as at 31 March 1998. For claims received
                  during 1998-99, separate figures should be provided.


              (4) The resultant decrease/increase of any balances in
                  suspense accounts that are utilised to control these
                  recoveries.


              (5) A breakdown of the write-off of R86 000 mentioned by the
                  National Commissioner during the hearing in respect of
                  the financial years involved.


         6. Stock administration


              The Committee is concerned about the many deficiencies
              reported with regard to the administration of stock. The
              Committee also noted the numerous references by the Head of
              Logistics to limited resources and expertise.

              The Committee therefore recommends that the National
              Commissioner take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that
              the new provisioning administration system for A-class items
              will be completed by September 2001, and that the Committee be
              informed of any material deviations from the implementation
              schedule on a quarterly basis.


         7. Fuel card system


              The Committee took note of the implementation problems of the
              new fuel card system and the fact that the SAPS may serve as a
              pilot project for a total vehicle fleet management system in
              conjunction with the Department of Transport.


              The Committee recommends that progress reports on the
              implementation of the fuel card system, and vehicle fleet
              management systems in general, be submitted to it and the
              Auditor-General on a quarterly basis.


         8. Members on suspension


              The Committee expresses serious concern about the financial
              implications of the number of members on suspension with full
              benefits. The long periods of suspension in certain cases are
              totally unacceptable to the Committee.

              The Committee recommends that it be furnished with a
              progress/status report as at the end of December 1999,
              compared to the end of March 1999, as well as what corrective
              actions have been taken where improvements have not been
              forthcoming.


         9. Auctions and disposal of assets


              The Committee noted in par 3.31 on page 40 that during the
              year under review, audits conducted by the Auditor-General and
              inspections carried out by the Inspectorate of the SAPS
              brought to light serious deficiencies regarding disposals.

              The Committee therefore recommends that the disposal policy of
              the SAPS be revised urgently to maximise income for the
              department. When vehicles and other assets are scrapped to be
              sold, it should happen without any unnecessary delay. Any
              auctioneer appointed should be reputable and be a member of
              the SA Institute of Auctioneers. The possibility of regularly
              rotating staff dealing with disposals should also be
              investigated.


         10.     Leave administration


              The Committee noted the progress made in addressing certain
              PERSAL system problems experienced by the SAPS. However, it is
              also noted that the deadline of March 1999 set for the
              completion of the reconciliation of the manual and the
              computerised leave records was not achieved. It was further
              noted that the ongoing administration of leave is not being
              performed adequately.
              The Committee therefore recommends that the project team
              established in July 1999 to address the issue of leave
              administration, attend to the following as a matter of great
              urgency:


              (1) Provide the Committee with a date when the new "user-
                  friendly" manual on leave administration will be
                  available.


              (2) Set realistic deadlines for completion of the
                  reconciliation of leave records and undertake monitoring
                  of the achievement thereof.


              (3) Ensure that the required training of staff is provided.


              Progress on the improvement of the administration of leave
              should be reported to the Committee quarterly as from 31 March
              2000.


     C.     Unauthorised expenditure, R3 405 893 [Page 17, par 3.3]
         The Committee took note of two instances of unauthorised
         expenditure, totalling R3 405 893, consisting of a payment made to
         a consultancy firm without tender procedures being adhered to and
         a payment made to a consultant in respect of a contract extended
         without the necessary prior approval.

         The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer provide it
         with substantive proof that the service provided did not
         constitute fruitless expenditure.


     D.     Computer audit [Page 50, par 3.45]


         1. The Committee noted that in the past there were weaknesses in
              the system of internal control of services rendered and
              equipment received in the information technology environment,
              that losses were suffered owing to excess charges and
              overpurchasing, that computer equipment was stored in a
              warehouse since 1995 and in the process became obsolete, and
              that there was failure by the department to always update and
              maintain asset registers.


         2. A computer audit of the project management of a network
              contract was also carried out. The key findings of this audit
              indicate a lack of supporting documents, inadequate project
              management and control due to inexperienced project managers
              as well as formal project management standards and procedures
              not being in place. Due to the lack of supporting documents,
              the process followed in reaching the decision to award the
              tender could not be evaluated.


         3. The Committee recommends that the new Accounting Officer take
              the necessary steps to ensure that public funds expended in
              the information technology environment is spent only after
              proper planning and that all related projects are managed
              professionally and in terms of acceptable standards.


     E.     General


         The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer of the SAPS,
         at monthly meetings with his top management, monitor and evaluate
         progress made regarding the matters referred to above as well as
         the other matters contained in the report of the Auditor-General
         for 1997-98, and that he report thereon to the Auditor-General on
         a quarterly basis in order for the latter to monitor the progress
         on behalf of the Committee.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

12.   Nineteenth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 1 December 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 35 - Trade
     and Industry for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 206-98], referred to
     it, reports as follows:

     Unauthorised expenditure (R3 477 855,94) (Page 6, par 2.2.4) (Listed:
     R2 278 833,78; Reported: R1¬†199¬†022,16)


     1.     Over-expenditure of R2 278 833,78 regarded as unauthorised in
         terms of the Exchequer Act, 1975, and listed by the Auditor-
         General, was considered by the Committee. The Committee noted that
         the listed unauthorised expenditure occurred owing to the non-
         compliance with prescripts. As the contravention was of a
         technical nature, the services were rendered, the State suffered
         no loss and the Auditor-General has indicated that the expenditure
         can be authorised legally without detracting from effective
         financial control, the Committee recommends that the amount be
         authorised by Parliament.


     2.     The remaining amount of R1 199 022,16, reported as unauthorised
         by the Auditor-General, refers to expenditure incurred from voted
         funds to host the Second National Conference on Small Business, in
         excess of the R2 million donation received. Further information
         had been requested from the department, and although the Committee
         has accepted the reply, it is concerned at the non-compliance with
         applicable Treasury Instructions. However, in view of the
         corrective measures reportedly implemented by the department, the
         Committee recommends that this amount be authorised by Parliament.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

13.   Twentieth Report (First Session, Second Parliament) of the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, dated 1 December 1999, as follows:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 37 - Water
     Affairs and Forestry and Related Accounts for the year ended 31 March
     1998 and the Performance Audit on Commercial Forestry [RP 208-98],
     referred to it, reports as follows:


     A.     Procurement administration system and related expenditure
         Various internal control weaknesses, which may result in the State
         suffering losses, were discovered during the audit.

         The Committee is pleased with the initiative by the Accounting
         Officer to establish an inspectorate, in addition to the existing
         internal system of control, to do checks on the more than 80
         administration offices scattered throughout the country.

         The Committee took note that 27 people, some of whom have
         subsequently been discharged, have been suspended after
         investigations involving R3,6 million.

         The Committee, however, wishes to express its concern at the long
         delay in finalising some of these matters, and recommends that the
         Accounting Officer urgently address the completion thereof and
         report back to it on progress in this regard by 31¬†January 2000.


     B.     Trading accounts (Government Water Schemes Trading Account;
         Industrial Plantations Trading Account)


         With regard to both trading accounts the auditors expressed an
         adverse opinion. This means that the financial statements do not
         fairly present the results of operations in accordance with
         prescribed accounting practice.

         The department merely made a poor attempt at an Income Statement
         to the Auditor-General and to Parliament. A Balance Sheet, Cash
         Flow Statement and Notes to the Statements were not submitted as
         required.

         The Committee noted with serious concern that the Department of
         State Expenditure granted permission for the submission of these
         inadequate statements.

         The Committee further noted that these statements did not include
         debtors and creditors, and that the scope of the audit was
         restricted as some of the documents to verify transactions were
         not available. As a result, the information disclosed is of little
         value from a financial management perspective. In fact, it could
         be regarded as misleading, as it poses more questions than it
         provides information. It is also apparent that no serious attempt
         was made to obtain proper debtors information from the regions.

         The Committee took cognisance of the Accounting Officer's view
         that the poor statements are a reflection of the weaknesses in
         administration and that it is inappropriate for individual
         departments to develop autonomous financial management systems.

         The Committee wishes to express its dissatisfaction at the
         inadequate financial statements. It would appear that the
         Accounting Officer allowed irregularities and systems weaknesses
         to dictate to him. The Accounting Officer's responsibility towards
         good financial management remains, notwithstanding these
         limitations.

         The Committee recommends -


         1. that the Accounting Officer provide it with explanatory notes,
              to explain the huge variations in these statements, by
              31¬†January 2000; and


         2. that State Expenditure do an evaluation of the compliance to
              disclosure requirements on all trading accounts in the various
              departments, the reasons for non-compliance, what steps have
              been done to avoid recurrence and what role State Expenditure
              itself is playing in assisting departments, and that it report
              back to the Committee on the progress thereon by 31 March
              2000.


     C.     Commercial forestry


         1. Staffing
              The Committee notes with serious concern that the plantation
              loss of R264 million in the 1998 financial year can be
              ascribed to excessive staff levels and wage rates. The
              Committee took cognisance of the reply from the Accounting
              Officer that supernumeraries would to a large extent be
              reduced by the privatisation of commercial forestry by the end
              of the 1999-2000 financial year. In addition, supernumeraries
              will also be afforded the opportunity to apply for Voluntary
              Severance Packages (VSPs).

              The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer provide
              it with the status of the reduction in supernumeraries by 31
              March 2000, and on a quarterly basis thereafter.


         2. Contractual obligation


              The Committee notes with serious concern that the department
              and the State is subject to huge claims as a result of
              contracts entered into prior to 1994, which are impossible to
              comply with. Even if the department should successfully
              privatise its commercial forestry operations, these potential
              liabilities will remain with the department.

              The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer -


              (1) inform the Committee about progress on the court case in
                  which the department is defending its failure to comply
                  with the terms of the contract;


              (2) determine whether any employee at senior management level
                  who was involved in originally entering into the contract
                  is currently employed in the public sector or drawing a
                  pension from the government; and


              (3) report back to the Committee on progress with these
                  matters by 31 January 2000.


     D.     Unauthorised expenditure


         1. Unauthorised expenditure previously reported - R617¬†788


              In the previous financial year the department made payments
              amounting to R617 788 in four instances without adhering to
              State Tender Board directives. The State Tender Board refused
              to grant ex post facto approval, and the payments were
              accordingly reported as unauthorised.

              The Committee wishes to express its serious concern at the
              inability of the department to trace the documentation and
              determine the actual amount of this unauthorised payment. This
              is another example of poor financial administration in the
              department.

              The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer, in
              consultation with State Expenditure, urgently address this
              long outstanding matter and report back to it by 31 January
              2000 with proposals on how to resolve the matter.


         2. Water Law Review - R1 838 557


              During the year under review the department made 35 separate
              consultant appointments to make progress with the SA Water Law
              Review, which included preparation of the National Water
              Policy for South Africa, the National Water Act and the Water
              Services Act.
              Twenty-one of these appointments, fee payments of which
              amounted to R1¬†838 557, were reported as unauthorised, as the
              department did not comply with State Tender Board directives.

              The Committee wishes to express its dissatisfaction at the
              department's blatant disregard for State Tender Board
              directives and at the fact that the Accounting Officer did not
              even apply for ex post facto approval of these payments. The
              Committee finds it unacceptable that Accounting Officers often
              cite time constraints as a reason for contravening
              regulations, and, because projects achieve a desirable
              objective, expect the Committee to condone these decisions.

              The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer provide
              the Committee with additional information regarding -


              (1) the hourly rates and amounts paid to the 21 consultants;
                  and


              (2) the amount spent on marketing and promotion.


              The Committee further recommends that the Accounting Officer
              provide the additional information by 31 January 2000, at
              which stage the Committee, after evaluation thereof, will make
              an appropriate recommendation.


         3. Utilisation of savings


              During the year under review the department utilised savings
              under certain programmes to finance expenditure under other
              programmes. This utilisation of savings is regarded as
              unauthorised, as the department did not obtain prior Treasury
              approval.

              Due to the incomplete capturing of budget information on the
              financial management system, it is not possible to determine
              the amount of savings utilised, and hence the amount of
              unauthorised expenditure.

              The Committee wishes to express its dissatisfaction about the
              under-utilisation of the limited capabilities of the financial
              management system. The Committee recommends that the
              Accounting Officer, in consultation with State Expenditure,
              determine the unauthorised amount and report back to it on
              progress made in this regard by 31 January 2000.


     E.     Outstanding information


         During the hearing on 27 October 1999, the Accounting Officer
         undertook to provide the Committee with additional information
         regarding various matters.

         No such information has been received at the time of finalising
         this Report, and hence certain aspects could not be dealt with in
         the Committee's recommendations.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

                           MONDAY, 10 JANUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (i)     Limitation of Legal Proceedings against Government
              Institutions Bill [B 65 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
              (Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
              - National Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (i)     Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill [B 66 - 99]
              (National Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Joint Committee on
              Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill).


     (3)    The Minister of Finance on 21 December 1999 and 28 December
         1999, respectively, submitted drafts of the Financial Institutions
         (Investment of Funds) Bill, 2000, and the SAA Unallocatable Debt
         Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandums explaining the objects of
         the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in
         terms of Joint Rule 159. The drafts have been referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Finance
         by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance
         with Joint Rule 159(2).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter,
         dated 13 December 1999, to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
         informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996, of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in terms of section 82(4)(b)(ii), read with
         section 227(1)(d), of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1993 (Act No. 200 of 1993).


         REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(2) 0F THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996) ON THE EMPLOYMENT
         OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR SERVICE IN THE
         PROVISION OR MAINTENANCE OF ESSENTIAL SERVICES RELATED TO THE Y2K
         PHENOMENON


         1. This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised
              the employment of the South African National Defence Force
              (SANDF) personnel and equipment in the Republic of South
              Africa for the provision and maintenance of essential services
              in the event of unforeseeable breakdown related to non-
              compliance with Y2K compatibility. This employment commenced
              from 10 December 1999 to 16 January 2000. This employment was
              authorised in accordance with the provisions of section
              82(4)(b)(ii), read with section 227(1)(d), of the Constitution
              of the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act No. 200 of 1993),
              [which sections continue to be in force in terms of item 24(1)
              of Schedule 6 to the Constitution of the Republic of South
              Africa, 1996 (Act No. 108 of 1996)], read further with section
              3(2)(a)(v) of the Defence Act, 1957 (Act No. 44 of 1957) for
              service in the provision or maintenance of essential services.


         2. The deployment consisted of 3 Battalions (1200 personnel) that
              were placed on standby and were authorised to be deployed to
              the extent necessary in the provision or maintenance of
              essential services such as the water supply,
              telecommunications, medical facilities and ensuring that
              essential state infrastructure was provided for and
              maintained. The operation was known as OPERATION CASTENET.


         3. The SANDF funded the operation from within its current budget
              allocation.
         4. I will also communicate this report to the National Council of
              Provinces and wish to request that you bring it to the notice
              of the Members of the National Assembly.

         Regards

         T M MBEKI


     Referred to the Joint Standing Committee on Defence.

                          THURSDAY, 20 JANUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         i  Nuclear Energy Bill [B 10B - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
               Act No 46 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 20
               December 1999);


         ii National Nuclear Regulator Bill [B 11B - 99] (National Assembly
               - sec 75) - Act No 47 of 1999 (assented to and signed by
               President on 20 December 1999); and


         iii     Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B
               60B - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75) - Act No 58 of 1999
               (assented to and signed by President on 12 January 2000).


         Note: The President has now assented to and signed all the Acts
         (60 in total) passed by Parliament in 1999.


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 20
         January 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     South African Airways Unallocatable Debt Bill [B 1 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance
              - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              20800 of 7 January 2000.]

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     DECISION BY THE SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY TO ESTABLISH AN AD HOC
     COMMITTEE ON REPORT NO 13 BY THE PUBLIC PROTECTOR


     1.     The Speaker of the National Assembly, after consulting the Chief
         Whip and the most senior whip of each of the other parties, has
         decided, in terms of National Assembly Rule No 214, to establish
         an Ad Hoc Committee on Report No 13 by the Public Protector, to
         consider the Report and report to the National Assembly thereon.


     2.     The committee is to be composed of 27 members as follows:


         a. African National Congress


              Cwele S C      Mokaba P R
              Dlamini B O    Nel A C
              Feinstein A J  Nonkonyana M
              Grov√© S P      Ramotsamai C M P
              Holomisa S P   Xingwana L M T
              Jana D P S
              Landers L T    Alternates
              Mahomed F      Benjamin J
              Masutha M T    Mgidi J S
              Modise T R     Oliphant G G


         b. Democratic Party


              Gibson D H M


         c. Inkatha Freedom Party


              Ndabandaba L B G


         d. New National Party


              Bakker D M
         e. United Democratic Movement


              Mabeta M E


         f. African Christian Democratic Party


              Green L M


         g. United Christian Democratic Party


              Mfundisi I S


         h. Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


              De Lille P


         i. Freedom Front


              Mulder C P


         j. Federal Alliance


              Luyt L


         k. Minority Front


              Rajbally S


         l. Afrikaner-Eenheidsbeweging


              Aucamp C


         m. Azanian People's Organisation


              Mangena M A


     3.     The Committee shall submit an interim report to the National
         Assembly by 28 February, 2000, which report will include a time
         frame for the completion of its business.


     4.     The Committee may exercise those powers in National Assembly
         Rule 138 that may assist it in carrying out its task.

     Dr F N Ginwala
     Speaker of the National Assembly
     Date: 19 January 2000
COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Committee on Preferential Procurement Policy
     Framework Bill on the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill [B
     66 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 18 January 2000, as
     follows:


         The Joint Committee on Preferential Procurement Policy Framework
         Bill, having considered the subject of the Preferential
         Procurement Policy Framework Bill [B 66 - 99] (National Assembly -
         sec 76), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a section 76
         Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 66A - 99].

                           FRIDAY, 21 JANUARY 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Bills:

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    uMthethosivivinywa wokuQhubekisa ukuLingana nokuVimbela
         uBandlululo Olungalungile [B 57 - 99].


         The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
         Bill [B 57 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75) was introduced by
         the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 27
         October 1999 and referred to the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on
         Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
         Bill.

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (1)    Financial Statements of the University of the North West for
         1997 [RP 164-99;

     (2)    Foundation for Education, Science and Technology for 1997-98 [RP
         168-99];

     (3)    Financial Statements of the Council for Mineral Technology for
         1998-99 [RP 188-99;

     (4)    Financial Statement of Vote 16 - Health for 1998-99 [RP 140-99];

     (5)    Accounts of the Rustenburg-Marico Regional Services Council for
         1993-94 [RP 145-95];

     (6)    Financial Statements of the President's Fund for 1997-98 [RP 165-
         99];

     (7)    Group Financial Statements of Syncat (Pty) Ltd for 1997-98 [RP
         184-99].

2.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs:


     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Reorientation and Development of Agricultural
         Advisory Services in the Northern Province", tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (2)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Promotion of Participative Development Planning in
         the Eastern Cape Province", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.

     (3)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Provincial Administration Capacity Building Programme
         Mpumalanga", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (4)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Small Business Promotion/Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
         Agency (NEPA)", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.
     (5)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Teacher Training (President's Education Initiative)",
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

3.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Annual Report and the Financial Statements of the Public
         Investment Commissioners for 1998-99, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the Public
         Investment Commissioners for 1998-99 [RP 167-99].

     (2)    Fourteenth Report of the Public Investment Commissioners for
         1997-98, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the Public Investment Commissioners for
         1997-98.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    Special Report of the Public Protector on the Alleged
         Irregularities with regard to the affairs and Financial Statements
         of the SFF Association, on the relevant reports of the Auditor-
         General to Parliament, Report No 13.


         Referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on Report No 13 by the Public
         Protector.


                              EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

     INTRODUCTION
     1.1    The key driving force to this investigation was to protect the
           public interest. When it appeared that no loss occurred, I had
           to weigh whether the benefit of investigating further would be
           justified by the cost of the investigation. I have not proceeded
           to investigate matters which have been dealt with elsewhere or
           in other investigations. I have also not investigated matters
           which would not have been of practical benefit to the public.


     1.2    Based on my investigation, a number of key issues were
           identified. Below I have briefly summarised those key issues and
           my findings and recommendations with regard to them.


     1.3    This summary is intended to provide an overview only and should
           not be taken to represent the entirety of the issues, findings
           or recommendations, which are fully contained in the remainder
           of this report.

     CHANGE IN ACCOUNT POLICY (R170 MILLION ISSUE)

     1.4    During the 1992/3 financial year, the Strategic Fuel Fund
           Association (SFF) Management decided to change the accounting
           policy relating to strategic oil stock that had been sold from
           one storage facility and replaced in another during the previous
           three years. This change in accounting policy gave rise to a
           loss of R170 million in the 1992/3 financial year. This was the
           R170 million loss that the former Minister of Minerals and
           Energy Affairs, Dr Maduna, referred to in his responses to
           questions in Parliament. The Minister indicated that this was
           possibly a physical loss to the SFF.
     1.5    During the initial hearings in June 1998, Counsel for the
           Minister put on record that the R170 million was not a physical
           loss as the Minister had indicated in his responses in
           Parliament, but an accounting loss caused by the change in
           accounting policy.


     1.6    Considering and evaluating the accounting policy change was only
           necessary for as long as it appeared that the R170 million was a
           physical loss. Given that there was no physical loss associated
           with the change in accounting policy, I therefore have made no
           finding regarding the reasonableness of the change in accounting
           policy and its disclosure.


     PAYMENTS TO INTERSTATE

     1.7    The SFF contracted directly with the Egyptian General Petroleum
           Corporation (EGPC) to purchase Egyptian crude oil in 1992. Prior
           to this date, due to sanctions, the SFF had effectively
           purchased Egyptian crude oil through a company called
           Interstate, paying Interstate a margin for this service, as was
           normal practice at that time.


     1.8    The SFF continued to pay Interstate a reduced margin (US $0,06 a
           barrel) on all oil purchased through EGPC after 1992. Interstate
           paid the SFF US $0,05 a barrel if they, instead of the SFF,
           lifted the oil under the contract.


     1.9    Allegations were made that the payments to Interstate were for
           no value and were perhaps improper or fraudulent.


     1.10   The evidence showed that the payments were made for the
           effective relinquishing to SFF of Interstate's Egyptian oil
           contract volumes with EGPC, as EGPC did not have additional oil
           volumes to contract with the SFF, without Interstate giving up
           their volumes. Insterstate also provided ad hoc logistical
           services, but these were not the main causa for the payments to
           Interstate.


     1.11   Whilst there were many deficiencies in the documentation of the
           contract with Interstate which gave rise to the suspicion of
           impropriety, I find that there was a valid reason or causa for
           the payments to Interstate. It is however equally true that the
           benefits received for the payments to Interstate reduced or
           weakened over the years as the oil procurement environment
           improved.


     OTHER ISSUES

     1.12   Allegations were also made with regard to:


           a R1 450 million payment by SFF to the Government on April 1997;
           and


           the incorrect posting in the books of SFF of monies recovered
           from the Salem oil tanker incident.


     Whilst I needed to investigate these allegations and have covered these
     issues in the report, it is common cause that no losses arose from
     these issues. As such these issues did not form the primary focus of my
     investigation.

     THE AUDITOR-GENERAL'S REPORT TO PARLIAMENT

     The audit of SFF


    1.13    The general allegation was that the audits of the SFF by the
           Auditor-General and his agent Price Waterhouse should have
           identified the problem with regard to the contract underlying
           the payments to Interstate (referred to as the Six Cents
           Agreement) and the other alleged irregularities.


    1.14    Parliament specifically requested me to look at the alleged
           irregularities and therefore I considered the audit process only
           in so far as it related to the alleged irregularities as noted
           above.


    1.15    Given that there was a valid causa for the Interstate payments
           and that the issue regarding the change in accounting policy did
           not cause an actual loss, I found no basis on which the audit of
           the SFF could be criticised for not identifying these issues.

     The Auditor-General's reports

    1.16    The main criticism of the Auditor-General's reporting to
           Parliament was that the 1992/3 management financial statements
           which in previous years had not been published, were published
           for the first time in 1992/3 in an abridged format. The abridged
           financial statements summarised the management financial
           statements and did not separately disclose the R170 million
           relating to the change in accounting policy.


    1.17    The argument was that the secrecy provisions, which had
           previously restricted the publishing of crude oil information,
           were sufficiently relaxed to allow full publication of the
           financial statements. The allegation went further to imply that
           the abbreviation had occurred to cover up the R170 million loss.


    1.18    Based on the evidence it appears that the Auditor-General (who
           had the discretion after consultation to decide what information
           to publish) in fact published the SFF information much earlier
           than he was required to do. In addition I found that whilst
           there were minor technical difficulties with the abbreviated
           1992/3 financial statements they could not be said to be
           misleading or inappropriate.


     CORPORATE GOVERNANCE/REASONABLENESS OF THE ACTIONS OF THE VARIOUS
     PARTIES


    1.19    Extensive evidence was heard on the reasonableness of the
           actions od the various parties to this investigation. This
           included:


           The professionalism of Nkoki Sizwe Ntsaluba (CA) SA (NSN) (the
           Management Auditors appointed by the Minister to audit SFF);

           The appropriateness of the Minister's actions;


           SFF Corporate Governance - the reasonableness of the actions of
           the SFF Board and Management and their interaction with NSN, the
           Minister and the Auditor-General.


    1.20    Generally I found that there was distrust between the Minister
           and some of the parties, perhaps due in part to the past
           difficulties experienced in South Africa. It was this distrust
           more than anything that hampered the early resolution of these
           matters between the parties and is probably the main reason that
           this matter had eventually to be referred to my office. Whilst I
           can understand that there may be distrust emanating from the
           past, it is important that this is put behind us so that we can
           work together to create a truly new South Africa. Politicians
           and Government Departments should lead the way in this regard.

    1.21    The distrust was further heightened by the SFF reporting
           structure. The General Manager and his team (who are not members
           of the Board) run SFF on a daily basis. They report to a non-
           executive Board. This gave rise to suspicions that the
           information flow to the Board could be manipulated by Management
           and in particular the General Manager. Whilst these suspicions
           were not substantiated, I have recommended that the SFF Board
           should consist of both executive and non-executive Directors as
           recommended by the King Report on Corporate Governance.

    1.22    The other allegations against the various individuals have been
           dealt with, where appropriate, in the main body of this report
           and are too numerous and detailed to be summarised effectively
           here.

Note: Copies of the report are available from the office of the Clerk of
the Papers.

