---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 May 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-05-10
---

WEDNESDAY, 10 MAY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:10.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                        ALLOCATION OF SPEAKING TIMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 106, the following times be
  allocated to parties for comment on the statement by the President on the
  Democratic Republic of Congo:


     President: 20 minutes; African National Congress: 5 minutes; Democratic
     Party: 4 minutes; Inkatha Freedom Party: 4 minutes; New National Party:
     3 minutes; United Democratic Movement: 3 minutes; all other parties: 2
     minutes each.

Agreed to.

                        DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

                                 (Statement)

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, hon members, I hope this will
not take 20 minutes. I do not think it requires 20 minutes.

As hon members are aware, we have been involved with the issue of the Congo
from the time that an armed uprising began in that country, aimed at that
time against President Mobutu and his government. What we sought to
achieve, at that time, was as smooth and as nondestructive a process of
change in the Congo as was possible.

We continued to be involved with this issue when the current military
conflict began. Our Foreign Minister and Defence Minister, at the time,
went to the Congo to discuss with President Kabila and his government our
view that it was necessary to intervene to stop the outbreak of the war.
However, by that time it was clear that some troops had already been
deployed in the Congo and that war could, indeed, not be stopped then.

We continued with our engagement with regard to this matter to seek a
negotiated resolution of the conflict. As a consequence of that, extensive
work was carried out. Many bilateral meetings were held with everybody who
was engaged in that conflict to encourage the adoption of a peace plan,
which was ultimately adopted in Lusaka in July 1999. Hon members will
remember that even after the adoption of that plan, and its signature by
the heads of states in Lusaka, there was still an outstanding problem: not
all of the rebel organisations had signed. Therefore there was the problem
that the plan could not be implemented, because not all the belligerents
had signed it.

Once again we were asked to intervene to help to resolve this matter.
Again, hon members will remember the period when our Foreign Minister had
to fly to Kisangani, Goma, Rwanda and other places, in order to secure the
signatures and adherence of all the rebel groups to the Lusaka agreement,
which was achieved. In consequence of that, we committed ourselves to the
implementation of the peace plan and to contribute whatever we could, as a
country, to ensure that what was agreed to in Lusaka by everybody was,
indeed, implemented this time. Again, I think hon members will remember
that the peace plan was also witnessed and supported by SADC, the
Organisation for African Unity and the United Nations. Because we were not
belligerents, we were not signatories to this agreement.

Since it was signed, we have continuously been engaged in a process of
encouraging all of the signatories to the agreement, in fact, to implement
the agreement, as a consequence of which, when it was clear by the end of
last year that there were problems in this regard, once more we approached
all of the belligerents and the organisations that had witnessed and
supported this, that is the UN, the OAU and SADC, with a proposal that they
needed to get together, among other things, to review the timeframes which
had been agreed in July 1999. Clearly, we had exceeded the deadlines that
had been set in that agreement. As a consequence of our representation a
meeting of the belligerents did indeed take place and they have shifted
those timeframes.

The matter of our own contribution to the implementation of this agreement
remained, of course, and no movement could take place with regard to that
matter until, indeed, the agreement itself was implemented. At the recent
meeting of the African countries and the EU in Cairo, President Kabila
approached us and asked us to intervene, because once more this process was
not moving as fast as it should have. He asked us to intervene in this
matter to try to assist in expediting the implementation of the agreement;
hence the meeting that took place in Algiers, since we had agreed that it
would be useful if we could get the chairperson of the OAU, the President
of Algeria, as well as other people, including the Secretary-General of the
OAU, the special representative to the Congo of the UN Secretary-General,
the chairpersons of Ecowas and SADC, President Obasanjo of Nigeria and
ourselves, and President Kabila of course.

We therefore met in Algiers, reviewed the matter of the implementation of
the agreement, looked at the obstacles with regard to the implementation of
the agreement and came to a variety of decisions. The secretary-general's
representative at the meeting pointed out that what was required in terms
of UN monitors was a group of four battalions that needed to be deployed.
This immediately indicated that some technical work would need to be done
to enable that deployment to take place. In that context we said that we
had indicated our own readiness to contribute to the implementation of that
plan, and therefore would be ready to make a contribution with regard to
that particular matter.

We have since received, from the Secretary-General of the UN, the details
of the kind of force that they would need, which would deal with matters
such as logistics and communication, which, as I said, would then enable
these four battalions to be deployed. We are working on that particular
matter, together with the UN, and therefore will supply these troops which
are not part of the four battalions that will be deployed, but more of a
headquarters group that will enable the support to the UN to ensure that
those infantry groups that will be playing the role of monitor are able to
function properly. As I said, we are working on that particular matter now
with the UN to ensure that we are able to move forward that process of the
implementation of the UN plan with regard to the military matters of the
Lusaka agreement, the elements of that agreement which deal with the
military.

Of course, we are also in contact with President Masire of Botswana, who
was chosen to facilitate the internal political discussions in the Congo.
Problems have arisen with regard to that too. That matter was again
discussed in Algeria, in the presence of President Masire, and some
decisions were taken to expedite that particular question. We are convinced
that it will be possible to move this process forward, indeed to achieve
the objectives that were visualised in the Lusaka agreement concerning the
military and political objectives.

We have remained disengaged with the issue of the Democratic Republic of
Congo because we believe that it is a strategically important African
country from many points of view. It has one of the largest concentrations
of people on the continent. Everybody is very familiar with the resources
this country has and the potential that it has for development, impacting
positively, both on its own people and more widely on the African
continent. It also shares borders with nine African countries and it is
therefore quite clear that peace and development in the Democratic Republic
of Congo would have a positive impact on a large part of our continent.

As I was saying, we are convinced that it is possible to move forward more
speedily with the implementation of the Lusaka agreement. We will
contribute in the manner that I have indicated, of course, coming back to
Parliament to fulfil the obligations with regard to the deployment of our
forces outside.

The last thing I would like to say in this context is that, of course, the
operation will be financed by the United Nations. I hope all of us as South
Africans would want to support this because, as will become clear as we
discuss other matters this afternoon, this issue of peace and stability,
democracy and development in the Congo is very, very directly relevant to
our own success with regard to the achievement of those objectives.
[Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, Mr President, it is quite
clear that South Africa finds itself in a very rough neighbourhood, with
crises in the Congo, which the President has spelt out this afternoon,
civil war in Angola, instability in Zimbabwe and unease in Namibia.

However, in respect of the Congo, unlike in Zimbabwe, I believe that the
South African Government has a clear, correct and consistent policy. In the
Congo we are on the right side as well, because we are on the side of peace
and the furtherance of democracy. As Foreign Affairs Minister Zuma has said
on many occasions, we should not seek political solutions via military
means. I am sure that is the correct approach.

Only this week, in respect of United Nations' missions in peacekeeping, the
experience of the United Nations' assistance mission in Sierra Leone is
instructive. There 500 United Nations peacekeepers have been taken hostage
by so-called loyalist rebels. This obviously illustrates the extreme danger
of joining a mission to the DRC, even in the very conditional circumstances
which the President has outlined.

In the case of the Congo - and I think perhaps the most important element
there is the human misery that has been suffered by the population for many
years - one has a vast country, harsh climate, poor infrastructure and a
history of hostility and belligerence. This indeed could be one of the
toughest support missions for peacekeeping ever undertaken by the United
Nations. It may also be, in the words of the United States Ambassador to
the United Nations, Richard Holbrooke, and I quote:


  ... the United Nations' last chance to prove it can get peacekeeping
  right.

The DP will support the deployment of the SANDF in the peace-support
operations in the DRC, subject to very stringent conditions, and it would
be very helpful if the President or the Government could respond to this at
some stage in the future. Firstly, regarding a clearly defined mission,
South African troops should only be used to protect and advance UN
observers. The President has spoken about the initial mission which will be
a headquarters group. It will obviously develop from there.

We obviously accept his reassurance that Parliament will be consulted every
step of the way, and we can engage further at that time. But whatever we do
and however strong or weak our involvement might be, we obviously need a
clear entry and exit timeframe. We need resources, training and a budget -
even if one is supported by the United Nations - which is going to allow us
to complete this mission, whatever its extent might be, in a reasonable
fashion. We obviously need the consent of the signatories to the Lusaka
ceasefire agreement - which is obviously assumed in his statement - and
reasonable assurances for the safety of members of the SANDF.

In other words, I do not believe we should go for a blank cheque. It should
be crossed and not negotiable on South Africa's extent of commitment and
the clarity of our objectives in the Democratic Republic of Congo. If any
kind of sustained conflict occurs between the United Nations troops and
even our support group and the belligerents in the Congo, we should effect
an immediate withdrawal of our troops, because the alternative would then
be a prolonged and intractable involvement in what could become a Vietnam-
style conflict.

Therefore we do not support the possibility of South African troops being
sucked into a full-scale, phase-three, peace-enforcement role. The
ceasefire agreement that the President alluded to, signed in Lusaka in July
1999, envisages peace-enforcement operations to include tracking down and
disarming armed groups, screening mass killers and handing over suspected
war criminals to the international crimes tribunal in Rwanda. This could,
indeed, be a very extensive mission and we are looking forward to hearing
further particulars of South Africa's involvement.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Deputy
President, Ministers and hon members, Howard Wolpe, the United States
special envoy to the Great Lakes region, said this about the crisis in that
region, which also includes the Democratic Republic of Congo. I quote:


  The most widespread interstate war in modern African history has
  significant consequences, not only for the 50 million Congolese, but for
  the peoples of all nine countries on the Democratic Republic of Congo's
  periphery. From the perspective of the United States, resolution of the
  conflict in the DRC is essential if the vision of an African political
  and economic renewal, articulated by South African President Mbeki and
  embraced by President Clinton, is to be realised.
The argument here is for the implementation of the core elements of the
Lusaka agreement, which we continue to support, and we believe that these
elements are fundamental to a lasting resolution of the conflict in the DRC
and its neighbours.

The Lusaka accord, firstly, seeks to affirm the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of Congo and of all the surrounding
states - a view shared by all Lusaka signatories, as this provision
eventually wants to see the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Congolese
soil. Secondly, the Lusaka agreement seeks a dual approach to end the
conflict in the DRC and the region, that is a neutral facilitation of
inclusive inter-Congolese political negotiations and a multilateral
interstate political intervention.

Thirdly, the Lusaka accord seeks a centre-periphery approach to the Great
Lakes question. In this way, it is able to commit its signatories to co-
operate in addressing the common security concerns, not only of the DRC,
but also those that underlie the Great Lakes crisis. Fourthly and lastly,
the Lusaka agreement imposes the ceasefire agreement which must commit its
signatories to work jointly to address other regional problems such as the
activities identified with the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.

These principles, in their accepted elaborate form, should provide a strong
guidance to any pending United Nations intervention in the DRC. For this
reason, the IFP supports the decision to involve South Africa in the UN
plan in the manner outlined by the President this afternoon.

Mr M C J VAN SCHALKWYK: Madam Speaker, there are two ways for troop
involvement in an attempt to settle a military conflict like that in the
DRC. In terms of Chapter 7 of the UN charter, it can be active military
operations with everything that that entails. In terms of Chapter 6,
military involvement can only be in a supporting and monitoring role,
excluding active military operations. The first option was already
described by our own head of the Defence Force as ``a crazy notion''. We
concur with that view.

The second option, a supporting and monitoring role, is something that
should be considered under certain circumstances. Firstly, the will to make
peace must be present. There is, at the moment, no such will in the DRC -
quite the opposite. Secondly, it must be clear who will fund the operation.
We have learned the hard way in South Africa - the Minister of Defence can
testify to that - that we are picking up the tab of other military
operations done in the name of other organisations and where the South
African military was involved. We appreciate the assurance that the
President gave this afternoon.

Thirdly, there must be a clear timeframe for the withdrawal of the other
foreign troops fighting their own wars in the Congo. Some foreign armies in
the Congo seem to lack that commitment. Fourthly, we must know exactly when
our troops will withdraw - either when they have fulfilled their duty or
when the risks become too high for them and they are drawn into military
conflict.

It seems to me that the Lusaka accord is not a proper basis for the
involvement of a supporting military force, because of the following
reasons. Clause 22 of the Lusaka accord makes provision for active military
operation and the disarming of participating armies. This will inevitably
mean, no matter what we say now, that we may be drawn into active military
operations and conflict. On top of that, not all the armed groups involved
in the war in the DRC are party to the Lusaka accord.

Unless these issues are resolved - and the President has given assurances
with regard to some of them - it is ill-advised to send our troops to the
DRC. I call on the President - we trust him and the country puts its trust
in him - to make sure that our troops do not become the victims of military
adventures. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Madam Speaker, hon President, Deputy President and hon
members, the UDM can only support our troops' involvement in peacekeeping
after the following conditions have been satisfied. First, the Algerian
summit was not representative because not all the parties to the conflict
were represented, and therefore the resolutions of that summit do not carry
the mandate of all the belligerents. [Interjections.] Therefore, in the
implementation of the UN and Lusaka resolutions, it is necessary for the
Security Council team touring Africa to seriously consider convening a
fully representative summit in order to legitimise the resolutions on a
peacekeeping force, and that a cessation of hostilities is addressed at
such a summit.

Weapons of South African origin, which were sold to Uganda and Rwanda -
confirmed from this podium by the Government's representative - and which
are presently deployed in the DRC, and the South African personnel called
mercenaries operating them, must be withdrawn forthwith. Thirdly ...
[Interjections.] It is your Government which sold the weapons to them!
[Interjections.] The money in the possession of Minister Terror Lekota -
which he admitted in this House last month to having received from some of
the belligerents for the purchase of weapons - must be handed over to the
UN Security Council. The aforegoing would restore our credibility and
enhance our competence to participate in a peacekeeping endeavour.

The UDM undertakes to verify with other stakeholders their position in
these discussions in order to facilitate consistency. We would suggest that
other political parties in this House do the same.

Finally, Government and this House have a moral and legal obligation to
make sure that our troops are aware of the facts in the areas of their
intended operation, and take the necessary safeguards for their protection.

Amalungu evile. Akunjalo? [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Members have heard. Is it not so?
[Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, Mr President, there is no DRC conflict.
[Interjections.] The DRC conflict is ...

The SPEAKER: Order!

Adv Z L MADASA: Mr President, I repeat that there is no DRC conflict.
[Interjections.] The DRC conflict is a regional conflict. When SADC members
are in conflict then the whole region is at war. Now, slowly but surely we
are becoming directly involved, initially by sending a peacekeeping force.
Will it help us to send peacekeepers, whilst Presidents Nujoma, Dos Santos
and Mugabe are on the offensive? The truth is that while we may prefer
peace in the region, the SADC partners prefer war.

Through the actions of Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe, SADC members are
acting differently to what they say and to their undertakings. Without a
uniform approach to the regional conflict, we are in trouble. The recent
announcement by President Nujoma that Namibia is setting up bases inside
Angola to crush Unita once and for all, does not help to solve the
situation either. We cannot send peace forces when others are sending
offensive forces. We are going to kill each other.

Through SADC we must advocate a strong parliamentary democracy. We must
condemn publicly leaders who engage national forces in pursuit of personal
gain or selfish ambition. We must advocate peace until everyone in the
region is convinced that peace is the only way. The war talk must stop.
Everyone in the region must talk peace. Until this is done, sending a
peacekeeping force is an imprudent and futile exercise at this stage. There
is no peace to be kept in the region. [Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker en agb President, ons is van Afrika,
ons is vir Afrika en ons gee om vir Afrika, en nou stuur ons troepe na
Afrika. Ek is nie daaroor bekommerd nie, want ek praat nie oor die
onttrekking voordat ons ingegaan het nie. Die vraag is wat ons daar gaan
doen. Dit is baie belangrik dat die militêre doel duidelik is.

Die militêre oplossing is nie dié oplossing nie. Hopelik kan tyd,
stabiliteit en verantwoordelikheid daarmee gekoop word, maar dan moet daar
na my mening baie meer as vier bataljons troepe gestuur word. Sonder die
werklike politieke oplossing, sal die militêre poging geldmors wees.

Dit was my voorreg om onlangs in Burundi te wees as lid van 'n Suid-
Afrikaanse span. Daar, en ook in Rwanda, het ek kans gehad om gedagtes te
wissel met ander Afrika-persoonlikhede. Afrika het 'n probleem. Opgesom is
dit die volgende: eerstens ly Afrika aan postkoloniale
meerderheidsinfeksie; tweedens is Afrika onvolwasse sover dit grondwetlike
sake en veelpartypolitiek betref; derdens sluk Afrika swaar aan die
Westminsterstelsel wat hy uit die Weste gekopieer het.

Daar is nie net 'n DRK-probleem in daardie gebied nie. Die DRK-probleem is
een manifestasie van 'n groot streekprobleem. Die oplossing van die een
probleem sonder die oplossing van die ander sal nie vir ons die finale
oplossing bied nie.

Meerderheidsdominasie in Afrika ly tot onderdrukking. Daar was reeds
etniese suiwering in Rwanda en Burundi met die uitwissing van minderhede en
in Zimbabwe met die uitdrywing van minderhede. As die militêre poging dus
eindig in groter meerderheidsdominasie, of eindig sonder die praktiese
akkommodasie van minderhede, dan is dit net 'n kwessie van tyd voor die
Kongo weer brand.

Suid-Afrika moet dus volgens die VF - en dit is 'n vereiste wat ons stel -
saam met die SAOG 'n inisiatief onderneem - selfs 'n OEA-inisiatief - om
veel meer as individuele brandpunte aan te pak, maar moet eerder ook werk
aan die riglyne vir minimum standaarde vir demokrasie in Afrika, veral
demokrasie ten opsigte van meerderheids- en minderheidsverantwoordelikhede
en -verhoudings.

As dit op die kontinent slaag, het ons 'n moontlikheid van sukses. As dit
nie slaag nie, is ek bevrees, sal ons vind dat selfs die versending van
troepe na daardie gebied ons uiteindelik gaan dwing om daardie troepe terug
te bring. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker and hon President, we are from Africa, we
are for Africa and we care about Africa, and now we are sending troops to
Africa. I am not concerned about that, because I am not talking about the
withdrawal before we have gone in there. The question is what we are going
to do there. It is very important that the military goal is clear.

The military solution is not the solution to this problem. Hopefully time,
stability and responsibility can be bought with that, but then, in my
opinion, much more than four battalions of troops should be sent there.
Without the real political solution the military effort will be a waste of
money.

Recently I had the privilege to be in Burundi as a member of a South
African team. There, as well as in Rwanda, I had a chance to exchange ideas
with other Africa personalities. Africa has a problem. Summarised it is the
following: Firstly, Africa is suffering from postcolonial majority
infection; secondly, Africa is immature regarding constitutional matters
and multiparty politics; thirdly, Africa is having trouble dealing with the
Westminster system which it adopted from the West.

There is not only a DRC problem in that area. The DRC problem is one
manifestation of a greater regional problem. The solution to the one
problem without the solution to the other will not present us with the
final solution.

Majority domination in Africa leads to oppression. We have already had
ethnic cleansing in Rwanda and Burundi, with the elimination of minorities
and in Zimbabwe with the expulsion of minorities. If the military effort
therefore ends in greater majority domination, or ends without the
practical accommodation of minorities, then it is only a matter of time
before the Congo starts burning again.

South Africa should therefore, according to the FF - and this is a
prerequisite we are stating - undertake an initiative, together with SADC -
even an OAU initiative - to tackle far more than individual focal points,
but should rather also work on the guidelines for minimum standards for
democracy in Africa, especially democracy in respect of majority and
minority responsibilities and relationships.

If this succeeds on the continent, we have a possibility of a success. If
it does not succeed, I am afraid we will find that even the sending of
troops to those areas will force us eventually to bring those troops back.
[Time expired.]]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, Mr President, it is commendable that
the leaders of the Great Lakes have allowed common sense and logic to
prevail, with dialogue being the best policy to settle political
differences in the DRC. We have seen through experience that war cannot
achieve desired political objectives, especially if it involves people and
governments faced with common problems. The signing of the peace agreement
by warring factions in the DRC is a positive step in the right direction,
but it is not a sufficient condition to guarantee a long enough peace in
the DRC.

Sierra Leone is a classic example. The rebels have taken up arms in
defiance of the 1999 peace agreement. It is our sincere hope that this
situation will not repeat itself in the DRC. If the situation escalates,
South Africa may be called upon to partake in operations to attain a
ceasefire and peace agreement. Unless South Africa is clearly designated by
the UN and accepted by the conflicting parties as their peacemaker of
choice, and most other actors respect this role, South Africa will be
hesitant to intervene. The decision to intervene and the nature of the
intervention will ultimately lie with the Department of Foreign Affairs.
The inherent dangers of entering such a volatile situation should not be
undermined.

This is where renaissance peacekeeping, as it was termed by President Thabo
Mbeki in his address to Rwanda, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, comes to the
fore. The essence of this type of peacekeeping is the creation of a
national peace mission, composed of all those currently engaged in the
intervention, to lead a peace operation under the leadership of a neutral
and foreign state.

Therefore it is our submission that South Africa's involvement in the DRC
should be underpinned by its commitment to facilitating the implementation
of the peace accord as agreed upon, and to finding the everlasting solution
to the problem. In order to achieve our mission, we should do the
following: assist the DRC by monitoring peace initiatives and assist in the
rebuilding of the DRC. [Time expired.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, hon President, the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania supports South Africa's intervention and involvement in the pathetic
and senseless war in the Democratic Republic of Congo. [Interjections.] The
late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere said in this very House that South Africa was
not an island in Africa.

Our support for the President, however, should be qualified. We believe
that we should be part of a joint peacekeeping force, involving the
participants in the war and other countries in Africa, and that we should
be part of a policy to strengthen the OAU in order to concentrate on unity,
peace and development. Expensive meetings and fellowship are not a priority
for Africa at this time. However, the UN should foot the bill for this
peace mission.

We should avoid being seen as a referee or a big brother. This might
encourage senselessness and delinquency on the part of the smaller
brothers. We have our own urgent needs and national priorities. We may look
like a First World country, but on average we are still a Third World
country.

Africa has long been acknowledged as the cradle of humanity, but it also
has the dubious distinction of showing the worst manifestations of ubuntu.
We seem like a cursed continent which has been bleeding continually through
the period of the tribal wars, followed by bloodier wars of colonialism,
apartheid and liberation. We have produced and exported slaves, more than
any other continent in the world. I always observe that the winners of an
athletics meeting - runner ending first, second, third and fourth - are
from different countries, but are all African. This mostly results from the
slave trade. The misery of Africa should stop now, in our lifetime. [Time
expired.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Mevrou die Speaker en agb President, die FA steun Suid-
Afrika se betrokkenheid by ander lande op diplomatieke gebied om
verandering te bewerkstellig en demokrasie te vestig. Militêre
betrokkenheid is egter iets anders, en kan alleen gesteun word as dit aan
basiese vereistes voldoen en van korte duur is. Suid-Afrika moet dit kan
bekostig, en kan nie toelaat dat hy só ingesuig word in die konflik dat dit
die beskikbare fondse vir die opheffing van Suid-Afrika se eie inwoners sal
benadeel nie.

Daar moet ook 'n wil in die land wees om die konflik op te los. Die blote
aanwesigheid van vredesmagte bring nie oplossings nie. Hulle enigste
funksie is om die strydende partye uitmekaar te probeer hou en so aan dié
partye 'n kans te gee om rondom die vredestafel 'n oplossing te beding.
Daar moet 'n tydsduur aan vredesmagte se aanwesigheid in daardie land
gekoppel wees.

Indien daar nie 'n kans vir vrede is nie, word vredesmagte se aanwesigheid
'n verleentheid en 'n eskalerende ekonomiese las. Die onvermoë van
vredesmagte in Sierra Leone om vrede te bewerkstellig tussen strydende
partye wat nie die wil het om vrede te maak nie, moet vir ons as 'n
waarskuwing dien.

Die vraag waaroor ons duidelikheid moet verkry, is of daar in die Kongo
waarlik die wil tot vrede is, en of daar nie dalk 'n verskuilde motief van
sekere faksies is om van magte uit ander lande gebruik te maak om eensydige
oorheersing te bevorder nie. Die betrokkenheid van Zimbabwe, Uganda en
Namibië by die Kongo in dié verband moet vir ons as 'n verdere waarskuwing
dien. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Madam Speaker and hon President, the FA supports South
Africa's involvement in other countries on a diplomatic level in order to
effect change and establish democracy. Military involvement, however, is
something different, and can only be supported if it meets basic
requirements and is of short duration. South Africa must be able to afford
it, and cannot allow itself to be sucked into the conflict to such an
extent that it has an adverse effect on the funds available for the
upliftment of South Africa's own inhabitants.
There should also be a desire in that country to resolve the conflict. The
mere presence of peacekeeping forces does not bring solutions. Their only
function is to try to keep the warring factions apart, and in this way give
them a chance to sit down and negotiate a peaceful solution. There must be
a time-frame that is linked to the presence of the peacekeeping forces in
that country.

If there is no likelihood of peace, the presence of peacekeeping forces
becomes an embarrassment and an escalating economic burden. The inability
of peacekeeping forces in Sierra Leone to bring about peace between warring
factions which do not have the will to make peace, should serve as a
warning to us.

The question on which we must gain clarity, is whether there really is the
will to make peace in the Congo, and whether there may not be a hidden
motive among certain factions to make use of forces from other countries to
promote unilateral domination. In this respect the involvement of Zimbabwe,
Uganda and Namibia in the Congo should serve as a further warning to us.]

If the purpose of the South African Government's involvement is to act
purely as a peacekeeping force under the above-mentioned prerequisites,
then the FA will support the action. Our President must, however, give us
the assurance that this is the aim and mission of South Africa's
involvement, and the conditions for the return of these troops must be set
out clearly and unambiguously.

South Africa has a role to play in Africa. Wars are the worst enemy of
development, and as long as South Africa has the interests of the peoples
of Africa at heart and not the interests of its dictators, Africa will
benefit.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, President, Deputy President, Ministers, hon
members, South Africa is a leading nation in Africa, and her participation
in international peacekeeping has developed beyond the mere monitoring of
cease-fires. In one holistic mission plan, the pressure is on South Africa
to address a conflict system in the Democratic Republic of Congo in its
totality.

The maintenance of modern peacekeeping in the DRC demands the
implementation of various disciplines such as humanitarian relief, human
rights monitoring and education, the protection of refugees, peace-
building, the support for voluntary disarmament and demobilisation,
national reconciliation, rebuilding of the judicial system, training a new
police force, and so on. These complex processes are costly and take time.

South Africa is a prominent democratic country that has to play her
rightful role in international peacekeeping. She therefore needs the
experience, capacity and resources to carry out a complicated peacekeeping
mission in the DRC. It is important for South Africa to be clear about what
she can and cannot achieve. Together with the United Nations, the
Organisation of African Unity and the international community in general,
South Africa can use her political influence to reconcile the DRC and, to a
certain extent, determine the success of a cease-fire agreement.

If the DRC's political parties want peace desperately, almost any
institution in the world can monitor and verify the implementation of cease-
fire agreements. The bottom line is that peace is in the hands of the
Congolese people and those who live on the borders of the DRC. If they
procrastinate implementing peace, no institution in the world can force
them not to.

The MF supports the decision to send a peacekeeping force to the DRC.
[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, mnr die President, Suid-Afrika is
integrerend deel van Afrika en die leidende staat in die subkontinent. Die
DRK se probleme werp 'n refleksie op Suid-Afrika en kan ook toenemend
hierheen oorspoel. Betrokkenheid by die DRK, besef ons, is ongelukkig, maar
dit is onvermydelik, ook binne die opset van die SAOG, waarvan die DRK 'n
lid is.

Dit is duidelik uit die President se verklaring dat die Regering geleer het
uit die Lesotho-fiasko, en in die geval van die DRK met veel meer
versigtigheid en diplomatieke korrektheid optree, hierdie keer binne die
raamwerk van bestaande internasionale strukture soos die VN en die SAOG.

Wat ons onvermydelike deelname aan die VN-vredesmag betref, wil ek graag
die volgende waarskuwings rig. Laurent Kabila het ondemokraties deur 'n
rebellie aan die bewind gekom en staan op geen hoër grond as die onderskeie
rebellemagte nie. Begunstiging van Kabila moet ten alle koste vermy word,
en dit moet duidelik deurgestuur word aan Zimbabwe, Namibië en andere.
Die Lusaka-skietstilstand wat deur die vredesmag gemoniteer moet word, word
telkens verbreek, en indien 'n hernieude verbintenis tot die skietstilstand
nie verkry word nie, is daar geen vrede om te moniteer nie. Betrokkenheid
by so 'n gewapende stryd kan baie gevaarlik wees. Die uitgestrektheid en
die topografie van hierdie groot land maak dit fisiek onmoontlik vir 'n mag
van 5 000 om effektief te wees. Ons moenie ons jong mans soos lammers ter
slagting laat lei nie. In dié verband moet die bloedneus wat die VN-
vredesmag in Sierra Leone kry as 'n waarskuwing dien.

'n Vredesmag sonder 'n politieke oplossing is soos 'n hond wat 'n kar jaag
en nie weet wat om met hom te maak as hy hom vang nie. Die politieke
oplossing vir die DRK is die opdeel in 'n konfederasie van outonome,
selfregerende gebiede. Dit moet die prioriteit wees. Die kunsmatige
eenheidstaat sal nie 'n oplossing wees nie.

In dié verband, ten slotte, kan Suid-Afrika veel leer uit die mislukkings
van die DRK om 'n bedeling daar te stel wat die diversiteit van die
bevolking nie net in slagspreuke op landswapens plaas nie, maar in die
realiteit van 'n grondwetlike bestel verdiskonteer wat vir almal, ook hier,
vrede sal gee. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, Mr President, South Africa is an integral part
of Africa and the leading state on the subcontinent. The problems of the
DRC are a reflection on South Africa and can also increasingly spill over
in this direction. Involvement with the DRC, we realise, is unfortunate,
but it is unavoidable, also within the context of SADC, of which the DRC is
a member.

It is clear from the statement made by the President that the Government
has learned from the Lesotho fiasco, and they are behaving far more
carefully and diplomatically correctly, this time within the framework of
existing international structures such as the UN and SADC.

Concerning our unavoidable participation in the UN peacekeeping force, I
would like to issue the following warnings. Laurent Kabila came to power
undemocratically through a rebellion and is no more legitimate than the
various rebel forces. The favouring of Kabila must at all costs be avoided,
and this must be made clear to Zimbabwe, Namibia and others.

The Lusaka cease-fire which must be monitored by the peacekeeping force is
constantly being violated, and if a renewed commitment to the ceasefire is
not obtained, there is no peace to monitor. Involvement in such an armed
struggle can be very dangerous. The vastness and the topography of this
large country make it physically impossible for a force of 5 000 to be
effective. We should not let our young men be led like lambs to the
slaughter. In this regard the setback which the UN peacekeeping force is
experiencing in Sierra Leone should serve as a warning.

A peacekeeping force without a political solution is like a dog which
chases a car and does not know what to do with it when it catches it. The
political solution for the DRC is to divide it into a confederation of
autonomous, self-governing regions. This must be the priority. The
artificial unitary state will not be a solution.

Finally, in this regard, South Africa can learn a great deal from the
failure of the DRC to establish a dispensation which does not merely
express the diversity of the population in a motto on a coat of arms, but
in reality negotiates a constitutional dispensation which will bring peace
for everyone, even here.]
Mr J N MASHIMBYE: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President,
members of Cabinet, colleagues, in the recent past in this Chamber we had
an opportunity to discuss South Africa's role in regional and international
conflicts. In that discussion we made an assertion that now, more than ever
before, South Africa has the means to contribute to peace and conflict
resolution - a noble cause that we cannot turn our backs on.

We, as South Africans, are a people who will never forget where we come
from. We come from a past marked by a protracted struggle against
apartheid's oppression and dehumanisation. As we refused to be dehumanised,
we committed ourselves to freedom, peace, and justice for every citizen of
the planet. We were imbued with this sense of justice when, amongst other
things, the international community stood up to assist the anti-apartheid
struggle in this country. We all incurred a debt to the world community.

Consistent with our values now and in the past, South Africa has committed
itself to a process of making peace a permanent feature of our continent.
Experience has taught us that to create peace, we cannot assume the right
to decide the destinies of other nations alone.

Our efforts at conflict-resolution, conflict-prevention or peacekeeping
must be done, as has been the case, under the mantle of SADC, the OAU and
the United Nations. We must commend the ANC-led Government for the
statesmanlike and meticulous leading role which South Africa has played and
is playing in the region and the continent.

The decision to initially send our troops to the DRC to play a noncombative
role is evidence of the sober approach by the Government of not becoming
party to a senseless sacrifice of troops, solely in order to prove a moral
point. We have always emphasised that a lot would depend on how the
international community, and especially the parties to the DRC conflict,
come to grips with pushing the peace process forward.

There had to be an indication that parties to the conflict are genuine in
their desire for peace, before the troops of the SA National Defence Force
could be committed to the fray. As a result of all the work done by our
Government and our former President in the Great Lakes region, members of
the SA National Defence Force who stand ready to be deployed to the Congo,
do so in the knowledge that they have been extensively prepared and trained
for their mission, and that conditions in the Democratic Republic of Congo
favour them to both make a positive contribution and to do so with maximum
regard for their own safety.

I am pleased to note that, in spite of some wayward opinions, nobody in
this House will do anything to treat the deployment of our troops as a
political football. To do so, as some have done recently with regard to the
Zimbabwean matter, will only help them to live up to their mettle, as
Oliver Tambo would describe them, of self-seeking individuals of no
consequence.

I want to say to the hon the President, the commander-in-chief of our armed
forces, that I am honoured and privileged to report to him that our armed
forces are ready and waiting for the next order. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the next item on the Order Paper is
questions to the President. This matter is another important aspect of our
new system of question time.
We want to express our appreciation to the President for having agreed to
come to the National Assembly and respond to questions regularly. It is a
welcome development for our new democracy.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that the SA Chamber of Business and United States government
           have expressed support for the quiet diplomacy of our President
           on the Zimbabwean crisis; and

       (b)  the statement by the Sacob chief executive officer, Kevin
           Wakeford, namely: ``We firmly believe that President Mbeki will
           achieve the desired result of stabilising the Zimbabwean crisis
           in the short-term run-up to elections, and thereafter the
           situation is expected to normalise''; and


  (2) reaffirms its support for the manner in which the President is
       handling the crisis.

[Applause.]

Mr R J HEINE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the bizarre situation in South Africa in which Cosatu, the
       ANC's partner in government, stages a strike which is opposed by the
       ANC Government and its Ministers but supported by the ANC as a
       political party;

  (2) wonders whether there is any other democratic country in the world
       where a government and political party have attempted to have their
       cake and eat it to the extent that the ANC does;

  (3) resolves -


       (a)  to enquire from Cosatu how many jobs it has created since the
           establishment of its fund for job creation; and

       (b)  to bring to its attention that strike action of this nature is
           totally unproductive and will destroy jobs rather than create
           them; and


  (4) holds the ANC Government and Cosatu responsible for the damage done
       to the South African economy.

[Applause.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Minister of Education has announced the Government's
           intention to introduce a third language in the school
           curriculum; and

       (b)  the IFP welcomes this development, being in line with its own
           policy to allow a dominant indigenous language in a region to be
           one of the languages taught to schoolchildren;


  (2) calls on the Minister to give support to this policy expression by
       allocating adequate human and material resources so that a third
       language is acquired by new learners under congenial circumstances
       and for the inherent value which resides in that language; and

  (3) requests the Government to desist from using any punitive measures in
       support of this very desirable and necessary development.

Ms G L MAHLANGU: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that South Africa has adopted a new symbol of our national
       identity, namely our new coat of arms;

  (2) recognises that the coat of arms must evoke an intense spirit of an
       inclusive national identity, which exemplifies the extraordinary
       creativity of our people through the ages, and inspire our united and
       diverse nation; and

  (3) calls on all South Africans to embrace this coat of arms and to own
       it as a common possession representing the aspirations of a winning
       nation that is conscious of the challenges that lie ahead.

[Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) regrets the irresponsibility displayed by Sadtu by rejecting Minister
       Asmal's plea that it should not participate in Cosatu's futile strike
       against unemployment today, but rather show its solidarity in a
       manner that suits the teaching profession;

  (2) congratulates the ANC on its U-turn as far as the striking of
       teachers is concerned and its decision to support Minister Asmal's
       call on teachers not to strike;

  (3) commends the SAOU and Naptosa for its responsible decision not to
       participate in the strike;

  (4) notes that this strike harms investment confidence and worsens the
       problem of unemployment rather than contributes to solving it;

  (5) die Nuwe NP se beroep steun dat onderwysers nie toegelaat moet word
       om deel te neem aan solidariteitstakings soos dié nie; en

  (6) met minister Asmal saamstem dat die gevolge van Sadou se optrede
       leerders sal benadeel, die teikens vir die verligting van die
       onderwyskrisis in gevaar sal stel, en in die proses werkloosheid sal
       verhoog deur opleiding vir die arbeidsmark te kniehalter.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)


 [(5) supports the New NP's call that teachers should not be allowed to
       take part in solidarity strikes such as this one; and

  (6) agrees with Minister Asmal that the results of Sadtu's action will be
       detrimental to learners, will endanger the targets for the
       alleviation of the education crisis, and in the process will increase
       unemployment by hampering training for the labour market.]

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with grave concern the pronouncements made by the Deputy
       President of the Republic of South Africa at the official opening of
       the National House of Traditional Leaders on 8 May 2000 on the role
       to be played by the traditional leaders during this period of
       transformation;

  (2) is appalled and concerned about the statements made by the Deputy
       President about the role which should be played by traditional
       leaders in the development of their areas;

  (3) expresses alarm and concern that the Deputy President has urged the
       traditional leaders to play an active role in the development of
       their areas ahead of enabling national legislation that should
       provide for a role for traditional leadership as an institution at
       local level on matters affecting local communities, as required by
       the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa;

  (4) expresses its shock and dismay on the division and cutting across of
       areas of jurisdiction of traditional leaders and disregard for their
       authority by the Demarcation Board, which will make traditional
       leaders irrelevant in their role pertaining to the development of
       their areas and matters affecting their communities ...

[Time expired.]

Mr S B NTULI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the continued refusal by some farm owners to bury deceased
           farmworkers and their families on their farms; and

       (b)  the negative behaviour by some white farmers such as poisoning
           grazing pastures for livestock of black farmers; and


  (2) calls on all farmers to condemn this destructive behaviour, as such
       behaviour is criminal and detrimental to building a new nation.

[Applause.]
Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) commends President Thabo Mbeki on his balanced position on the
       Zimbabwean crisis;

  (2) deplores the highly emotional reaction of some people whose aim seems
       to be to try to demonise President Robert Mugabe;

  (3) reiterates the view that the South African land question is a time
       bomb which it would be unwise and dangerous to ignore; and

  (4) calls on President Mbeki urgently to call an all-party South African
       summit on equitable land distribution to which all significant role-
       players and interested groups are invited.

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that although today's national strike by Cosatu went ahead, the
           federation and business have committed themselves to addressing
           the causes of the strike; and

       (b)  that the strike was called after the National Economic,
           Development and Labour Council parties had failed to address
           issues such as the need for economic growth and the alleviation
           of unemployment and poverty;


  (2) recognises this commitment to resolve the causes of the strike as a
       positive development; and

  (3) calls on Cosatu and business to continue positively engaging each
       other in order to find solutions to alleviate unemployment and
       poverty.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House notes that -


  (1) the redeployment efforts of Deputy President Zuma have failed as it
       has again been necessary for the ANC NEC to intervene and subvert the
       democratic process in their structures in Gauteng and Free State; and

  (2) while the ANC is in disarray in two important provinces, the DP
       continues making progress, attracting increasing support from former
       ANC members such as prominent Eastern Cape councillor Desmond Draai
       who resigned from the ANC to join the DP, stating some of his reasons
       as -


       (a)  the ANC's policy of appointing unqualified and inexperienced
           people to posts;

       (b)  poor service delivery by the ANC Government; and

       (c)  weak ANC leadership.

[Applause.]

Mrs J CHALMERS: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Minister for Welfare and Population Development, the
       hon Zola Skweyiya, has begun a sweeping overhaul of the Welfare
       department in preparing it to deal with the effects of globalisation
       on the poor;

  (2) recognises that this plan is critical if South Africa is to provide
       proper social protection in a globalising world;

  (3) notes that the department has developed a strategic programme with
       concrete objectives, timeframes and resource allocations; and

  (4) calls on the Minister and his department to continue with their
       efforts to produce a caring society where ordinary people are put
       first.

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with alarm the recent report by the Auditor-General, Mr Shauket
       Fakie, that the national accounts of the SA Revenue Service are in
       such a state of disarray that he was not willing to sign them;

  (2) calls upon the Minister of Finance to investigate the fact that the
       cash accounting records differed from the debtor records by more than
       R413 million;

  (3) finds it of particular concern that the inspector's report found that
       proper books and records had not been maintained and that according
       to the cash accounts, taxpayers had probably paid more of their hard-
       earned money than they should have had proper records been kept;

  (4) finds it perturbing that the Auditor-General questioned whether,
       given that more than a third of debts have been outstanding for more
       than nine months, the SA Revenue Service's provision for bad doubtful
       debts, which amounted to R2,62 billion, was adequate; and

  (5) is of the opinion that it is in the national interest that the
       necessary corrective steps be taken immediately.

[Time expired.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) finds it unfortunate that the national strike today will have a
       negative impact on the economy, measured by lost production, reduced
       productivity and the impact on investment sentiments;

  (2) notes, however, that the circumstances leading to this strike go back
       to 1995 when Cosatu discussed their views with Government, amongst
       other stakeholders, and Government then embarked on a road of jobless
       economic growth, leaving no option for Cosatu but to take this road
       of a national strike;

  (3) calls on the Government to embark on an economic policy that will
       create a climate for job creation opportunities in all sectors of our
       economy, both in the formal and informal side of our society; and

  (4) recognises that this implies that the Government must again make
       known their position regarding the implementation of the Gear policy.

Mr S K LOUW: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the achievement of Eskom's electrification target, symbolically
       called the ``2 million switch'' in Elandsfontein, Graskop, a small
       rural village in Mpumalanga;

  (2) recognises that the electrification programme is part of the ANC
       Government's attempts to improve the quality of people's lives; and

  (3) calls on the Minister and her department to continue with their
       excellent work to improve the lives of rural communities by providing
       affordable and reliable electricity.

[Applause.]

Adv P S SWART: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat -


       (a)  daar 7 000 vakatures in die Polisiediens bestaan, volgens die
           Polisie se eie aanduidings; en

       (b)  die vul van hierdie vakatures by polisiestasies met rekrute van
           goeie gehalte 'n aansienlike bydrae sal lewer tot die bekamping
           van misdaad in ons land; en


  (2) derhalwe die Regering versoek om so gou doenlik die 7 000
       aanstellings te doen.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  there are 7 000 vacancies in the Police Service according to the
           Police's own indications; and

       (b)  filling these vacancies at police stations with recruits of a
           high standard will make a significant contribution to the
           combating of crime in our country; and


  (2) therefore requests the Government to make these 7 000 appointments as
       soon as possible.]

The House adjourned at 18:16.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Report of the Independent Electoral Commission on the National and
     Provincial Elections of 2 June 1999 [RP 83-2000].

2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     Reasons for declaring a state of disaster in the Magisterial Districts
     of Phutaditjhaba Transitional Local Council, Qwaqwa Rural Council and
     Maluti Transitional Rural Council in the Free State Province submitted
     to Parliament in terms of section 2(4) of the Civil Protection Act,
     1977 (Act No 67 of 1997).

3.    The Minister of Safety and Security:


     Regulation Number R.389 published in the Government Gazette Number
     21088 dated 14 April 2000, the South African Police Service Employment
     Regulations made in terms of section 24(1) of the South African Police
     Service Act, 1995 (Act No 68 of 1995).


