---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-10-04
---

WEDNESDAY, 4 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr A S NKOMO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the statement by the chairperson of the Medical Association of
       South Africa, Mr Zolile Mlisana, that the President's comments on the
       Aids disease created confusion about the causal relationship between
       HIV and Aids;

  (2) believes that Mr Zolile Mlisana's statement neither adds scientific
       value to the debate nor contributes positively to the challenges
       facing South Africans in this regard;

  (3) reiterates that the Government has not and does not deny the causal
       relationship between HIV and Aids; and

  (4) calls on the Medical Association of South Africa to join forces with
       the Government and other civil society organisations to fight the
       Aids pandemic.

[Applause.]

Mr B G BELL: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay that the Mpumalanga government is building a new
       legislature at a cost of R800 million despite having a budget of only
       R250 million;

  (2) acknowledges that there are areas in Mpumalanga where flood damage
       has destroyed infrastructure, cut people off from fresh water and
       electricity, and created health risks for citizens;

  (3) expresses its grave disquiet that very little has been done to repair
       this damage or improve the position of these people by a government
       which callously spends more than R400 million above its budget on non-
       essentials to the detriment of the poor; and

  (4) censures the ANC Government in this province for its fiscal
       irresponsibility and its neglect of the people it was elected to
       serve.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) fully supports the directive by the Minister of Water Affairs and
       Forestry, Mr Ronnie Kasrils, that Cape Town residents should use
       water sparingly due to the astronomical cost of building new dams;

  (2) notes that such a directive will, in the long run, help the residents
       themselves to cut down the future cost of water;

  (3) acknowledges the moves by the Cape Metropolitan Council to engage in
       education campaigns on water saving; and

  (4) urges all other areas as well to use this natural resource sparingly.

Ms M C LOBE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent utterances by Morgan Tsvangirai, the leader of the
       Movement for Democratic Change, that President Robert Mugabe of
       Zimbabwe must resign or face being removed forcibly;

  (2) believes that this statement is inflammatory and irresponsible, and
       does not assist the people of Zimbabwe in resolving the complex
       social and economic problems they are experiencing, nor does it
       strengthen democracy in Zimbabwe;

  (3) further believes that it is the will of the people of Zimbabwe which
       will determine the future of their president in the presidential
       elections of 2002; and

  (4) calls on him to refrain from making subversive statements and to use
       the MDC's opposition status in the Zimbabwean parliament to
       strengthen democracy.

[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with deep concern that, in spite of the red carpet put out for
       him on the occasion of his last visit to the NCOP, the President is
       unwilling to return there to answer questions from NCOP members, and
       that compliant ANC members of that House have accordingly pushed
       through a resolution to scrap questions to the President of our
       country;

  (2) deplores this latest development in moves by the President's Office
       to further isolate this country's leader from his people and
       questions the wisdom of such a move, especially in view of the fact
       that the impression is being created in the media, both at home and
       abroad, that the President has lost the confidence of his people; and

  (3) appeals to the President to make himself available to answer
       questions from the democratically elected representatives of the
       people on a regular basis.

Mr M E MABETA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Department of Foreign Affairs had, at the inception of
       the new democratic state in 1994, inherited the apartheid structures
       of the personnel of the respective foreign affairs departments of the
       former Republic of South Africa, Transkei, Botswana, Venda, Ciskei
       and the Department of International Affairs of the African National
       Congress;

  (2) notes that this discrimination positioned the former apartheid
       structure as the legitimate department and thus retained an
       untransformed Department of Foreign Affairs;

  (3) observes with great satisfaction that the new incumbent director-
       general of this department has taken visible steps towards the
       transformation of the Department of Foreign Affairs in such a way
       that there will be a more representative top and middle management
       structure at head office and among transferred officials in the
       external offices in the near future; and

  (4) urges ...

[Time expired.]

Ms M M SOTYU: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  a member of the vigilante group People Against Gangsterism and
           Drugs, Pagad, Ismail Edwards, was sentenced to an effective 25
           years in prison yesterday; and

       (b)  Edwards is also on trial with alleged Pagad hit-man Ebrahim
           Jeneker on a charge of murdering Inspector Bennie Lategan;
  (2) acknowledges that the Government and the judicial system is serious
       about putting the perpetrators of violence behind bars; and

  (3) calls on the police to expedite and conclude their investigations
       into the killing of Inspector Lategan and other terrorist activities.

[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that approximately 100 000 disabled people in the Eastern Cape
       had their disability grants unilaterally cut by the provincial
       welfare department;

  (2) notes that the Eastern Cape High Court has subsequently given the go-
       ahead for a class action to be brought on behalf of these disabled
       people after it was argued, on their behalf, that a class action was
       the only way to obtain justice for the desperately poor disabled
       people who could not afford their own legal action;

  (3) notes that the presiding judge found that the grants of the
       individual applicants were unlawfully stopped in violation of their
       constitutional rights; and

  (4) calls on the national Government to urgently intervene in this
       untenable situation, particularly as a further delay in the
       reinstatement of these disability grants may be caused by an appeal
       to the Supreme Court of Appeals by the provincial government.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the efforts of the University of the Free State and the Pan
       South African Language Board to promote indigenous languages in South
       Africa by embarking on a monolingual project on the Sesotho
       dictionary;

  (2) appreciates that the twosome are proceeding with the establishment of
       a Sesotho lexicographic unit at the university;

  (3) congratulates Prof Mohlomi Moleleki, head of the department of
       African languages, who has been appointed chair of the directorate;

  (4) commends the University of the Free State and PanSALB on this
       progressive move which is the first on the continent; and

  (5) expresses its hope that other universities will take a leaf from the
       book of the University of the Free State in serving the nation.

Mr B A RADEBE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the survey conducted by Idasa which indicates that most white
       South Africans refuse to accept responsibility for apartheid;

  (2) recalls that the apartheid government was voted into power for 46
       years by an exclusively white electorate;

  (3) notes that the report indicates that only 50% of whites - as opposed
       to 70% of blacks - indicated a willingness to participate in nation-
       building, and that only 20% of whites think that material
       compensation for victims is an important part of national
       reconciliation; and

  (4) calls on all South Africans, especially the white community, to face
       the past with honesty and responsibility, and work together for a
       united, just, and democratic South Africa.

[Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:
  That the House -


  (1) notes the opinion of the Chairperson of the SABC Board that we will
       have either a national broadcaster or a national circus, depending on
       the quality of the appointees to the posts of Chief Executive
       Officer, Chief Operations Officer and Chief Financial Officer, all
       being executive members of the Board;

  (2) urges Cabinet to honour such appointments to be made by the Board, in
       terms of section 14 of the Broadcasting Act;

  (3) notes further that the Broadcasting Act of 1998 predates and
       conflicts with the Public Finance Management Act of 1999 on certain
       accounting and reporting procedures and that government policy to
       separate the SABC into public and commercial components was never
       persuasively argued or justified; and

  (4) urges the Government to consult the SABC Board and to commence work
       on amending the Act.

Mr J H SLABBERT: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the building and maintenance of our precious network of high
           quality roads is a significant infrastructure supporting our
           economic growth and progress; and

       (b)  trucking keeps the wheels of our industries and commerce
           rolling, literally and figuratively;


  (2) is extremely perturbed by a report written for the Sunday Times of 1
       October 2000 by Chris Barron under the heading ``South Africa's
       Trucking Industry is in a Mess";

  (3) requests the Minister of Transport to deal with the issues raised
       here, which cannot and should not be countenanced; and
  (4) calls on the Minister to make statements to the House indicating what
       measures he is going to take to deal with the problems.

Mr E P MOGALE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  an exploratory meeting took place between Agri SA and the
           uMkhonto weSizwe Veterans' Association; and

       (b)  this meeting was the first of its kind between these two
           organisations, where ideas were exchanged on land and farming
           issues;


  (2) believes that meetings of this nature are important in establishing
       strategic partnerships amongst civil society organisations; and

  (3) commends the bold initiatives by these two organisations, and hopes
       that future engagements will contribute towards the reconstruction
       and development of our country.

Dr P J RABIE: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van die finansiële oorlewingskrisis wat die landbou in
       Suid-Afrika beleef en die vernietigende effek daarvan op die ekonomie
       van Suid-Afrika in die lig daarvan dat -


       (a)  diesel, een van die grootste insetkostes in die landbou, vandag
           met 37 sent per liter styg;

       (b)  dieselbrandstof die afgelope kalenderjaar met bykans 50% in
           koste toegeneem het; en

       (c)  Standard Bank bereken dat die posisie van 'n tipiese mielieboer
           die afgelope 5 jaar voor hierdie styging reeds met 132% verswak
           het en dié van 'n koringboer met 61%; en


  (2) 'n beroep op die Minister van Finansies doen om die flagrante
       diskriminasie teen die landbou in Suid-Afrika te beëindig deur die
       dieselrabat wat vir ander sektore van die ekonomie geld spoedeisend
       uit te brei na die vernaamste bron van werkgeleenthede op die
       platteland.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr P J Rabie: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the financial survival crisis which South African agriculture
       is presently experiencing, and its destructive effect on the economy
       of South Africa, in the light of the following -


       (a)  the price of diesel, one of the biggest input costs in
           agriculture, is set to rise by 37 cents per litre today;
       (b)  the price of diesel fuel has increased by almost 50% during the
           past calendar year; and

       (c)  Standard Bank estimates that even before this increase the
           position of a typical maize farmer had already deteriorated by
           132% over the past 5 years, and that of a wheat farmer by 61%;
           and


  (2) appeals to the Minister of Finance to end the flagrant discrimination
       against agriculture in South Africa by urgently extending the diesel
       rebate that applies to other sectors of the economy to the most
       important source of employment opportunities in the rural areas.]

Mr S ABRAM: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the election of Mr Walter Ntuli, a KwaZulu-Natal sugar cane
       farmer, as President of the KwaZulu-Natal Agricultural Union;
  (2) congratulates the agricultural fraternity of KwaZulu-Natal for
       placing their trust in Mr Ntuli; and

  (3) wishes Mr Ntuli a fruitful term and expresses the hope that
       transformation in this sector and the interests of agriculture
       generally will be vigorously promoted.

Ms N V CINDI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  six people have been killed and at least seven others injured in
           taxi-related violence in the Eastern Cape; and

       (b)  since the weekend, taxi violence in this province has been
           escalating;


  (2) expresses its sincerest condolences to the families, friends and
       loved ones of the deceased; and

  (3) calls on the police to expedite and conclude their investigations
       into taxi violence to ensure that the perpetrators of violence are
       put behind bars.

[Applause.]

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs will sign a
       R11 million settlement agreement for the Chatha community in the
       Keiskammahoek area in the Eastern Cape;

  (2) believes that this is yet another indication of the commitment by the
       Government to work towards a better life for rural communities; and

  (3) welcomes the initiatives by the Ministry and the department to
       resolve land claims in rural areas.

[Applause.]

                            SCHEDULING OF DEBATES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:
   
  That, notwithstanding Rule 253, the debates on the following Bills be
  conducted on Thursday, 5 October 2000, and Friday, 6 October 2000:


     (a)    Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B 51B -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75);


     (b)    Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Bill [B 53 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75); and


     (c)    African Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund Bill [B
         65 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75).

Agreed to.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a first time.

Votes and Schedule agreed to.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Mnr T D LEE: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is jammer dat die Pretoriase stadsraad
in gebreke gebly het om die beloofde skenking te maak ten bate van die
Urban 21 - Afrika Streek Voorbereidende Konferensie wat in Junie vanjaar
gehou is. Die Departement van Behuising moet geloof word vir die spoed
waarmee hulle tot die redding van die situasie gekom het en R206 000
geskenk het om ons land 'n groot verleentheid te spaar.

Wat ek egter betreur, is dat dieselfde departement nie met dieselfde spoed,
ywer en drif hulle primêre taak uitvoer en tot die redding van die miljoene
haweloses kom nie. Ek is seker dat, soos ek hier staan, mev C M Bono van
Lower Crossroads nog altyd sonder dienste is, en dat mev D Smith nog altyd
in 'n ou lykswa bly, alhoewel ek hulle lot reeds sedert Mei vanjaar bekla.

As ek die bedrag R206 000 sien, sien ek amper 16 mense voor my wat elkeen
'n R15 000-subsidie vir 'n huis kon ontvang het. Dit is eintlik skandalig
dat, terwyl die behuisingsbegroting tot slegs 1% van die nasionale
Begroting besnoei is en die behuisingswaglyste ál langer word, 'n deel
hiervan op kletssessies bestee word. Is dit nie maar tipies van hierdie ANC-
regering nie? Hier word ge-``workshop'', daar word 'n seminaar gehou en
êrens anders 'n kongres.

Hulle ly in der waarheid aan 'n kletssindroom, maar of dit nou deur 'n
virus veroorsaak word of nie, sal ek my nou nie oor uitspreek nie. Ek sal
dit liewer oorlaat aan baie hogere mense wat deskundiges is op die gebied
van virusse en sindrome!

Daar word gepraat oor geweld, maar daagliks sterf onskuldige mense as
gevolg van geweld. Daar word gepraat oor armoede, maar die armoediges word
afgeskeep, want toelaes en pensioene word nie uitbetaal nie, om nie eens
van die Lotto-debakel te praat nie. Daar word gepraat oor vigs, maar
HIV/vigs het reeds pandemiese afmetings aangeneem. Daar word gepraat oor
behuising, maar die waglyste vir behuising word by die dag al hoe langer.
Hierdie pratery baar selde enige vrugte, want die posisie vererger
daagliks. Dit is soos hulle in Engels sê, ``Talk is cheap, but money buys
the whisky''.

Die tyd het aangebreek om oor te gaan tot aksie. Iets moet gedoen word
sodat al die mense van Suid-Afrika in veiligheid, vrede en voorspoed en met
'n dak oor hulle kop kan lewe.

Die DP steun hierdie wetsontwerp. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Mr Chairperson, it is a pity that the Pretoria City Council
failed to make the promised donation in favour of the Urban 21 - Africa
Region Preparatory Conference that was held in June this year. The
Department of Housing must be praised for the speed at which they came to
the rescue and donated R206 000 to spare our country major embarrassment.

What I regret, however, is that the same department does not perform its
primary task with the same speed, zeal and passion and come to the aid of
the millions of homeless people. I am certain that, as I am standing here,
Mrs C M Bono of Lower Crossroads is still without services, and that Mrs D
Smith is still living in an old hearse, although I have been lamenting
their plight since May this year.

When I see the amount of R206 000, I see almost 16 people before me who
could each have received a R15 000 subsidy for a house. It is really
disgraceful, while the housing budget has been cut to only 1% of the
national Budget, and the waiting lists for housing are growing longer and
longer, that a part of this is spent on chat sessions. Is this not typical
of this ANC Government? Here a workshop, there a seminar and elsewhere a
congress is held.

They are in fact suffering from a chat syndrome, but whether it is caused
by a virus or not I cannot say. I would rather leave that to much higher-up
people who are experts in the field of viruses and syndromes!

There is talk about violence, but innocent people are dying daily because
of violence. Poverty is talked about, but the poor are neglected, because
allowances and pensions are not paid out, not to mention the Lotto debacle.
Aids is talked about, but HIV/Aids has already reached pandemic
proportions. Housing is talked about, but waiting lists for housing are
growing by the day. This talking rarely bears any fruit, because the
position is worsening daily. It is as they say: Talk is cheap, but money
buys the whisky.

The time has come for action. Something must be done so that all the people
in South Africa can live in safety, peace and prosperity and with a roof
over their heads.

The DP supports this Bill.]

Dr G G WOODS: Chair, we can contrive to exploit this debate on the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill to go in many different directions unrelated
arguments, but the real issues in the Bill remain non-issues. Why? Firstly,
the three adjustments are purely of a technical nature; secondly, they do
not call for any additional funds; thirdly, they do not amount to any loss
of value-for-money for the state; fourthly, they do not translate into any
loss of delivery by the state; and, finally, they do not imply any instance
of financial mismanagement.

In the given circumstances, these adjustments are necessary and make good
sense, and all that is left for me to say is that we support the Bill.
[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, the New NP and the DA support this Bill
because we believe that it is most important for the Finance department ...

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: I thought
the Speaker said earlier on that there was no DA in this House. Now, why
are they supporting this Bill? [Interjections.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Deputy Chairman, we wear our colours on our sleeves.

It is important for the Finance department to get its house in order,
particularly with reference to the amount of R107 million for legal aid.
This amount was included in the adjustments estimate for 1999-2000 as an
additional appropriation, and first appeared before this House nearly a
year ago in November 1999.  I wish to say to the Minister of Finance that
we are talking about the reappearance of items.

As the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development told this House
at the time, the amount was for the payment, by the Legal Aid Board, of
debts owed to legal practitioners. The amount was again before this House
when the Minister of Finance presented his Budget in February this year.
The Minister included the amount in the increase, which he claimed had been
allocated to the Justice department. Now it is before the House for the
third time for a technical reason, it seems, namely that it was included in
the wrong column in the original 1999 Act. The purpose of its inclusion
here is to shift it into the right column, namely, from column one to
column two. It boggles the mind how this sort of thing can go wrong time
and time again in the Finance department. Anyway, let us hope that this
amount has at last been placed in the right column, since it was all spent
ages ago.

I am informed by the Legal Aid Board that the funds were paid out to it
last December to help defray the huge amount of accumulated arrears owed to
legal practitioners at that time. In fact, during the period from 1 January
this year to 30 September this year, approximately 134 000 payments were
made to legal practitioners at a total cost of approximately R205 million.
These payments would not have been possible without the additional R107
million received in December 1999.

Indeed, it had a salutary effect so that, today, the outstanding debts on
accounts that have already been accepted by the board amount to only R50
million. This deal has also substantially helped reduce the board's
contingency liabilities which, in August 1999, amounted to a whopping R600
million. They were heading for R1 billion, based on instructions received
by the board.

At the time, the amount of R107 million was voted in November 1999. The
Legal Aid Board also acted to reduce the fees payable by the board to legal
practitioners. This, apparently, was a quid pro quo to the Treasury for
getting the bail-out funding. The result of this has been that the current
contingent liabilities of the Legal Aid Board have been reduced to an
estimated R300 million. The board hopes to have reduced this to R150
million by the end of the year.

In other words the deal that was done a year ago around this bail-out of
R107 million has had a good knock-on effect on the management of the Legal
Aid Board's finances, which is also a persuasive reason for supporting this
Bill. It is a story with a reasonably happy ending. What is quite clear is
that the new constitutional rights of the accused and rights to legal
representation have placed an impossible burden on the resources available
for legal aid from the Department of Justice and something had to be done
about it.

Our constitutional rights owe a great deal to the Canadian constitution.
But, historically, South Africa has spent only one-sixtieth of what a
country like Canada spends per capita of the population on legal aid. Given
the scope and volume of the Legal Aid Board's operations, they anticipate
that they will - at least for the foreseeable future - always have
approximately 5 000 accounts on hand, representing work in progress, in
their finance department. There also have been problems around the
drastically reduced fees for legal practitioners and many lawyers have been
unwilling to take on Legal Aid Board work, particularly in the rural areas,
although this is settling down, to a degree.

Another silver lining is the fact that last month the Treasury apparently
authorised the creation of some 900 new posts at the new Justice centres
which are to be established and managed by the Legal Aid Board and will
eventually replace the judice system of using lawyers in private practice
for legal aid. The deal around this R107 million, therefore, seems to have
been a trigger for the implementation of an idea that has been around for
some time.

The previous Minister of Justice spent five years talking about introducing
a new, cheaper system of legal aid, but did nothing about it. The Justice
centres are an attempt to offer cheaper legal aid, but it will be a modest
start on the prospective 900 posts; apparently only just over 200 will be
filled in the current financial year at some seven Justice centres.
In the meantime the legal aid system must continue to rely heavily on
lawyers in private practice. So the Legal Aid Board will apparently again
be asking for additional funding amounting to R140 million above their
annual baseline figure of R270 million for the next financial year. They
hope to get, at least, R100 million extra. This is in order to pay the
legal practitioners who in good faith did work for the Legal Aid Board
within a reasonable time. This Government has a moral obligation to ensure
that these lawyers who in good faith did the work get paid in time. [Time
expired.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The hon the Minister raised a
point of order. I do not want to rule on that, but I want to observe that
we are dealing with adjustments. Some members may take adjustments to mean
a much broader term than that which is on the Order Paper, and may choose
to see themselves in a somewhat different way. But the presiding officers
are not compelled, by the same logic, to recognise how they wish to see
themselves. So we do allow them that liberty.

An HON MEMBER: Just tell them it is not seeking injustice!

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson, the Bill before us is crystal clear and
represents no increase in the expenditure of Government. It addresses
requests from certain departments to the national Treasury ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I am not sure whether you are
being heard. Would you speak into the microphone?

I think, while we are on this subject, I would appreciate it if the Whips
of the various parties could ascertain from their members what difficulties
are being experienced with the handset that is on the table. If some of
these are defective, then I think we would like to know how many are
defective in order that something could be done about it.

Mr J H MOMBERG: The whole DP is defective!

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson, the Bill addresses requests from certain
departments to the national Treasury mainly to move amounts from column 1
to column 2. I will, therefore, not waste the time of the members of this
House by speaking at length about this Bill.

I will conclude by making two remarks. Firstly, it is of vital importance
that the Legal Aid Board addresses its financial problems seriously in
order that disadvantaged people in particular should have access to legal
services where they need them and where they apply for such assistance.

Secondly, the National Skills Fund must utilise its resources in such a
manner as to develop skills that are needed for the 21st century economy.
In this regard, the disadvantaged people must be empowered on a scale never
seen before in our country with skills that will provide them with jobs.

The UDM supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Mr Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, it is the
responsibility of the Department of Finance to explain whether it is good
financial practice to operate on assumptions in financial matters. Good
financial practice would have ensured that the City Council of Pretoria
stuck to its commitment to contribute to the conference on housing.
However, because the contract was based on an incorrect assumption, the
department has been forced to correct the situation to the tune of R206
000.

With reference to the Legal Aid Board, we hope that the Minister aims to
provide continual assistance to this struggling sector. The constitutional
right to legal aid becomes meaningless if the funding is lacking. It has
been mentioned that the legal aid crisis affects the poor the hardest, as
lawyers struggle to provide legal assistance to indigent people.

It is estimated that the board is struggling with a debt of about R280
million. Law firms are reluctant to take on cases from the Legal Aid Board
because of the controversy surrounding the payment of fees. If we allow the
situation to continue, this will lead to the undermining of justice, as
less experienced public defenders are used to defend complex cases. We must
avoid the situation at all costs, where legal aid either ceases to operate
or, if it does continue to operate, its services are of a very poor
quality.

We note, further, that an amount of almost R4 million was used for
technical support in the Department of Labour. A clearer statement on the
breakdown of how this money has been allocated would have been very useful.


With these few words, the ACDP supports this Bill.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, the Adjustments Appropriation Bill is
structured in a transparent, rolling budget format which supports effective
planning to meet the policy priorities of national and subnational
government.

One cannot deny that efforts have been made to implement the priorities
within the country's financial resources. In a sense, the national Budget
facilitates a process in which expenditure responsibility complements
revenue. All the needs have been thoroughly considered and determined
accordingly, because resources are scarce.

Furthermore, not all goals can be met immediately and simultaneously.
Therefore, trade-offs and prioritising are required to meet certain
objectives that are outlined by the policy goals. The budget plan has
managed to place emphasis on social service, which can act as a catalyst to
strengthen the economy's ability to grow.

The reform of the budgetary process has, to a certain degree, successfully
met the objectives of the economy, and satisfied certain basic
psychological needs of the electorate. Evidence of this exists in the
distribution of the child support grant, the intensive campaign against
HIV/Aids, housing projects and new local government structures.

The economy is dynamic, therefore, the budget policy framework is also
dynamic. However, the MF is confident that, from year to year, the creative
budget process will be implemented to circumvent difficulties that affect
the economy.

The MF supports the Bill.

Prof B TUROK: Mr Chairperson, I would like to start off by commenting on
what was said about the procedures in discussing this Bill. It seems to me
there has been a bit of abuse of the Rules and Procedures of this House.
When the Bill came to the Portfolio Committee on Finance, there was some
discussion as to whether we should have a debate at all.

We all want lots of debate in this House, we are all political animals, we
all wish to air our views, but we have to be appropriate in the way we
behave in the House. The feeling in the ANC in the Portfolio Committee on
Finance was that we did not need to debate this Bill. It is a technical
Bill, it is an administrative Bill, and we thought that it should pass on
the nod.

However, the hon Andrew from the DP made a big point about wanting the Bill
to be discussed. He said that he wanted to make two or three points in this
debate on behalf of the DP and therefore we agreed to the Bill being
discussed. We now find that the hon Lee is the spokesperson for the DP. He
is not a member of the Portfolio Committee on Finance, nor does he know
anything about finance. [Laughter.] I have observed, over some time, that
the hon Lee is not a ``yes man''. When the leader of his party says ``no'',
he says ``no''. [Laughter.] Clearly, this is what happened on this
occasion. [Interjections.]

As for the hon Camerer, she is also not a member of the Portfolio Committee
on Finance. I think she would claim some knowledge on finance, but she has
never dealt with the issues which are before us today. So I think what is
happening here is that there is a politicisation of a purely administrative
process and, if it was not so late in the evening, I would have quite a lot
to say on this matter.

What did strike me about the speech by the hon Lee, is that he was
attacking the Government on three critical delivery issues. Although this
is a technical Bill, he took the opportunity to deal with three critical
issues facing this Government, namely housing, law and labour and, to my
astonishment, he managed to bring in yet again the question of Aids.
[Interjections.]

I do want to appeal to the hon Lee that we have had more than our fair
share of comments on the Aids crisis and the Aids problem. To use the
discussion of a technical finance Bill to broach, yet again, for the
hundredth time, this issue, is really unfair to the House. In my opinion
the Chair might perhaps have ruled him out of order. [Interjections.]

I also want to make a point about the question of the housing conference.
Clearly Pretoria failed to pay its share, and the lesson the House must
learn is that if the conference had been held in Cape Town, the money would
have been paid without any problem. Maybe the department should take note
of that.

Just to comment very briefly on the contents of the Bill, an African
regional conference is a matter of major importance. Clearly we need to co-
ordinate across the continent, we need to co-ordinate in the region, and
anyone who raises any objection to that kind of issue perhaps ought not to
be in the House.

Secondly, concerning the Legal Aid Board, the Portfolio Committee on
Finance had long hearings and discussions on the Legal Aid board. It is
vital to get that board on its feet and therefore this money must be
allocated right away.

Regarding the labour issue, the issue of job creation and the presidential
Jobs Summit is something that the whole House must support. People have
talked about it a great deal and therefore this Bill is of great
importance.

I have no hesitation in saying that the ANC supports the Bill and we
regret, a little bit, that people have tried to make nonsense of what is a
technical Bill and actually misrepresented the situation in the Portfolio
Committee on Finance. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, there is an old bit of economics
which says ``talk is cheap because supply always exceeds demand''. The 39
minutes of debate that we have had on this technical Bill, that nobody has
had any disagreement with, merely confirms that old truism. It confirms the
price of talk.

I would like to thank all the parties for their support for the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Minister, yes, indeed, in
respect of time it appears that supply has exceeded demand, or rather
demand has been much less than the supply here. That being the situation,
that concludes the debate on this Bill.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 18:12.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 4 October 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)     South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 62 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Finance - National Assembly).

         (ii)    Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Justice and
                  Constitutional Development - National Assembly).
         (iii)   South African Rail Commuter Corporation Limited Financial
                  Arrangements Bill [B 64 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
                  75) - (Portfolio Committee on Transport - National
                  Assembly).

         (iv)    African Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund
                  Bill [B 65 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
                  (Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs - National
                  Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 4 October 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


         (i)     Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Second Amendment Bill [B 66 - 2000] (National
              Council of Provinces - sec 76) - (Select Committee on Social
              Services - National Council of Provinces).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled on 2 October 2000 and are now referred
     to the Portfolio Committee on Education:


     (1)    Government Notice No 777 published in the Government Gazette No
         21444 dated 11 August 2000, The date on which TEFSA ceases its
         functions made in terms of the National Student Financial Aid
         Scheme Act, 1999 (Act No 56 of 1999).

     (2)    Government Notice No 789 published in the Government Gazette No
         21438 dated 11 August 2000, Approval that the pilot project Travel
         and Tourism Standard Grade, Grade 10 - 12 becomes a fully fledged
         instructional offering, made in terms of the National Education
         Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

     (3)    Government Notice No R.848 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21501 dated 1 September 2000, Correction notice to Government
         Gazette No 21192 dated 18 May 2000, made in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

     (4)    Government Notice No 3102 published in the Government Gazette No
         21539 dated 6 September 2000, Call for public comment on draft
         document - The National Policy Framework on Whole-school
         Evaluation, made in terms of the National Education Policy Act,
         1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:

    The following correspondence has been submitted to the Speaker of the
     National Assembly by the Ministry of Provincial and Local Government:


     Dear Dr FN Ginwala
     National Assembly
     P O Box 15
     CAPE TOWN
     8000

     (021) 461 9462

     GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE SUBMISSIONS BY TRADITIONAL LEADERS ON
     THEIR ROLE, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS
     By direction of the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, I
     forward herewith a copy of a letter signed by the President relating to
     this matter for your information.

     Yours sincerely

     HEAD: MINISTERIAL SERVICES

     PRESIDENT REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

     28 August 2000

     GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE SUBMISSIONS BY TRADITIONAL LEADERS ON
     THEIR ROLE, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS


     1 Your memorandum presented to me and dated 16 May 2000, your response
         to the Discussion Document towards a White Paper on Traditional
         Leadership and Institutions dated 29 June 2000, and our discussion
         on 23 August 2000, have reference.

          You will recall that we met on 23 August 2000 so that I could
          present to you the Government's response to your submissions. You
          then requested that Government's response be presented in writing.

          At the conclusion of the meeting we then agreed as follows:


     - That I would transmit the written response to you early this week;

     - A copy of the letter would also be given to the other stakeholders
         who have provided us with comments on the Discussion Document; and

     - That nothing will be said publicly about what was discussed in our
         meeting of the 23rd of August until this letter has been
         dispatched.

     I now hereby respond formally in line with the decision taken on 23
         August 2000. In formulating this response, Government had recourse
         to the memoranda of 16 May and 29 June 2000 referred to above.

     2 Proposals by Government

     1 Traditional leaders will, in line with the Constitution and the
         relevant law, continue to discharge the authority currently vested
         in them.

     2 Government will process an amendment to the Municipal Structures Act
         during the September 2000 session of Parliament and increase the
         representation of traditional leaders in the municipal councils
         from 10% to 20%. The increased representation relates not only to
         local municipalities, but also to the relevant metropolitan and
         district councils.

     3 Government will review the role of traditional leaders in matters of
         governance and ensure that they are accorded an appropriate role
         within the intergovernmental relations structures. This review
         will occur simultaneously with the current review of our
         intergovernmental system. The principles of co-operative
         governance will continue to guide us in this process.

     4 Government will take steps to ensure that Provincial Houses of
         Traditional Leaders and the National House are properly resourced
         so that they may carry out their functions more effectively.

     5 Where traditional authority areas have been subdivided as a result of
         the demarcation process, the Municipal Demarcation Board will
         reassess the situation. It must also be said that, ultimately, the
         Board will have the final say on the matter, as it is an
         independent body. The Chairperson of the Demarcation Board has
         already been approached in this regard and will hold meetings with
         the various Houses of Traditional Leaders and the respective
         Premiers within the next ten days.

     6 The national and provincial spheres of government administer laws
         having a bearing on traditional leadership. With a view to
         identifying which additional responsibilities may be assigned to
         traditional leaders, various national departments and the affected
         provinces have been asked to identify areas which may be so
         assigned. The work relating to this has started already, and the
         list of additional responsibilities produced thus far indicates
         clearly that traditional leadership does indeed have a place in
         matters of governance in our country.

     7 The National departments involved in this process are:


          - Agriculture;
          - Arts, Culture, Science and Technology;
          - Environmental Affairs and Tourism;
          - Health;
          - Home Affairs;
          - Justice and Constitutional Development;
          - Land Affairs;
          - Minerals and Energy;
          - Safety and Security;
          - Water Affairs and Forestry; and
          - Welfare, Population and Development.


     8 The White Paper on Traditional Leadership, which will be finalised in
         March 2001, will lead to the enactment of national framework
         legislation in July 2001. This legislation will effectively
         rationalise approximately 1500 pieces of existing laws relating to
         traditional leadership.
     9 The role of the various Houses will be reviewed with a view to
         strengthening their participation in the national and provincial
         legislative processes.

     10     MEC's for Local Government will be advised to consider applying
         Section 81(4)(b) of the Municipal Structures Act in their
         respective provinces. This section empowers an MEC for local
         government in a province, after consulting the relevant House of
         Traditional Leaders, by notice in the Provincial Gazette, to
         prescribe a role for traditional leaders in the affairs of a
         municipality. Such a role will be consistent with the Constitution
         and will bring traditional leaders and municipalities closer
         together.

     11     We will continue to conduct discussions with yourselves on all
         outstanding issues. We will also continue to update you on
         progress being made with the work that is currently underway.

     3.     Rural Local Government Model

     1 Is is clear from the memoranda dated 16 May and 29 June 2000 that a
         new model of local government in rural areas is being proposed. I
         am familiar with the arguments being put forward in favour of the
         proposed model, as these have been under consideration for a
         number of years. It must be recorded that the existing model, as
         provided for in the Constitution, was approved by the
         Constitutional Assembly after an extensive and inclusive
         consultation process.

     2 It must be pointed out that during the colonial and apartheid eras,
         the institution of traditional leadership was distorted in a
         number of ways. These distortions included allocating to
         traditional leaders functions that traditionally did not belong to
         them. As a result of these distortions, this country has ended up
         with a system that is not in line with the basic framework of our
         Constitution. Most of these functions will now be performed by
         local government structures, in terms of the Constitution.
     3 The existing constitutional framework provides for a dual system
         which provides for the retention of traditional leadership, while
         at the same time allowing local communities to elect their public
         representatives. This system was ushered in, in a phased manner
         through amendments made to the Local Government Transition Act -
         hence the election of rural councillors in 1995/1996.

     4 In addition to your submissions, government has also analysed many
         other submissions by other organisations and South Africans on the
         Discussion Document towards a White Paper on Traditional
         Leadership and Institutions. I am given to understand that the
         general tenor of these submissions is known to you as these were
         referred to constantly at the rounding up conference on the
         Discussion Document which you attended on the 17-18 August 2000.
         It is clear from these submissions that many South Africans
         support the rural local government model provided for in the
         Constitution.

     5 The Government does not support the alteration of the existing local
         government model. The proposal to disenfranchise a section of our
         people negates the aspirations of millions, including some
         traditional leaders, who fought for democracy.
     4.     Conclusion

     1 The challenge we are faced with at this moment in time is to find a
         way of stabilizing our system of governance in the rural areas by
         creating a climate within which the institution of traditional
         leadership and elected institutions of government can co-exist.
         This is a challenging task, but it is achievable.

     2 In tackling the enormous challenges facing us, Government,
         traditional leaders and other stakeholders must jointly promote
         the common ideal of nation building in our country. Government is
         committed to promoting development throughout South Africa. We
         will, together with you, continue to work out mechanisms, which
         will ensure the attainment of these ideals.

     Regards

     T M MBEKI

     Khosi F P Kutama
     Northern Province House of Traditional Leaders
     Private Bag X9503
     Pietersburg, 0700

1.    The Speaker:

    The following correspondence between the President of the Republic and
     the Leader of the Official Opposition relating to the use of AZT in
     rape cases and to other matters has been submitted to the Speaker of
     the National Assembly by the Parliamentary Counsellor of the President
     at the request of the President:

                                                           13 September 2000
Dear Madam Speaker

You may remember that on June 13 this year, the National Assembly discussed
the budget vote of the Presidency.

During the debate, an exchange took place between the President and the Hon
Mr Tony Leon relating to the use of the drug AZT in rape cases.

Subsequent to this debate, Mr Leon wrote to the President further to
clarify his position on this matter. This led to an exchange of letters
discussing this and other matters.

The President and Mr Leon then agreed that this correspondence should be
made available to Members of Parliament, given both the nature of the
issues discussed and the fact that the discussion began in Parliament.

Accordingly, I would, hereby, like to submit the relevant documents with a
request that they should be made available to all Members of Parliament.

These documents are:


  1.  A transcript of the relevant exchange between Mr Leon and President
       Mbeki in the National Assembly on 13 June 2000. (Annexure A)


  2.  A letter from Mr Leon to the President dated 19 June 2000. (Annexure
       B)


  3.  A letter from Mr Leon to the President dated 27 June 2000. (Annexure
       C)


  4.  A letter from Mr John P Kearney, CEO of Glaxo Wellcome South Africa
       to Mr Leon dated 21 June 2000. (Annexure D)


  5.  A letter from President Mbeki to Mr Leon dated 1 July 2000. (Annexure
       E)


  6.  A letter from Mr Ryan Coetzee to Mr Parks Mankahlana dated 7 July
       2000. (Annexure F)


  7.  A letter from Mr Leon to President Mbeki dated 7 July 2000. (Annexure
       G)


  8.  A letter to the Editor written by Mr Kearney of Glaxo Wellcome
       published in the Sunday Times edition of 16 July 2000. (Annexure H)


  9.  A letter from President Mbeki to Mr Leon dated 17 July 2000.
       (Annexure I)


  10. A letter from Mr Leon to President Mbeki dated 28 July 2000.
       (Annexure J)


  11. A letter from Mr Leon to President Mbeki dated 5 August 2000.
       (Annexure K)


  12. A letter from Mr Leon to President Mbeki dated 24 August 2000.
       (Annexure L)


  13. A letter from President Mbeki to Mr Leon dated 1 September 2000.
       (Annexure M)

I stand ready to meet the Hon Speaker at your convenience, to discuss any
matters you may wish to raise in connection with the request contained in
this letter.
Your sincerely

Charles Nqakula
Parliamentary Counsellor of the President
cc The Hon Chairperson of the NCOP
ANC Chief Whip
Cape Town

ANNEXURE A:

EXCERPTS FROM THE DEBATE ON THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET VOTE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY,
13 JUNE 2000

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr A J Leon):

We move to the second paradox of this Government, to which the President
drew close attention this morning, and that is that it represents poor
people globally, but neglects them locally. The President has taken on, as
he told us this morning, the mantle of representing poorer nations on the
world stage. For that, he deserves our acclamation and congratulations, and
we are not stinting in giving them to him. But, paradoxically, and that for
which the Presidency deserves the widest condemnation, the poorest people
here at home have seen and heard little of their President this year.
[Interjections.]

Those without jobs, those in dire poverty, and those living with HIV/Aids,
have been left wondering what the future holds for them under this
Government. The President's questions about the causes of HIV/Aids have
failed to reach their ears. And let me say, if that is the case, then
perhaps they are less confused and, in one real sense, better off than if
they had heard the mixed messages emanating from him and his office on this
crucial issue.

I think the Aids debate is an acute one. I quote the words uttered on 10
May this year by Charlene Smith, who herself survived a horrific rape
ordeal. Let us listen to what she said about the Government's and the
President's stance:


  If, instead of spending vast amounts of money on recreating the wheel,
  President Mbeki had taken up the GlaxoWellcome offer - the lowest in the
  world at R200 for 28 days' supply of AZT - and made it available to rape
  survivors to prevent HIV, 10 000 rape survivors in South Africa would
  have got the drug. Eighty percent of them would not have sero-converted
  and become HIV-positive if raped by an HIV-positive person.

As the Americans would say, whom he met recently: Case closed.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC (Mr T M Mbeki):

The hon Tony Leon raises the matter of the use of AZT in instances where
women have been raped. It is illogical. I do not know if the manufacturing
company here, that manufactures AZT, is in fact selling AZT for that
particular purpose or is giving it out to patients who are in those
circumstances, because if they are doing that, I am not sure that it will
be legal. The reason for that is that AZT is not licensed in this country
for that particular purpose. Indeed, it is not licensed in any country in
the world for that particular purpose. The reason for this is that the
manufacturing company says that AZT is not a vaccine. Therefore, one cannot
use it in this instance where somebody gets raped, possibly by somebody who
is HIV-positive, and if one gives that person AZT, it will stop an
infection. The manufacturing company itself says that AZT is not a vaccine
and therefore it cannot work in the circumstances, which is why they have
never applied for the licensing of AZT for that purpose in any country.

An HON MEMBER: What about the offer that they made you?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Glaxo Wellcome would not have made an offer
to the Government for AZT to be used in this way. [Interjections]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: But they made an offer!

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, Tony, they did not. You should give me
the evidence of the offer. We have discussed this matter with them. We have
discussed this matter with them and have said that there is this demand
which is strange, because they have not applied to the MCC for this
purpose. There is not a single clinical study anywhere in the world which
deals with this. The manufacturing company said that, of course, they would
not apply for this particular application because it is illogical. It is
absurd, because if it worked, then there would be no need to work further
on a vaccine because this would be a vaccine.

It is very easy to check this one. We just need to telephone Glaxo Wellcome
tomorrow. [Laughter.] It is quite easy to check that out. That member
should try to speak to them again and tell them what I said about this. I
say that it is not licensed in this country for that purpose. It is not
licensed anywhere in the world for this purpose, because that company has
not applied, for the reasons that I have indicated.

ANNEXURE B:

19 June 2000

Mr T M Mbeki
President
Republic of South Africa
Private Bag X1000
PRETORIA
0001

Dear President Mbeki

I enjoyed participating in the debate on your Budget Vote and look forward
to future encounters of this or a similar kind. Perhaps we could take the
discussion further in a less adversarial forum.

I would, however, like to answer your challenge on the issue of HIV/Aids
and the proposals concerning AZT and your response thereto. My statement to
Parliament was along the following lines:


  I think the AIDS issue is an acute one. I quote the words uttered on 1O
  May this year by Charlene Smith, who herself survived a horrific rape
  ordeal - she said about the Government's and the President's stance:


     If, instead of spending vast amounts of money on recreating the wheel,
     President Mbeki had taken up the GlaxoWellcome offer - the lowest in
     the world at R200 for 28 days' supply of AZT - and made it available to
     rape survivors to prevent HIV, 10 000 rape survivors in South Africa
     would have got the drug. Eighty per cent of them would not have sero-
     converted and become HIV-positive if raped by an HIV-positive person.

Obviously what I said is generally the view of rape and anti-AIDS victim
Charlene Smith. Of necessity my remarks were somewhat elliptical because of
the wide number of topics I had to cover in the very limited time available
to me in your debate.

However, with respect to your response, I believe that my central
contention is valid. You, of course, are correct to indicate that AZT is
not a vaccine, which I did not suggest it was. It is, however, an anti-
retroviral medication which will prevent sero-conversion in rape victims
who are raped by an HIV- positive person.

I accept the accuracy of your statement that AZT is not registered with the
relevant authority. But surely this is irrelevant? After all, Misoprostal,
used in clinics by the Government's own Department of Health to induce
abortions, is also not registered by the MCC for that specific purpose. As
I understand it, a 28 day course of AZT will boost the immunity of a woman
raped by an HIV-positive person, thereby allowing her to fight the virus
and increase her chances of not converting positive.

Kindest regards
Yours sincerely
A J LEON MP
Leader of the Opposition

ANNEXURE C

27 June 2000

Mr T M Mbeki
President
Republic of South Africa
Private Bag X1000
PRETORIA
0001

Fax: 012 342 1938
Dear President Mbeki
Further to my letter to you of 19 June 2000 on the issue you raised in
Parliament in response to my remarks about the so-called Aids vaccine, may
I draw to your attention the enclosed response I received from the Chief
Executive of Glaxo Wellcome.

Kindest regards
Yours sincerely

AJ LEON MP
Leader of the Opposition
cc Dr M E Tshabalala-Msimang, Minister of Health

ANNEXURE D

GlaxoWellcome
J.P. Kearney
Chief Executive

21 June 2000

Mr A Leon MP
Parliament of the Republic of South Africa
P.0. Box 15
Cape Town
8000

Dear Mr Leon
Thank you for your letter of 20 June 2000 and the copy of your written
response to President Mbeki regarding the AZT drug issue raised in
Parliament on 13 June 2000.

It is very kind of you to keep us informed of these developments and I am
pleased to confirm that your reply to the President is essentially accurate
on the scientific aspects of using AZT as post-exposure prophylaxis in
individuals who have been raped.

Together with you and your Party, we look forward to the day when all
individuals who have been subjected to the horrific crime of rape will have
the opportunity to access anti-retroviral prophylaxis.

Glaxo Wellcome is committed to working together with the South African
Department of Health and all relevant role players to improve access to
drugs for HIV-positive individuals.
Kind regards
John P Kearney
Chief Executive

ANNEXURE E

July 1, 2000
Dear Tony

Thank you for your letters of June 19 and 27, 2000 relating to the AIDS
issue. Thank you also for the copy of the letter of the South African CEO
of GlaxoWellcome, Mr J.P. Kearney.

As you are aware, during the last few months, I have tried to familiarise
myself with all elements relating to the HIV-AIDS matter.

Necessarily, this has also meant studying as much literature as possible on
the question of anti-HIV retroviral drugs.

What I said in Parliament was based on the information I had managed to
garner on the issue you raised. As you correctly indicate, this related to
the efficacy of AZT in stopping HIV infection in cases of rape.

Your statement, that 80% of women raped by HIV-positive men would not
become HIV-positive if they are given AZT, has no scientific basis
whatsoever.

In this regard, I suggest that, among others, you obtain a copy of the
publication of the US CDC, MMWR September 25, 1998/47 (RR17).
Among other things, the CDC says:

``no data exist regarding the efficacy of (anti-retroviral drugs) for
persons with nonoccupational HIV exposure'' (As you must be aware,
`nonoccupational exposure' includes rape.)

``Some physicians believe that anti-retroviral agents are indicated for
persons with possible sexual, injecting-drug-use, or other nonoccupational
HIV exposure. However PHS (the US Public Health Service) cannot definitely
recommend for or against anti-retroviral agents in these situations because
of the lack of efficacy data on the use of anti-retroviral agents in
preventing HIV transmission after possible nonoccupational exposure.
Efficacy and effectiveness data and additional epidemiologic information is
needed ...'' and,

``Research is needed to establish if and under what circumstances anti-
retroviral therapy following nonoccupational HIV exposure is effective.''

The CDC makes this equally important statement:

``Postexposure anti-retroviral therapy should never be administered
routinely or solely at the request of a patient. It is a complicated
medical therapy, not a form of primary HIV prevention. It is not a `morning
after pill' ...'' (My emphasis).

In the same report, the CDC says that:

``The risk for HIV transmission ... per episode of receptive vaginal
exposure is estimated at 0.1%-0.2%.''

In this regard, you might care to consider what it is that distinguishes
Africa from the United States, as a consequence of which millions in sub-
Saharan Africa allegedly become HIV positive as a result of heterosexual
sexual intercourse, while, to all intents and purposes, there is a zero
possibility of this happening in the US.

In your letter to me of June 19, you make the extraordinary statement that
AZT boosts the immune system.

Not even the manufacturer of this drug makes this profoundly unscientific
claim. The reality is the precise opposite of what you say, this being that
AZT is immuno-suppressive.

Contrary to the claims you make in promotion of AZT, all responsible
medical authorities repeatedly issue serious warnings about the toxicity of
anti-retroviral drugs, which include AZT.

For example, in its Report, MMWR May 15, 1998/Vo. 47/No. RR-7, the CDC
says:

``The selection of a drug regimen for HIV PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis)
must strive to balance the risk for infection against the potential
toxicity of the agent(s) used. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is
not justified for exposures that pose a negligible risk of transmission.''

In this context, please bear in mind the 0.1%-0.2% risk of transmission
indicated by the CDC with regard to receptive vaginal exposure.

The matter is not in dispute between us that AZT is not licensed by the
South African MCC for use in rape cases. Further to this, GlaxoWellcome has
not applied to the MCC for such a licence.

Indeed, the approved package insert for AZT makes no claim about the
efficacy of AZT with regard to rape cases.

I would presume that the reason that GlaxoWellcome has not applied for a
licence is precisely because it knows that there is no scientific evidence
it could produce to justify this application.

It is very strange that you have proven scientific information which
GlaxoWellcome, the CDC, the MCC and every responsible medical authority
does not have, that 80% of rape victims in our country would not have
become HIV positive if they had been given AZT.

It may be that I underestimate the scientific expertise of which your Party
disposes.

Accordingly, I am ready to change my views on this matter, to pay due
tribute to such expertise, if it is demonstrated that you do, indeed, have
such expertise.

If it is necessary, I can present the argument about the obvious logical
absurdity of the claim that viral infection can be stopped by the use of
drugs provided that the virus was communicated in circumstances of forced
heterosexual sexual intercourse.

It is in this context, apart from extant scientific information, that the
issue I raised in the National Assembly about AZT not being a vaccine
assumes its relevance. The PEP argument about AZT (and other anti-
retrovirals) cannot be sustained unless vaccine-like efficacy is attributed
to these anti-retroviral drugs.

Accordingly, the statement you make in your 19 June letter that I am
``correct to indicate that AZT is not a vaccine, which I (you) did not
suggest it was'', is inconsistent with your argument that AZT should be
used as though it were a vaccine.

I am very disturbed at Mr Kearney's statement that your incorrect
statements about AZT and rape are ``essentially accurate on the scientific
aspects of using AZT as post-exposure prophylaxis in individuals who have
been raped.''

I imagine that all manufacturers of anti-retroviral drugs pay great
attention to the very false figures about the incidence of rape in our
country, that are regularly peddled by those who seem so determined to
project a negative image of our country.

What makes this matter especially problematic is that there is a
considerable number of people in our country who believe and are convinced
that most black (African) men carry the HI virus.

In addition to this, reflecting a view among these about rape in our
country, Charlene Smith was sufficiently brave, or blinded by racist rage,
publicly to make the deeply offensive statement that rape is an endemic
feature of African society.

This is what she wrote recently in the US Washington Post:
``Here, (in South Africa), HIV is spread primarily by heterosexual sex -
spurred by men's attitude towards women. We won't end this epidemic until
we understand the role of tradition and religion - and of a culture in
which rape is endemic and has become a prime means of transmitting the
disease, to young women as well as children.''

The hysterical estimates of the incidence of HIV in our country and sub-
Saharan Africa made by some international organisations, coupled with the
earlier wild and insulting claims about the African and Haitian origins of
HIV, powerfully reinforce these dangerous and firmly-entrenched prejudices.

None of this bodes well for a rational discussion of HIV-AIDS and an
effective response to this matter, including the use of anti-retroviral
drugs.

Whatever his obligations as the Chief Executive of the company that
manufactures AZT, I think it is grossly unethical that Mr Kearney should
seek to increase the sales of AZT, and therefore GlaxoWellcome's profits,
by exploiting the justified health concerns of our people.

I consider it deeply offensive and comtemptuous of our people, our country
and its laws that, as you and Charlene Smith say, GlaxoWellcome should
promote the sales of AZT by selling `cut-price' AZT in our country for use
by rape victims, knowing very well that this is in violation of the law and
that no scientific evidence exists proving the efficacy of this drug in
cases of rape.

I have noted the fact that Mr Kearney seeks to achieve his commercial
purposes ``together with you and your Party.''

It is amazing and completely unacceptable that you, the Leader of the
Official Opposition, should consider all of this, including blatant
disrespect for the rule of law, as ``irrelevant'', the word you use in your
letter to me.

You will remember that during the debate around the legislation we
introduced enabling the parallel import of drugs and medicines, to make
these affordable for our population that is deeply mired in poverty, your
party was correctly and needlessly very vocal about the necessity to ensure
that all pharmaceutical products available to our people should be subject
to approval by the MCC.

Why is a double standard now being applied with regard to AZT, making the
need for the certification of drugs by the MCC ``irrelevant''?

Only recently, your party has been very strident in demanding respect for
the rule of law in Zimbabwe.

Why is a double standard now being applied with regard to AZT, making the
requirement for observance of the rule of law ``irrelevant''?

In his letter to you, Mr Kearney says his company is committed ``to improve
access to drugs for HIV-positive individuals''.

In more direct and plain language, this means that, consistent with its
normal and understandable commercial objectives, GlaxoWellcome is committed
to increase the sales of AZT in our country, in competition with anti-
retroviral drugs manufactured by other companies.

If Mr Kearney did not pursue this objective as vigorously as possible, his
company would be entitled to terminate his contract.

You and I, as public representatives of our people, pursue, or should
pursue, a different objective. With regard to the matter under discussion,
our objective must surely be to improve the health of all our people.

I think that it is dangerous that any of our public representatives and
political parties should allow themselves to be used as marketing agents of
particular products and companies, including drugs, medicines and
pharmaceutical companies.

I accept that it is perfectly within their right for private individuals,
such as Charlene Smith, to play this role, as it would be for you, in your
private capacity.

In the controversy that has attended the questions our government has
raised about various matters relating to HIV-AIDS, much has been said about
us, in a sustained effort to force us uncritically to accept a so-called
orthodox view.
We have resisted this pressure and will continue to do so, because of the
decisive importance of an accurate understanding of AIDS and its specifics
in our own country.
I trust that our discussion about AZT and rape will convince you that
despite the fervent reiteration of various assertions, supported by many
scientists, medical people and NGO's, about the existence of some
unchallengeable and immutable truths about HIV-AIDS, as public
representatives we have no right to be proponents and blind defenders of
dogma.

Whatever the intensity of the campaign to oblige us to think and act
differently on the HIV-AIDS issue, the instinctive human desire in the face
of such a barrage, to obtain social approval by succumbing to massive and
orchestrated pressure, will not lead us to become proponents and blind
defenders of dogma.

The cost of AIDS in human lives is too high to allow that we become blind
defenders of the faith.

Unless you have evidence to demonstrate that what I have said about AZT and
rape is wrong, I would expect that you make a public statement distancing
yourself from the false claims so regularly propagated in this country,
concerning the efficacy of AZT as post-exposure prophylaxis in cases of
rape, propaganda in which you joined.

Not only is this the only honourable thing to do, but, as a high-level
public representative, I believe you have an obligation to correct the
misleading impression on the matter we are discussing that you and your
Party have conveyed on more than one occasion, in Parliament and elsewhere.

Needless to say, to uphold the rule of law and to fulfil the government's
obligations with regard to the health of our people, we will follow up on
the matters you have brought to our attention, concerning the disturbing
behaviour of Glaxo Wellcome.

Given that the matters about which you have written to me were discussed
openly in the National Assembly, during which debate I suggested that you
convey my views to Glaxo Wellcome, I believe that it would be correct that
we make the correspondence between us available both to the National
Assembly and the general public.

Once again, I would like to suggest that you inform yourself as extensively
as possible about the AIDS epidemic. Again, for this purpose, I would like
to recommend that you access the Internet.

On the various websites, you will find an enormous volume of literature,
including CDC, WHO and UNAIDS documents, editions of various highly
respected science journals as well as ``dissident'' articles.

As you know, many frightening statements are made with great regularity
about the incidence of HIV-AIDS in our country and continent and the threat
this poses to our very survival as a country, a continent and as Africans.

I believe that it is imperative that all our public representatives should
base whatever they say and do on the HIV-AIDS matter, on the truth and not
necessarily on the comfort of fitting themselves into the framework of
whatever might be considered to be `established majority scientific
opinion'.

Yours sincerely
THABO MBEKI
The Hon A.J. Leon, MP
Leader of the Official Opposition
National Assembly
CAPE TOWN

ANNEXURE F

7 July 2000
Mr Parks Mankahlana
Spokesperson for the Presidency
Per fax: 012 342 1938

Dear Mr Mankahlana

In his letter of July 1 to Mr Leon on the subject of making AZT available
to rape survivors, President Mbeki said that he believed it correct to
``make the correspondence between us available both to the National
Assembly and the general public''.

In his response this morning, Mr Leon agreed.

Consequently, I have made the correspondence available to Ray Hartley of
the Sunday Times.
Please feel free to contact me in this regard. My cell number is 083 448
2693.

Yours sincerely
Ryan Coetzee
DP Executive Director for Political Management

ANNEXURE G

7 July 2000
Mr T M Mbeki
President
Republic of South Africa
Private Bag X1000
Pretoria
0001

Fax: 012 342 1938

Dear President Mbeki

Thank you for your letter of the 1st of July. I appreciate the great time
and effort that you have obviously put into your response, although I find
much of the tone and content unhelpful in promoting rational debate on this
important matter.

If I understand your letter correctly, you argue against the provision of
AZT to rape victims on two grounds:

Firstly, you argue that there is ``no scientific evidence'' to support the
argument that the provision of AZT could prevent the transmission of the
HIV virus to rape victims.

Secondly, you claim that the risks of potential transmission are so low
that they do not warrant the use of AZT, which as you correctly point out
can have severe side effects.

You base your argument on numerous quotes from the publication of the
Centre for Disease Control in America, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, September 25, 1998/ Vol 47/ No. RR-17. I do not believe that when
read as a whole, the document supports your arguments. I will deal with
each argument in turn.

The evidence from the CDC report which you provide to support your first
argument is a quote from the CDC which says ``no data exist regarding the
efficacy of (anti-retroviral drugs) for persons with nonoccupational HIV
exposure ... ''; the fact that the US Public Health Service ``cannot
definitely recommend for or against anti-retroviral agents in these
situations because of the lack of efficacy data''; and that further
research is needed ``to establish if and under what circumstances'' such
therapy would be effective.

The CDC report is extremely even-handed. It scrupulously weighs up the
evidence both for and against the provision of anti-retroviral drugs
following non-occupational HIV exposure. You have unfortunately only quoted
the arguments against. A point that must be made at the beginning is that
the CDC does allow the provision of anti-retroviral drugs by physicians to
rape victims. The document is an attempt to highlight the ``potential
benefits and risks'' and so provide a guide to physicians on whether or not
to pursue such a course of treatment. The CDC has published formal
guidelines for physicians should they choose to use AZT.

The reason for the lack of ``efficacy data'' is that there have been no
prospective trials conducted to measure the effectiveness of AZT for non-
occupational exposure. It is simply impossible to conduct such trials
because one would need to establish beyond doubt the HIV status of both the
rape suspect and the rape survivor before and after the rape. While this in
itself is almost impossible, the fact that it is illegal to test for HIV
against a person's will makes such research harder still. The best that can
be done is to conduct a retrospective case control study. One is currently
being conducted by the CDC.

It is for this reason that the CDC is unable to recommend either for or
against anti-retroviral drugs for rape victims. This does not mean that
there is ``no scientific basis whatsoever'' for my statement that the
provision of AZT would reduce HIV transmission to rape survivors.

In fact, the CDC report evaluates data from various trials, which could
have a bearing on the potential efficacy of anti-retroviral PEPs. It makes
reference to various trials conducted on animals, but I will deal only with
its references to studies on humans. Two are of significance: Firstly, the
CDC quotes the study (which I referred to in my letter) from a 1995 survey
where investigators used ``case control surveillance data from health care
workers'' in Europe and America to document that AZT use ``was associated
with an 81% decrease in the risk for HIV infection after percutaneous
exposure to HIV-infected blood''. According to the CDC this study
``demonstrated anti-retroviral effectiveness'' following needle stick
injuries.

The CDC also refers to the study where there was a 67% reduction in
transmission of HIV from mother to child when AZT was administered during
pregnancy, labour, and for six weeks after birth. The CDC states that there
was evidence that a ``prophylactic effect'' on the foetus before, during or
after birth ``could account for some reduction in perinatal transmission''.


Although the CDC report acknowledges that these studies ``might not be
directly relevant to non-occupational exposure'' they do ``suggest that
anti-retroviral agents are potentially valuable for treating HIV exposures
in these settings''.

These trials are obviously not conclusive for they have to be extrapolated
to non-occupational settings. However, they do suggest that anti-retroviral
agents can act as a postexposure prophylaxis and reduce a person's risk of
acquiring HIV infection after exposure. The CDC report states ``it can take
several days for infection to become established in the lymphoid and other
tissues. During this time, interventions to interrupt viral replication
could represent an opportunity to prevent an exposure from becoming an
established infection.''

Thus, if providing AZT to rape victims can prevent an exposure to HIV from
becoming an established infection (and there is substantial evidence to
suggest it can) the benefit is massive, if not priceless. The victim is
literally saved from a death sentence.

Which brings me to your second argument, which is that the chances of HIV
transmission from rape are so small, and the side-effects of AZT are so
large, that providing such treatment to rape victims is not really worth
the candle.

You quote the CDC as saying that in selecting a drug regime for post-
exposure prophylaxis the physician should ``balance the risk for infection
against the potential toxicity of the agent(s) used. Because PEP is
potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures that pose a
negligible risk of transmission.'' You then state, ``in this context,
please bear in mind the 0.1% - 0.2% risk of transmission indicated by the
CDC with regard to receptive vaginal exposure.'' You seem to be implying
that ``receptive vaginal exposure'' constitutes a ``negligible risk of
transmission'' and that consequently it is not worth providing rape
survivors with AZT with potentially toxic side effects.

This is disengenous for two reasons: Firstly, the risk of HIV transmission
following rape (particularly in South Africa) is not ``negligible'' at all.
Rape does not constitute ``receptive'' sex and as such is likely to lead to
trauma and consequently a far greater risk of HIV transmission. The risk is
compounded in South Africa by the high levels of HIV in the population as
well as the prevalence of Sexually Transmitted Diseases, which greatly
increase the possibility of HIV transmission. Secondly, the CDC is not
referring to rape or consensual sex when it states that PEPs are not
``justified for exposures that pose a negligible risk of transmission''.
Rather, it is referring to contact between infected body fluid and intact
skin. This would be clear had you quoted the whole sentence from the CDC
report, which reads, ``Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not
justified for exposures that pose a negligible risk of transmission (e.g.
potentially infected body fluid on intact skin).'' (My emphasis.)

This is just one example of where you have pruned quotes to make them fit
your argument. Elsewhere you quote the CDC report as saying ``Postexposure
anti-retroviral therapy should never be administered routinely or solely at
the request of a patient. It is a complicated medical therapy, not a form
of primary HIV prevention. It is not a `morning-after pill ...' (your
emphasis)''. Yet you omit to mention that the report continues (from
precisely the point where you left off) ``but, if proven effective, can
constitute a last effort to prevent HIV infection in patients for whom
primary prevention has failed to protect them from possible exposure.'' (My
emphasis.)

Reading through your letter I had the strong feeling that you have reached
your conclusions already. You then selectively choose quotes to support
your argument, and ignored others that didn't. If the quotes do not quite
fit your purposes you lop off the awkward parts.

What is most disturbing about your letter is the way you impute sinister
motivations on the bona fide actions of others. You seem to believe that
the request by my Party, Charlene Smith and others for the government to
provide AZT to rape victims, and the offer by Glaxo Wellcome to provide it
at greatly reduced prices, is all part of a giant conspiracy. You imply
that this conspiracy is the result of some unholy alliance between a civil
society motivated by racism and an international pharmaceutical industry
driven by greed.

It seems that underlying your letter is a belief that civil society is once
again being driven by an overriding desire to reaffirm ``its belief that
its racist stereotype of Africans [is] correct.'' (ANC statement to HRC on
racism in media)

Out of a ``determination'' to project a ``negative image'' of South Africa
unnamed forces peddle what you describe as ``very false figures'' on the
incidence of rape in this country. You claim that the AIDS debate in South
Africa is being driven (and distorted) by people ``who are convinced that
most black (African) men carry the HIV virus''. Among their number you name
Charlene Smith who you claim was ``blinded by racist rage'' when she wrote
that rape was endemic in South African society.

You proceed to complain that by publishing ``hysterical estimates'' (your
emphasis) and by making ``wild and insulting claims'' about the African
origins of HIV, the international community is (whether out of accident or
design) acting to ``reinforce these dangerous and firmly-entrenched
prejudices''.

You then claim that the international pharmaceutical companies are driven
by even more sinister motivations. You suggest that the sole and overriding
desire of the pharmaceutical companies is to maximise their profits by
exploiting every available opportunity to flog their drugs to South Africa,
regardless of their efficacy or toxicity thereof. You claim that having had
their interest pricked by the high incidence of rape in this country, Glaxo
Wellcome set out to cynically exploit the ``justified health concerns of
our people'' in order to (once again) ``increase the sales of AZT''. To top
this giant-racial-capitalist-conspiracy off you accuse Charlene Smith and I
of being ``marketing agents'' of the pharmaceutical companies.

(For the record: Neither I nor the Democratic Party have received any
financial assistance of any nature from Glaxo Wellcome.)

What concerns me about your letter is the tendency to turn questions of
fact into questions of motive. This method of propaganda may be useful
means of silencing (or isolating) your critics without responding to their
arguments, but is not particularly conducive to rational debate.

It is somewhat hypocritical to accuse overseas opinion of intolerance and
then to try to shut down dissent domestically by labelling people
``racists'' or ``pawns of the pharmaceutical industry''. Your statement
that the government will take steps against the ``disturbing behaviour of
GlaxoWellcome'' is frankly sinister.

Your determination to resist the imposition of what you call the ``dogma''
of scientific opinion seems to be matched only by a desire to impose your
own.

Yet what is most worrying for South Africa is that it seems your party has
actually started to believe its own propaganda. Instead of identifying,
confronting, and then dealing with the immense problems facing our country,
the ANC is perpetually chasing shadows. You seem more concerned with the
possibility that high rape and AIDS figures might confirm the prejudices of
some, than with the massive human tragedy in our country which those
figures are merely an indication of. In consequence, your obsession with
the motives of others has begun to harm the interests of the very people
you claim to represent.

As the earlier part of my letter has indicated, there are strong scientific
grounds for providing post-exposure prophylaxis to victims of rape. I
cannot see how the offer by GlaxoWellcome to provide AZT to rape survivors
at reduced prices can be described as ``grossly unethical''.

Similarly, I cannot see how you can equate the provision of AZT to rape
survivors with the state sponsored campaign of terror and intimidation in
Zimbabwe It is a nonsensical comparison.

I, like you, am a layman on these matters. You are entitled to your
personal opinion on whether AZT is effective in reducing HIV transmission,
and indeed, whether HIV even causes AIDS. However, it is wrong for you to
use your current position (which was gained on the basis of political
rather than medical talent) to block the provision by your government of
such treatment.

It is perfectly consistent with the CDC report (which you quote!) for our
government to make available AZT for prescription to rape victims.
Obviously, our doctors must weigh up the risks and benefits of prescribing
such treatment. They must act both with the informed consent of the
patient, and according to proper guidelines such as the CDC provides. The
point is that the physician and the patient must be left to make that
decision. By denying rape victims AZT you are denying them the choice. With
all due respect, you lack both the moral right and the medical expertise to
make such a life and death decision.

I agree that this correspondence should be made available to the National
Assembly and the general public.

Yours sincerely
A J LEON MP
Leader of the Opposition
(Signed in Mr Leon's absence.)

ANNEXURE H

Putting the AZT record straight
(Sunday Times: 16/07/2000)
GLAXO Wellcome is concerned that it has become a subject of last week's
correspondence between President Thabo Mbeki and the Leader of the
Opposition, Tony Leon, as reported in ``AIDS: Mbeki versus Leon'' (July 9),
when South Africa and the world battle with a serious AIDS crisis.

This should be a time for stakeholders to come together to find common
ground rather than a time to polarise the debate.

There were a number of misconceptions and errors contained in the two
letters printed in your newspaper, and thus, to correct the
misunderstanding and make a meaningful contribution to the discussion,
Glaxo Wellcome wishes to put on record the following points:

-     Glaxo Wellcome first offered preferential pricing of its two anti-
     retroviral products, AZT and 3TC, to the South African government for
     use in the public sector in 1997, and this pricing has since been put
     into practice through the State Tendering Authority.


     The exchange between the President and Mr Leon implied that this
     pricing was also offered for use following rape - causing concern at
     Glaxo Wellcome because AZT is not registered for this purpose. All our
     offers of preferential pricing in South Africa have been for the use of
     AZT in prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV.

     The company has not engaged in any price or supply negotiations to
     provide AZT for use in rape survivors, nor does the company promote the
     product, for that indication. Mr Leon has therefore misinterpreted the
     company's offer.

-     President Mbeki is correct in pointing out that Glaxo Wellcome's
     package insert for AZT does not mention the medicine's use in rape
     situations. For the reasons spelled out in Mr Leon's letter, it has not
     thus far been possible to carry out clinical studies relating to the
     use of anti-retrovirals in rape survivors.

    However, the medical profession's discretion to administer AZT to rape
     survivors is supported by the recommendation of the Centres for Disease
     Control in Atlanta, US, the worldwide authority on communicable
     diseases. Furthermore, the CDC and other researchers are analysing the
     issues surrounding rape and anti-retrovirals in an attempt to devise
     appropriate clinical studies to test the effectiveness of medication in
     preventing transmission in such circumstances.

-     Glaxo Wellcome is proud of the highest ethical standards of its
     operation in South Africa and worldwide. Glaxo Wellcome SA does not
     engage in any direct or indirect support for political parties, as it
     believes that healthcare needs to transcend political discussion -
     although the company does provide information and assistance on its
     products when these are requested by a legitimate source.

    Glaxo Wellcome's excellent track record was this year once again
     confirmed when 151 general practitioners and 35 managed healthcare
     leaders in South Africa voted Glaxo Wellcome as South Africa's most
     ethical pharmaceutical ompany.
We trust this clarifies the issue.  - John Kearney, CEO, Glaxo Wellcome
South Africa, Johannesburg.

ANNEXURE I

July 17, 2000

Dear Tony,

Thank you for your letter of 7 July 2000 which discusses various matters
related to HIV-Aids. Unfortunately because of pressing engagements inside
and outside the country, I could not reply to your letter earlier.

As you will remember, there was the exchange between us in the National
Assembly related to the issue of the provision of AZT to rape victims.
Accordingly, your own letters to me dated June 19 and 27 also discuss this
particular matter.
Your latest letter goes beyond this. For instance, you refer to such
matters as needle-stick injuries and mother-to-child transmission, neither
of which was under discussion between us.

Let me therefore return to the matter of AZT and rape and the matter of
statements made by representatives of Glaxo Wellcome.

As you know, in his letter to you, the CEO of Glaxo Wellcome South Africa,
Mr Kearney, said that your incorrect statements about AZT and rape were
``essentially accurate on the scientific aspects of using AZT as post-
exposure prophylaxis in individuals who have been raped''.

Yet, Dr Peter Moore, Medical Director of Glaxo Wellcome South Africa, had
said on the television programme, Carte Blanche, on 7 November 1999:


  I have to state emphatically that AZT is not registered and we do not
  recommend it for use after rape.'' (My emphases.)

A rule of simple logic states that two diametrically opposed statements
about the same thing cannot both be correct.

It was not possible that both Mr Kearney and Dr Moore, both of Glaxo
Wellcome South Africa, could both be correct.

I am pleased to see that the CEO of Glaxo Wellcome has now repudiated what
he said about your comments being ``essentially accurate on the scientific
aspects ... etc''.
As you will have seen in the Sunday Times edition of July 16, 2000, this is
what Mr Kearney now says:


  ``The company has not engaged in any price or supply negotiations to
  provide AZT for use in rape survivors, nor does the company promote the
  product for that indication. Mr Leon has therefore misinterpreted the
  company's offer.


  ``President Mbeki is correct in pointing out that Glaxo Wellcome's
  package insert for AZT does not mention the medicine's use in rape
  situations. For the reasons spelled out in Mr Leon's letter, it has not
  thus far been possible to carry out clinical studies relating to the use
  of anti-retrovirals in rape survivors.''

I trust you will also note that whereas Mr Kearney says his company does
not promote AZT for use by rape survivors, Dr Moore says they do not
recommend it for use after rape.

Given the gravity of the matter under discussion, this is not simply a
matter of semantics. Perhaps Glaxo Wellcome will have an opportunity to
clarify this matter in future.

As I said to you and the rest of the National Assembly, AZT is not
registered in this country for use by rape victims. Neither has its
efficacy for such situations been demonstrated scientifically.

Obviously, you did not believe what I said then and continued to
communicate things I am convinced were clearly wrong.

You sought to convince us that there was proven efficacy of AZT in cases of
rape and that Glaxo Wellcome had offered this drug at reduced prices for
use in such circumstances.

You even went so far as to suggest that the fact that AZT was not
registered or suggested for this indication was ``irrelevant''.

I remain firmly of the view that had AZT been promoted and offered at
reduced prices for rape cases, this would have constituted very disturbing
behaviour on the part of Glaxo Wellcome, driven by nothing else except
profit, with no regard for ethics and the health of our people.

It would require that the government take the necessary action to stop what
would have been illegal behaviour.

I find it very interesting indeed that you consider the enforcement of the
law in this regard as you say in your letter as ``frankly sinister''.

In the National Assembly and subsequently, you communicated wrong things as
fact. Glaxo Wellcome has now also stated that what you conveyed was
incorrect.

This may come as a surprise to you, but given this reality, all normal
human beings will naturally ask what your motives are in doing this.

Throughout our communication on the matter under discussion I have not
resorted to any ``propaganda'' as you allege. Neither have I sought to
silence you.

What we are about is gaining as accurate and factual an understanding as
possible with regard to the matter under discussion. As I am doing in this
letter, I am quite ready to respond to all your arguments and hope that you
are as ready to respond to mine without rancour.

You and Mr Kearney argue, as you say in your letter, that ``the CDC does
allow the provision of anti-retroviral drugs by physicians to rape
victims.''

I can only interpret this as being nothing more, or less, than a determined
attempt to ensure that rape victims use AZT and other anti-retroviral
drugs.

Let me go back to the CDC documents I cited in my letter to you.

The CDC document MMWR September 25, 1998 / 47(RR17) - hereafter RR17 -
says:


  ``Because no data exist regarding the efficacy of this therapy for
  persons with non-occupational HIV exposure, it should be considered an
  unproven clinical intervention.'' (My emphasis.)


  ``Although healthcare providers and others have proposed offering anti-
  retroviral drugs to persons with unanticipated sexual or injecting-drug-
  use HIV exposures, no data exist regarding the effectiveness of such
  therapy for these types of exposures.'' (RR17). (My emphasis.)
  ``Many insurers will not cover the cost of this unproven therapy, so any
  possible benefit will be limited, based on the patient's ability to
  pay.'' (RR17).
  ``The risk for HIV transmission per episode of receptive penile-anal
  sexual exposure is estimated at 0.1%-3%; the risk per episode of
  receptive vaginal exposure is estimated at 0.1%-0.2%. No published
  estimates of the risk for transmission from receptive oral exposure
  exist, but instances of transmission have been reported.'' (RR17).

Commenting on studies of anti-retroviral agents used to prevent HIV
infection in animals, the same document says:


  ``Treatment initiated within 24 hours of exposure and continued for 28
  days appeared to have a greater effect than treatment initiated 72 hours
  after exposure. However, ZDV (AZT) might not be the optimal agent to
  demonstrate proof-of-concept because it has not demonstrated potent
  inhibitory activity against SIV infection in macaques even when treatment
  is initiated before viral exposure.'' (RR17). (My emphasis.)

Presumably this is where you and Ms Smith found your figures about the need
to dispense AZT within 24 hours of rape and to sustain this for 28 days.

Yet the same document concludes:


  ``Extrapolating these results to humans is problematic because of several
  factors ... Animal studies offer proof-of-concept and demonstrate the
  challenges to understanding the requirements for effective use of anti-
  retrovirals to prevent HIV transmission in humans.'' (RR17).

In your letter you draw attention to comments made in this document to the
entirely different issues categorised in the document as:

-     ``percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood'' among health workers;
     and,

-     ``perinatal transmission'' of HIV to their child by HIV-infected
     mothers.
The CDC goes on to say:


  ``Despite the apparent usefulness of anti-retroviral agents in perinatal
  and occupational settings, it is unclear whether these findings can be
  extrapolated to other settings. Further studies are needed before one can
  conclude whether using anti-retroviral agents to prevent HIV infection
  after non-occupational exposures is effective.'' (RR17).

Whereas the CDC warns against the extrapolation of these findings to other,
and specifically non-occupational, settings, you proceed to do precisely
this.

You write:


  ``Thus, if providing AZT to rape victims can prevent an exposure to HIV
  from becoming an established infection (and there is substantial evidence
  to suggest it can) the benefit is massive ...''

Nowhere is it suggested in the CDC documents that thus the provision of AZT
to rape victims can prevent exposure to HIV!
Where is the substantial evidence to which you refer, when in your own
letter you also say: ``The reason for the lack of `efficacy data' is that
there have been no prospective trials conducted to measure the
effectiveness of AZT for non-occupational exposure''!
 
The allowance you assert the CDC gives for the provision of anti-retroviral
drugs to rape victims is nothing more than a statement that the US
Government has not banned the use of these drugs in cases of rape.

Any open-minded reading of its documents can only lead to one conclusion.

As stated by the CDC, that conclusion is that:


  ``Because of the lack of efficacy data for the use of anti-retroviral
  agents to reduce HIV transmission after a possible non-occupational
  exposure, PHS is unable to recommend for or against therapeutic approach
  ... Research is needed to establish if and under what circumstances anti-
  retroviral therapy following non-occupational HIV exposure is
  effective.'' (RR17).

I therefore find it extremely puzzling and very strange indeed that you
describe this CDC document merely as ``an attempt to highlight the
`potential benefits and risks' and so provide a guide to physicians on
whether or not to pursue such a course of treatment''.

Repeatedly, the CDC says no data exist to demonstrate or disprove such
benefit. Yet you say that the document, among other things, seeks to
highlight potential benefits!

What the document does highlight are the risks of toxicity associated with
the use of anti-retroviral drugs. Balanced against this, it gives the
estimate for the risk of HIV transmission in the case of one episode of
receptive vaginal intercourse as being almost zero.

What the CDC says is that if any physician should nevertheless decide to
prescribe anti-retroviral drugs, despite everything it says, then such a
physician should do a whole range of things, spelt out under 9 bullet
points, including obtaining the informed consent of the patient.

So serious is this matter that the CDC says that such informed consent
should be ``recorded in the medical charts of all persons prescribed anti-
retroviral agents following non-occupational exposure''.

The CDC says: ``The patient should be told that physicians have diverse
opinion about the use of anti-retroviral medications to treat possible non-
occupational HIV exposure and that PHS cannot make definitive
recommendations because of limited knowledge.''

Beyond all this, because of the problems of toxicity, the CDC says any
physician who decides to use these medications should do so ``in
consultation with an expert in the use of anti-retroviral agents'' and ``If
physicians decide to use anti-retroviral agents, they should consult with
an HIV-care provider experienced with their use.'' (My emphases.)

Your letter contains this extraordinary sentence:


  ``Rape does not constitute `receptive' sex and as such is likely to lead
  to trauma and consequently a far greater risk of HIV transmission.''

In all the literature I have seen, the words ``receptive'' and
``insertive'' are used to distinguish the passive from the active partner,
as during male homosexual intercourse.

Where the CDC referred to receptive vaginal exposure, this is to
differentiate this exposure from receptive anal exposure and receptive oral
exposure for women.

Clearly, in the event that no receptive exposure would have occurred, then
no rape would have occurred. It therefore makes no sense to say, as you do,
that ``rape does not constitute `receptive' sex ...''

You also make the extraordinary statement that:


  ``The CDC is not referring to rape or consensual sex when it states PEPs
  are not `justified for exposures that pose a negligible risk of
  transmission'.''

In this letter and, to some extent, the previous one I wrote to you, I
quoted estimates the CDC made about the risk of HIV transmission in
situations of homosexual and heterosexual sexual intercourse.

I trust that the planets you and I inhabit are not so foreign to each
other, as seems to be the case, that we fail to agree that the receptive
vaginal exposure to which the CDC refers, constitutes ``sex'' in the
colloquial meaning of this word.

I also trust that we will also agree that by any standard a 0.1%-0.2% risk
of transmission in instances of receptive vaginal exposure, constitutes a
negligible risk of transmission.

Indeed, the particular paragraph of the CDC document in which these figures
are mentioned is headed - Probability of Transmission From One HIV
Exposure!

The only conclusion `a reasonable man' can reach from the CDC document is
that the CDC is saying that the Probability of Transmission From One HIV
Exposure in the event of receptive vaginal exposure is negligible, whatever
the national levels of HIV infection, which you describe in our country as
high.

Any other conclusion would obviously be illogical or constitute a wilful
attempt to disregard facts, for whatever reasons.
I do not understand how you came to the conclusion that `negligible risk of
transmission' refers only to ``contact between infected body fluid and
intact skin''. Nowhere does the CDC say this.

It says that ``an estimated 95% of recipients become infected from
transfusion of a single unit of infected whole blood''.

Obviously, this represents an almost certain risk of transmission.

In the same paragraph, the CDC says ``the risk for HIV transmission per
episode of intravenous needle or syringe exposure is estimated at 0.67%.
The risk per episode of percutaneous exposure (e.g. a needlestick) to HIV-
infected blood is estimated at 0.4% ...''

The figures relating to anal, vaginal and oral sexual exposure are, again,
cited in this same paragraph which, as we have said, is headed Probability
of Transmission From One HIV Exposure.

You say that, deliberately to mislead, I did not quote the words that
appear in the CDC report, viz, ``e.g. potentially infected body fluid on
intact skin''.

The Oxford English Dictionary explains the expression e.g. as follows:


  ``Exempli gratia - for the sake of example.''

Because of the strange twists of logic that litter your letter, you have
transformed what was stated by the CDC for the sake of example into the
totality of what the CDC sought to convey.

I am puzzled about why you find it necessary to do this.

You also complain that I omitted to mention certain CDC words that occur
after its statement that anti-retroviral therapy ``is not a morning-after
pill ...'' I note that, of course, you make no comment about this very firm
CDC statement, given that you seem so keen that AZT should be given to rape
survivors, despite the absence of any data to justify this, and despite the
comments of Glaxo Wellcome.

Again, I do not understand why you think the particular fragment I did not
quote helps your argument.

This fragment starts, ``If proven effective ...'' (My emphasis.) Here, the
CDC is making the same point it makes throughout the document from which we
have quoted, that the efficacy of anti-retroviral drugs with regard to non-
occupational exposure has not been proved.

Accordingly, it says that if such efficacy is proved in future, ``post-
exposure anti-retroviral therapy (which is not a form of primary HIV
prevention) can constitute a last effort to prevent HIV infection in
patients for whom primary prevention has failed to protect them from
possible exposure.''

I fail to see why you think this fragment which I ``pruned'' from what I
quoted, to use your word, helps your very curious determined defence of the
scientifically indefensible.

In your letter, you also state that sexually transmitted diseases ``greatly
increase the possibility of HIV transmission''.

On this matter, the CDC says:


  ``Sexual activities associated with a risk of HIV transmission also are
  associated with risk for unintended pregnancy and STDs (e.g. syphilis,
  gonorrhea, chlamydia or hepatitis B virus).'' (RR17.)

As you will notice, this is very different from what you say about greatly
increased possibilities of HIV transmission.

You may have noticed that in my speech at the Opening Session of the 13th
International Aids Conference earlier this month, I mentioned the incidence
of STDs as one of the conditions that contribute to Africa's health crisis
and referred to teenage pregnancies.

I believe that STDs are very relevant to the collapse of immune systems
among many Africans, including our own people, and therefore the acquired
immune deficiency syndrome.

There are many scientists who have been conducting research into this
matter for some time.
One of these, John B. Scythes of Canada has written to the WHO as follows:


  ``Latent syphilis is chronic active syphilis from the immunological
  standpoint, and is both more dangerous for immune system genetics and
  harder to treat than exanthematous late syphilis. Judging from the work
  of Poland's Jadwiga Podwinska and the late Tom Fitzgerald from Minnesota,
  a Th2 cytokine pattern begins to predominate in most persons with latent
  syphilis, and standard treatment does not reverse this phenomenon.


  Subsequent re-exposure without Th1-driven immunologic anamnesis would
  lead to the silent re-dissemination of treponemes.''

I hope that the international scientific panel on AIDS that we have
convened will address the important issue of STDs.

However, whatever the impact of STDs on the immune system, the correct
medical response to infection with these is to treat them using established
therapies. None of these include the use of AZT or any of the other anti-
retrovirals.
The suggestion that because STDs impact negatively on the immune system, as
does TB, they should therefore be treated with AZT, would constitute very
serious medical malpractice.

I hope this is not what you are suggesting.

I also note that you make no comment whatsoever against the gravely
insulting statement made by Charlene Smith about rape being ``endemic'' in
African culture.

Rather, you attach footnotes to your letter which, by trying to talk the
rape figures upwards, seek to imply that she may, after all, be right.

My attention has also been drawn to Ms Smith's denial, in a recent
publication, of ever having written the passage I quoted in my letter to
you.

In the event that you did not understand its true import, let me cite it
once again.


  ``Here, (in South Africa), (AIDS) is spread primarily by heterosexual sex
  - spurred by men's attitude towards women. We won't end this epidemic
  until we understand the role of tradition and religion - and of a culture
  in which rape is endemic and has become a prime means of transmitting the
  disease, to young women as well as children.''

The article in which this appears is subtitled - ``Their Deaths, His
Doubts, My Fears''.

It appears in the Washington Post edition of June 4, 2000. Datelined
Johannesburg, the newspaper says it is ``By Charlene Smith'', described by
the newpaper as ``a South African journalist who writes about HIV, (who)
will speak at the International AIDS Conference in Durban in July''.

Since she denies having made this nakedly racist statement, which you seek
to justify in your footnotes, time will tell who between her and the
Washington Post is prone to the shameless propagation of unembellished
untruths.

The racist stereotype of Africans that many South Africans carry in their
heads has nothing to do with ``civil society''. The subterfuge of seeking
to hide behind the skirts of ``civil society'' will not pass.
Your comments suggest that you are not aware of the fact that the figures
published about the incidence of HIV in our country and the rest of our
Continent are estimates.

Mathematicians and statisticians have questioned the reliability of these
estimates and the correctness of making extrapolations, in our country,
from information gathered among pregnant black (African) women at antenatal
clinics, using highly questionable mathematical models. To understand the
extraordinary distortion this creates, please try to get figures about the
incidence of HIV-AIDS among the white population of our country!

I am certain you will find the search very frustrating and the result very
illuminating! But, of course, I am likely to be quite wrong in assuming
that a person as well informed as you are about HIV-AIDS does not already
have this information.

You may also be unaware of the desperate attempt made by some scientists in
the past to blame HIV-AIDS on Africans, even at the time when the USA was
the epicentre of reported deaths from AIDS.

To me as an African, it is both interesting and disturbing that the
signatories of the so-called ``Durban Declaration'' return to the thesis
about the alleged original transmission of HIV ``from (African) animals to
humans'', given what science has said about AIDS during the last two
decades.

I accept that it may be that you do not understand the significance of this
and the message it communicates to Africans, hence your queer observation
that I seek to silence our critics, without responding to their arguments.

In my letter of July 1, 2000 I took issue with you about the matter of
double standards. In one instance this related to the matter of the rule of
law, about which you campaigned with regard to the land question in
Zimbabwe.

In this regard, you accuse me of making ``a nonsensical comparison''.

Since the issue of the rule of law is a matter of principle, I believe that
it is fundamentally incorrect to argue, as you did, that AZT should be
prescribed for rape, despite the fact that the existing legal procedures
had not been followed enabling this drug to be registered and legally
dispensed for this purpose.

Strangely, you, the Leader of the Official Opposition, argue that my
insistence on the observance of the rule of law is nonsensical.

Whereas you would not accept what I said in the National Assembly about the
fact that Glaxo Wellcome neither asserted the anti-HIV efficacy of AZT in
cases of rape and had not applied for its licensing for such a situation, I
trust you now accept the truthfulness of these statements, since they have
been confirmed by representatives of the company.

After all, relative to them, you do not occupy the position of ``an
effective opposition''.

Whatever your personal views, I trust that, as Leader of the Official
Opposition, you will understand and accept the proposition that it is
incorrect to argue for the observance of the rule of law in Zimbabwe and to
categorise its observance as ``irrelevant'' and ``nonsensical'' in South
Africa when AZT is affected.
What I have said in this and the previous letter about the efficacy of AZT
in rape cases does not constitute a ``personal opinion'', as you assert.

Unless they indicate otherwise, I would also assume that the manufacturers
of AZT, Glaxo Wellcome, do not consider what I have said about what the CDC
says about AZT and AIDS as constituting a ``personal opinion''.

If there were any dispute about this, I would be very willing to ask the
CDC whether it has changed its mind since 1998. On this matter, our
government will therefore continue to act in a manner that is consistent
with available scientific evidence. I have a political obligation to ensure
that this happens, regardless of your own personal opinions.

I am certain that, as government, we are perfectly aware of the interests
of the people we represent. We will continue to do everything we can to
ensure that these interests are addressed, naturally within the context of
the constraints imposed on us by the stubborn legacy of colonialism and
apartheid.

That legacy includes the persistence of racist ideas in the minds and the
psychology of many of our people and others elsewhere in the world.

I spend the amount of time and effort I do on the issue of AIDS because as
a government we have to do everything necessary to deal with this syndrome
and the destructive health crisis in our country and the rest of Africa.

None of this constitutes ``shadows'', as you allege, which allegation might
be informed by the fact that throughout their lives the majority of those
you represent have had the ``good fortune'' of being perhaps unwilling
beneficiaries of racist practice and recipients of supremacist racist
prejudice, and ideology.

I must also make the point that the formulation of correct policies and
programmes makes it imperative that, as government, we proceed from the
most accurate information we can access.

We will therefore always seek to obtain the accurate figures about such
matters as rape and AIDS so that we adopt correct policies with regard to
these important challenges.

We do not have the luxury to play political games with information, merely
to advance party-political objectives.

As a government, we will not abdicate our responsibility to work for the
health of all our people, leaving this matter exclusively to ``the
physician and the patients'', as you suggest.

I may have no medical expertise, but I have grave doubts that the fact of
being the largest opposition party means that you are best placed to advise
our government about the medical decisions it should take.

All of us have a moral obligation not to do anything we believe to be
fundamentally wrong. This applies as much to Presidents as it does to
Ministers who might feel that decisions of the President or the Cabinet are
wrong.

No amount of pressure, however virulent, strident and sustained, will
persuade me to betray this principle.

If nothing else, this is what many of us have learnt from a very long
history of struggle by our people from liberation from oppression, contempt
and lies.

I believe that common courtesy required that you inform me that you
intended to release our correspondence to the media, as I would if I were
handing this letter to the media.

The only thing we had agreed was the principle that the National Assembly
and the general public should have access to the communications between us.

But, again, possibly we do originate from different planets with radically
different value systems.

Yours sincerely
THABO MBEKI

The Hon A. J. Leon, MP
Leader of the Official Opposition
National Assembly
CAPE TOWN

ANNEXURE J
28 July 2000
His Excellency
Mr T M Mbeki
President of the Republic of South Africa
Private Bag X1000
PRETORIA
0001

Dear Thabo

Thank you for your letter of 17 July 2000.

Let me begin my response by stating something which I should have made more
strongly in my previous letter: I do not think it appropriate that
politicians should decide upon technical and scientific issues. South
Africa has world-class scientists, and they should be allowed to render
judgment on such matters. Nonetheless, in your previous letter you chose to
debate this issue on the technical and scientific merits of prescribing
AZT, obliging me to respond to your arguments as best I could.

In your letter of 17 July you claim that John Kearney of Glaxo Wellcome has
repudiated ``what he said about your comments being `essentially accurate
on the scientific aspects' ...etc''.3 The basis of this assertion is Mr
Kearney's letter in the Sunday Times where he states that `you are correct
``in pointing out that Glaxo Wellcome's package insert does not mention the
medicince's use in rape cases''.

You appear to be making two assumptions: The first is that if a drug is not
registered for a particular indication then there is ``no scientific
evidence'' to support its prescription for that particular indication; and,
secondly, if it was prescribed for an unlisted indication this would be a
violation of the law.

I have been advised that in order for a drug to be registered for a
particular indication, a double-blind prospective trial needs to be
conducted. In cases like AZT for rape victims (as I pointed out in my
previous letter) it is simply impossible conduct such a trial. There are
also various other (non-scientific) reasons why a pharmaceutical company
may not seek approval for a particular indication. Thus because a
(registered) drug is not registered for one or other specific indication
does not mean there is ``no scientific evidence'' to support its
prescription for that indication.

I have been advised, further, that your assumption that providing AZT to
rape survivors would constitute a violation of the law is equally invalid.

In your letter you state that if Glaxo Wellcome had offered AZT for rape
victims this ``would have constituted very disturbing behaviour'' and the
government would have to ``take the necessary action to stop what would
have been illegal behaviour.''

Further on in your letter you state:


  ``Since the issue of the rule of law is a matter of principle, I believe
  that it is fundamentally incorrect to argue, as you did, that AZT should
  be the prescribed for rape, despite the fact that the existing legal
  procedures had not been followed enabling this drug to be registered and
  legally dispensed for this purpose.''

  You argue that it is illegal to provide a (registered) drug for a
  specific indication if the Drug Regulatory Authority has not registered
  it for that indication. This is simply not the case. There appears to be
  a confusion on two issues:

  As the law stands no one may prescribe an unregistered medicine (such as
  Virodene) for any indication. But AZT is registered with the MCC and (as
  the law stands) doctors are free to use registered drugs for non-
  indicated purposes if, in their better judgment, they believe the
  scientific evidence supports it.

  My research indicates that in the United States the law is similar. The
  fact that a drug is not listed for a particular indication, does not mean
  that it would be either illegal or medically inappropriate to do so.

  For example, the American Food and Drug Administration (FDA) states that:

  The Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act does not limit the manner in which a
  physician may use an approved drug. Once a product has been approved for
  marketing, a physician may prescribe it for uses or in treatment regimens
  or patient populations that are not included in approval labelling. Such
  ``unapproved'' or, more precisely, ``unlabeled'' uses may be appropriate
  and rational in certain circumstances, and may, in fact, reflect
  approaches to drug therapy that have been extensively reported in medical
  literature. (Source: American Medical Association - correspondence -
  Chicago, Ill. 21.700).


  This view is supported by the American Medical Association (AMA) which
  states:

  The AMA reaffirms its policy that a physician may lawfully use an FDA-
  approved drug product or medical device for an unlabeled indication when
  such use is based upon sound scientific evidence and sound medical
  opinion; and affirms the position that, when the prescription of a drug
  or use of a device represents safe and effective therapy, third party
  payors should consider the intervention as reasonable and necessary
  medical care, irrespective of labeling, and should fulfil their
  obligation to their beneficiaries by covering such therapy. (AMA policy
  number H-120.988)


  AMA policy definitively supports the unlabeled use of drugs as long as
  such use is based upon sound scientific evidence and sound medical
  opinion.
  Thus, your claim that prescribing a registered drug for a non-indicated
  purpose would constitute a violation of the rule of law is, with respect,
  baseless.

  The question then is, would the provision of anti-retrovirals to rape
  victims be based upon sound scientific evidence? A related question is:
  Do politicians have the right to decide what constitutes ``sound
  scientific evidence``' and ``sound medical opinion'' or should this be
  left to medical professionals?

  In your letter you restate your arguments that there is no scientific
  evidence to support the provision of AZT to rape survivors and, further,
  that the CDC regards the risk of transmision through heterosexual sex (as
  well as rape) as ``negligible''.

  You claim that my description of the CDC document as ``an attempt to
  highlight the `potential benefits and risks' and so provide a guide to
  physicians on whether or not to pursue such a course of treatment'' is
  ``extremely puzzling and very strange indeed.''

  I do not quite understand your reasoning here, for the document itself
  says:

  ``Health-care providers and their patients may opt to consider using anti-
  retroviral drugs after non-occupational HIV exposures that carry a high
  risk for infection, but only after careful consideration of the potential
  risks and benefits and with a full awareness of the gaps in current
  knowledge.'' (Summary.)


  The document then proceeds to discuss these potential benefits and risks,
  as well as the gaps in the current knowledge.

  As the CDC study points out (and you repeatedly highlight) there is no
  direct data on the efficacy of anti-retrovirals as PEPs following non-
  occupational exposure. For this reason the CDC has had to resort to
  evaluating indirect evidence from animal trials; as well as from studies
  of the efficacy of AZT in reducing transmission of HIV both from mother
  to child, and in occupational settings.

  You chastise me for mentioning these aspects of the CDC report (which you
  assert is an unacceptable widening of the scope of our correspondence)
  and claim that these are ``entirely different issues'' not relevant to
  the matter under discussion. In fact, these studies are directly relevant
  for they show the efficacy of anti-retrovirals in preventing sero-
  conversion following HIV exposure.

  In May 1998 the CDC released fairly prescriptive guidelines on the
  management of occupational exposures to HIV (MMWR 47 (RR-7) 15 May 1998).
  The decision to make these recommendations was based on the French case
  control, which associated the provision of anti-retrovirals with an 80%
  decrease in the risk of HIV sero-conversion following needle-stick
  injuries, ``along with data on ZDV efficacy in preventing perinatal
  transmission'' and ``evidence that post-exposure prophylaxis prevented or
  ameliorated retroviral infection in some studies of animals.'' (My
  emphases.)

  Thus, just as animal data and perinatal data were relevant in drawing up
  recommendations for occupational exposure, so is such data relevant
  (although not conclusive) in evaluating the efficacy of PEPs for rape
  survivors.
  What these various studies, cited by the CDC, show is that anti-
  retroviral drugs can prevent sero-conversion following HIV exposure. As
  the CDC states, ``Information about primary HIV infection indicates that
  systemic infection does not occur immediately, leaving a brief `window of
  opportunity' during which post-exposure anti-retroviral intervention may
  modify viral replication.'' (RR-7)

  In your letter you state that the CDC document ``gives the estimate for
  the risk of HIV transmission in the case of one episode of receptive
  vaginal intercourse as being almost zero''. You then proceed to repeat
  your argument that when the CDC states ``anti-retroviral agents should
  not be used for persons with HIV exposures that have a low risk of
  transmission'' they are referring to heterosexual intercourse. You state:

  ``The only conclusion `a reasonable man' can reach from the CDC document
  is that the CDC is saying that the Probability of Transmission From One
  HIV Exposure in the event of receptive vaginal exposure is negligible,
  whatever the national levels of HIV infection, which you describe in our
  country as high.''
  It is simply not true to assert that the CDC regards rape (or consensual
  sex for that matter) as constituting a ``negligible risk of
  transmission''. When the CDC use the term ``negligible'' they are
  referring to risks in the order of potentially infected body fluid on
  intact skin. (Shaking hands and blowing kisses across a park would also
  constitute ``negligible'' risks of transmission.) Quite obviously, there
  is a far greater risk of acquiring AIDS from receptive vaginal exposure
  than from body fluid on intact skin.

  The CDC does regard risks in the order of 0.1% to 0.2% as constituting a
  sufficient risk of transmission to justify the provision of anti-
  retroviral drugs. This can be seen by referring back to the CDC report on
  the management of occupational exposure to HIV (RR-7). That document
  estimates that the ``average risk for HIV transmission after a
  percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood is approximately 0.3% and
  after a mucous membrane exposure is 0.09%.'' The CDC regards such levels
  of exposure as constituting sufficient risk to warrant a ``basic 4-week
  regimen of two (anti-retroviral) drugs for most HIV exposures.''

  Furthermore, forced sexual intercourse is likely to constitute a far
  higher risk of transmission than consensual sex (which is what the 0.1%
  to 0.2% figure is referring to.) Forced sexual intercourse can lead to
  trauma, which (as I said before) will lead to an increase in the risk of
  transmission. In the case of child or gang rape the risk of transmission
  (for obvious reasons) is even higher still.

  In my previous letter I stated that the risks of transmission were
  increased by the high levels of STDs in South Africa. You then proceed
  down a side track, which ends up at this particular dead end:

  ``Whatever the impact of STDs on the immune system, the correct medical
  response to infection with these is to treat them using established
  therapies. None of these include the use of AZT or any of the other anti-
  retrovirals.

  The suggestion that because STDs impact negatively on the immune system,
  as does TB, they should therefore be treated with AZT, would constitute
  very serious malpractice.
  I hope this is not what you are suggesting.''

  I was not suggesting that AZT should be prescribed for STDs. My point was
  that if one person has an STD there is a substantial increase in the
  chance of HIV transmission. The CDC states that an STD increases the
  chance of transmission of HIV three to five times. In a case of
  heterosexual sex this could increase the risk of transmission from 2 in a
  1 000 to 1 in a 100. The CDC report (RR17) states that vaginal tears or
  bleeding, visible genital ulcers or other evidence of an active STD would
  all increase the risks of HIV transmission.

  Although the CDC does not make a binding recommendation for or against
  the provision of anti-retrovirals following non-occupational exposure, it
  does regard such treatment as a perfectly acceptable clinical
  intervention by individual doctors. However, the lack of direct clinical
  data was not the only reason for the lack of a firm recommendation; there
  were two other considerations:

  Firstly, the CDC document was not concerned solely (or even primarily)
  with possible HIV exposure caused by sexual assault. A major concern of
  the CDC was that if the general public thought that anti-retrovirals
  could be used as a ``morning-after pill'' there would be an increase in
  risky behaviour and a decrease in adherence to preventative measures.
  Since no woman chooses to be raped this consideration is not applicable
  in cases of sexual assault.

  Secondly, America has a far lower rate of both HIV infection and sexual
  assault than South Africa. This means both that in America rape is not a
  major means of HIV transmission, and that in a case of sexual assault
  there is far less likelihood that the rapist would be HIV positive. There
  is consequently a far lower risk of HIV transmission following sexual
  assault in America than in South Africa. Thus, it is not the important
  concern of public health policy in America that it is (or should be) in
  South Africa.

  What I argued in my previous letter was that anti-retrovirals should be
  made available in the public health system for doctors to prescribe
  (according to proper guidelines) to rape victims. Such a course of action
  would be both legal and medically acceptable.

  Indeed, as Mr Kearney notes in his letter to the Sunday Times ``the
  medical profession's discretion to administer AZT to rape survivors is
  supported by the recommendation of the Centre for Disease Control in
  Atlanta, US, the worldwide authority on communicable diseases.''

  By refusing to make AZT or other anti-retrovirals available within the
  public health system you are preventing doctors from exercising that
  discretion.

  This brings me to the issue I raised earlier: Do politicians, whatever
  their enthusiasm for scientific research, have the right to decide what
  constitutes ``sound scientific evidence''?

  In your various statements on the many aspects of the AIDS debate
  (Virodene, anti-retrovirals, the provision of AZT to pregnant mothers and
  rape victims, etc.) you have chosen to act as effective final arbiter on
  technical scientific questions.

  I have tried to answer your assertions as completely as possible. But I
  do not believe there should be a ``Mbeki theory of AIDS'' or a ``Leon
  AIDS theory'' for that matter. All of us have a simple duty, as public
  figures, to consult the most scientifically informed - and best supported
  - medical view and to go on that. It seems clear - and it was made clear
  again at the AIDS Conference in Durban - that the overwhelming weight of
  world scientific opinion is on the crisis before us. I think we must all
  have the humility to accept that, and not to second-guess the experts.

  But I do not think that politicians are under any ``moral obligation''
  (in fact quite the opposite) to claim the right to deliver final judgment
  on questions of scientific fact. It is a totalitarian principle that
  political leadership is somehow on a higher plane to technical expertise,
  and is thus entitled to override the autonomy of all institutions in
  society.

  There are, however, one or two other issues I must raise. First, I have
  no brief to defend or attack Charlene Smith. She is her own person.

  But I think it is a fundamental mistake and profoundly misguided to
  associate matters of race with the AIDS crisis. This matter is just too
  serious for any of us to play politics, racial or otherwise, with the
  figures, since in our society allegations, or repeated assertions of
  racism, are appropriately very serious matters. Therefore, in my view,
  there needs to be a very clear basis in fact before one pronounces
  persons guilty of racism. There does not, with respect, appear to be such
  a basis in your gratuitous assault on Charlene Smith.

  In your letter you dismiss Charlene Smith's defence of herself in the
  Mail & Guardian and once again re-quote her as saying in the Washington
  Post (4 June):

  ``Here, (in South Africa), (AIDS) is spread primarily by heterosexual sex
  - spurred by men's attitudes towards women. We won't end this epidemic
  until we understand the role of tradition and religion - and of a culture
  in which rape is endemic and has become a prime means of transmitting the
  disease to young women as well as children.''

  You claim that this is a ``nakedly racist statement''. Yet nowhere in
  this quote does Charlene Smith make a racial distinction between Black,
  Coloured, Indian or White South Africans. You are reading into the
  statement a racial intention that is by no means evident.

  In fact what she actually wrote was this:


     ``In Africa, even if we develop a vaccine or distribute billions of
     condoms, and the continent is already awash in latex, unless we begin
     working on male attitudes toward women - and that requires looking at
     the role of culture, tradition and religion; we will get nowhere. In
     doing this there is a need to reflect on how modernisation has warped
     cultural attitudes. (Mail & Guardian 14 July 2000).


  As you can see, in the article Charlene Smith sent to the Washington
  Post, she did not say (or imply) that rape was endemic in South African
  culture. What happened was that the Washington Post sub-editors cut down
  the article (by about a third); the question is, was there a dark and
  sinister racial motivation behind their action, or were they just trying
  to fit the article onto the page?

  I actually think of Ms Smith as a rape victim and that she has been
  publicly brave about her awful experience. She deserves your
  understanding, not your vilification.
  The ANC's Statement to the HRC Inquiry on Racism in the Media made the
  claim that all whites carry around a racist stereotype in their heads all
  the time. This claim was made on the basis of no factual evidence
  whatsoever and paid no regard to the deep changes this country has
  experienced over the last twenty years. Nonetheless it seems to be a
  belief shared by your spokesman, and it is implicit in your statement
  that ``Many South Africans carry in their heads'' a ``racist stereotype
  of Africans''.

  I would suggest that you take a moment to consider how deeply racist (in
  the true sense of the word) and offensive is this assertion. Just because
  a group of racially prejudiced ANC members sit around a table and agree
  with each other on how morally reprehensible a particular minority is,
  does not transform those prejudices into fact.

  By labelling your critics (even those who mildly disagree with government
  policy) as ``racist'', you cut your party off from new ideas. Since, you
  could so easily dismiss your critics (both publicly and to yourself) you
  did not test your ideas against those of your opponents in reasoned and
  rational debate. It was far easier to dismiss a person as ``racist'' than
  to argue issues on the merits, or even acknowledge that your opponents
  might just be right every now and then. As a result the thinking of your
  party has stiffened into orthodoxy.

  You will find that on the AIDS issue, South African and international
  opinion will simply not be bludgeoned into silence by tactics of moral
  blackmail or demonisation. I can understand your deep sense of
  frustration at this turn of events.

  Lastly, you state that ``I believe that common courtesy required that you
  informed me that you intended to release our correspondence to the
  media.''

  As a matter of fact I observed all the courtesies which you suggest I did
  not. Although I dictated the letter from overseas our Executive Director,
  Ryan Coetzee, informed your Mr Mankahlana by telefax of our intention to
  publish (as we understood with your concurrence) the correspondence.
  Since we received no response from either fax number, we assumed that our
  proposal met with no disagreement from your Office. In fact it was you,
  not I, who specifically suggested we publish the correspondence in the
  first place.

  But since you raise the issue of ``common courtesy'' in our dealings
  perhaps you will allow me to comment on this issue more broadly. I have
  always treated you and your Office with the courtesy and the decorum your
  position and you personally are entitled to expect. However, I believe
  that as elected Head of State you have treated me, as elected Leader of
  the Opposition, with basic discourtesy since June 1999. I think you will
  find if you consult your opposite numbers in other constitutional
  democracies that the relationship between head of government and the
  leadership of the opposition in other countries, ranging from Botswana to
  Britain, is somewhat different from how you have chosen to conduct this
  relationship. Your immediate predecessor chose the path of consultation
  and will confirm that not once, or ever, was any confidential briefing in
  which he engaged the opposition, breached by the opposition.

  Be that as it may, you are obviously entitled to adopt any style of
  behaviour that you deem appropriate. But you might wish to reflect on the
  fact that you have never once issued an invitation to the opposition to
  discuss matters of common concern to the country. It is only when the
  opposition has sought a meeting with government that same has been
  acceded to. In respect of projects which should unify the country,
  whether they be the Presidential Inauguration, the Millennium
  celebrations, the new Coat of Arms and national symbols, or even the
  latest ``South Africa Unlimited'' project, such were either never
  discussed with the opposition, or we were slighted at the event
  concerned, or our participation in them was never sought.

  The Constitution obviously requires of us robust debate and in this
  regard I have always accepted your original commitment in Parliament on
  23 September 1994 when you stated:


     ``With regard to the matters that the hon member Mr Tony Leon raised, I
     would like to agree with him about the role of the opposition and the
     need for openness and candour, the need for good and robust debate, and
     the need for us to accept the bona fides of our interlocutors.''

In the event, you appear to have changed your mind, fairly fundamentally,
since then.

In conclusion, let me revert to the AIDS pandemic: I would far rather, Mr
President, that you and I should work together on this supreme crisis
facing our country. I agree entirely, for example, with what you say about
other sexually transmitted diseases. I would be only too happy to stand on
the same platform with you to back a campaign for the eradication of STDs
whose prevalence does so much to help spread HIV/AIDS. I am not interested
in whether my supporters or yours suffer more from STDs: this is not a
matter of, as you put it, ``political obligation'' or of whom one
represents. You and I are both patriotic South Africans. We both want the
best for our country and for all our countrymen and women. I will be only
too happy to meet you at your earliest convenience to discuss how we may
work together to dramatise that this is a crisis for all of us, that death
and disease know no distinction of politics, creed or race. I believe that
the sight of the President and the Leader of the Opposition working
together in such a way would have a very great public impact and would show
just how serious we are and how great the crisis is. This in itself could
save lives. I beg you, let us make that our sole priority.

Kind regards
Yours sincerely
TONY LEON

ANNEXURE K

August 5, 2000

Dear Mr Leon

Thank you for your letter dated 28 July 2000. The positions you have taken
with regard to the matter we have been discussing, the use of AZT in cases
of rape, have been consistently wrong from the day this matter came up in
the National Assembly in June.

The problem is that you seem to find it extremely difficult to admit this
obvious fact.

The result of this is that the harder you try to advance indefensible
propositions, the greater the difficulties you get yourself into.
It seems clear that you are determined that neither established fact, nor
anything else whatsoever, will deter you from pursuing your set goal of
ensuring that rape victims use AZT.

In your letter of June 19, you claimed that AZT ``will prevent sero-
conversion in rape victims who are raped by an HIV positive person''.

As you must surely know by now, this statement has no substance in fact,
since no trials have been carried out anywhere that would enable anybody to
come to such a conclusion.

In the same letter you said, ``a 28 day course of AZT will boost the
immunity of a woman raped by an HIV positive person.''

Again, as you must surely know by now, this statement has no substance in
fact, since no trials have been carried out anywhere that would enable
anybody to come to such a conclusion.

You will also remember that in his 21 June letter to you, the CEO of Glaxo
Wellcome South Africa, Mr Kearney, said ``your reply to the President is
essentially accurate on the scientific aspects of using AZT as post-
exposure prophylaxis in individuals who have been raped.''

In my letter to you of July 17, I quoted Mr Kearney and Dr Moore, Medical
Director of Glaxo Wellcome South Africa, as essentially repudiating this
statement.

As you will remember Mr Kearney said his company does not ``promote (AZT)
for (rape survivors)''. Dr Moore said that ``emphatically, (the company
does not recommend AZT) for use after rape''.

In your response of 28 July, you carefully avoid any reference to these
straightforward statements by the manufacturers of AZT, which address the
very heart of the matter we have been discussing.

Despite this evasive action, you must surely know by now that not even the
manufacturers of AZT support you in your campaign to sell AZT to rape
victims.

In your letter of 19 June you said that it was ``irrelevant'' that AZT was
not licensed in this country for use by rape survivors. To prove your
point, you cited the use of a particular drug to induce abortions, even
though it was not licensed for these purposes.

Again, you advanced these arguments to promote the use of AZT by rape
victims.

To assist you in your campaign and as you correctly point out, once more,
Mr Kearney of Glaxo Wellcome came to your aid.

Indeed, he wrote in his Sunday Times letter that ``the medical profession's
discretion to administer AZT to rape survivors is supported by the
recommendation of the Centres for Disease Control ...''

In your letter of 28 July you expend a lot of effort to defend this
position, to promote the administration of AZT to rape survivors.

The FDA and AMA statements you cite in this letter make the points that the
use of approved drugs for indications for which they are not registered
would be permissible ``in certain circumstances''. (FDA).

In the text you have cited, the FDA says such use ``may, in fact, reflect
approaches to drug therapy that have been extensively reported in medical
literature''.

In the text you have cited, the AMA says such use should be ``based upon
sound scientific evidence and sound medical opinion ...''

Surely, you must know by now that the use of AZT in cases of rape meets
neither of these FDA and AMA conditions.

Apart from anything else, you restate the point that ``in cases like AZT
for rape victims ... it is simply impossible to conduct such a trial'',
(that would provide sound scientific evidence proving the efficacy of AZT
in cases of rape.)

In my letter of July 1, I told you that ``if it is necessary, I can present
the argument about the obvious logical absurdity of the claim that viral
infection can be stopped by the use of drugs, provided that the virus was
communicated in circumstances of forced heterosexual sexual intercourse.''

Imminent within this logical absurdity, is the equally absurd notion that
drug trials can be conducted to test the efficacy of AZT in cases of rape.

I am glad that you have now understood that ``it is simply impossible to
conduct such a trial''.

I am still puzzled about where you and Ms Charlene Smith found the evidence
you presented to the National Assembly that, if given AZT, ``80% of (women)
would not have sero-converted and become HIV positive if raped by an HIV
positive person.''

Given what you, yourself, quote from the FDA and AMA, I am deeply concerned
that Mr Kearney of Glaxo Wellcome still finds it possible publicly to
state, in support of your campaign, that ``the medical profession's
discretion to administer AZT to rape survivors is supported ...''

Glaxo Wellcome is a major and long-established pharmaceutical company. I do
not believe that its representatives are not familiar with the rules and
guidelines laid down by such bodies as the FDA and the AMA.

Neither do I believe that its senior representatives would not know that
there is no basis whatsoever for the claim that ``the medical profession's
discretion to administer AZT to rape victims is supported ...''

Taking the totality of Mr Kearney's public comments together, I find it
difficult to avoid the conclusion that he is determined to say things here
that no Glaxo Wellcome representative would say, for instance, in the US or
the UK.

When I have said that we should act to enforce the spirit and the letter of
the law with regard to the use of medicaments, you have sought to express
your horror at this idea.

Nevertheless, I must remind you that our oath of office enjoins us to
defend the laws and the Constitution of the Republic.

In your letter of July 28, you say that you have been advised that my
``assumption that providing AZT to rape survivors would constitute a
violation of the law is equally invalid''.

I trust that you now understand that you have no basis of any kind to
substantiate the argument that the positions I have taken are invalid on
scientific/medical grounds.

However passionate your commitment to AZT, I also hope that now you
understand that your FDA and AMA quotations provide you no basis to assert
the legal invalidity of my arguments.

You are a lawyer and I am not. Nevertheless, I must disagree with your
interpretation of South African law, as it applies to the matter we are
discussing.

In your June 19 letter you refer specifically to a medicament used to
induce abortions, despite the fact that it is not licensed for this
purpose. You identify this product as ``Misoprostal''.

In a legal opinion to the Director General of Health dated 1997-02-04,
relating to this specific matter of what they call ``misoprostol'', the
State Law Advisers say:
  ``With regard to the Department's view that medical practitioners can use
  a medicine for an unapproved indication in a professional situation where
  it is deemed in the interest of the patient, Steyn Die Uitleg van Wette,
  (5th ed.) on page 228-229, remarks that where the authorised person or
  body uses his statutory powers in the public interest but for an
  unauthorised purpose, the act will be ultra vires.''

Further, the State Law Advisers say:


  ``We are ... of the opinion that the Council (MCC) cannot in terms of
  section 21 of the (Medicines and Related Substances Control) Act,
  authorise the use of the medicine (misoprostol) for a purpose not
  previously provided for ...''

  On this same matter, Professor S.A. Strauss, Professor Emeritus of Law of
  the University of South Africa has written:


     ``Off-label use can legally take place only if the conditions of
     registration have been duly amended. Application may in terms of
     section 15A of the Act be made for amendment of entries in the medicine
     register. But the section makes provision for such amendment only `on
     application by the holder of the certificate of registration', which
     will normally be the manufacturer or its authorised distributor of the
     medicine involved.''

Later, Professor Strauss says:


  ``A practitioner who uses a medicine for the treatment of an indication
  not approved of by the MCC when registering a medicine, may expose
  himself to a civil action under common law for damages if the patient
  were to suffer harm in consequence of off-label use ... The mere fact
  that off-label use might constitute a ``technical'' criminal offence in
  terms of the Act, would not lead to an inference of negligence. But in
  the event of a criminal conviction, the Medical Council might take
  disciplinary action against the practitioner for unethical conduct.
  Unjustified and potentially harmful off-label use would in any event
  decidedly be regarded as unethical.''

  I accept that the above are, merely, `legal opinions'.

  You write that you have been advised that the view of government, that it
  is illegal for medical practitioners to use drugs for purposes other than
  those for which they have been licensed, is invalid.

  That, too, is merely, a legal opinion.

  I hope that any medical practitioner who acts on your advice, and
  dispenses AZT to rape victims, will do so knowing the possible legal
  consequences indicated in the medical opinions I have cited.

  Relying on these opinions, our Department of Health is of the view that
  medicines should be used for the specific indications for which they are
  registered, in compliance with the requirements of the Medicines and
  Related Substances Control Act of 1965. I do not agree that ``providing
  AZT to rape survivors'' would not ``constitute a violation of the law.''

  Accordingly, I will continue to insist that respect for the rule of law
  requires that all of us must demand that AZT should not be used for a
  purpose for which it is not registered, for which no registration
  application has been made and for which no efficacy data exist.

  I still find it completely unacceptable that the Leader of the Official
  Opposition should, in a democracy, blatantly urge defiance of the law.
 
  Given that you seem to agree with Glaxo Wellcome on a number of issues,
  it might help that you talk to them to overcome their reticence and try
  to have AZT registered for use in cases of rape.

  If, for some reason, the MCC agreed to this, that would end the prospect
  of possible civil and criminal action against medical practitioners who
  prescribe AZT in rape cases, which you fervently urge.

  Such an MCC decision would be taken despite the fact that the
  manufacturer does not approve of this and despite the fact that no
  scientific evidence exists to justify such use.

  Given the extant literature on non-occupational PEP, some of which I have
  cited in the previous letters, I do not believe that there is any need
  for me to comment on the outlandish remarks you make in your last (28
  July) letter.

  In this letter you say: ``if one person has an STD there is a substantial
  increase in the chance of HIV transmission.'' (My emphasis.)

  There is no evidence anywhere to support this bold assertion.

  The `orthodox' position, as I understand it, would be stated thus: any
  person suffering from an STD stands a greater possibility of HIV
  infection.

  According to this proposition, whatever its merit, the transmitter of the
  HIV may very well be free of any STD. If, however, the `receptive' person
  suffers from an STD, his or her risk of being infected by HIV increases.

  Your bold and wrong assertion is based on the assumption that there is a
  strong relationship between affliction with an STD and being an HIV
  carrier.

  To clarify this matter, in my last letter I drew your attention to the
  association between STD's and acquired immune deficiency.

  It is most odd that, even as the CDC is working to improve its focus on
  STD's precisely because of this, you consider my comments ``a side
  track'' and a ``dead end''.

  With regard to the issue of comments that appeared under Ms Charlene
  Smith's name in the Washington Post of June 4, 2000, clearly, in terms of
  your July 28 letter, you have access to the sub-editors of this newspaper
  that I do not have.

  Because of this, you even know by how much her article was cut down by
  these sub-editors.

  You must also maintain particular relations with her to state so
  unequivocally, (in your July 28 letter), that ``in fact what she actually
  wrote was ... '' (My emphasis.)

  For our present purposes, let us accept that in her unedited article (and
  her convictions) Ms Smith was referring to Africa, rather than South
  Africa specifically.

  Perhaps wrongly, I wonder what Ms Smith knows about Africa.

  I would be very interested to hear from you how, in her view,
  ``modernisation has warped cultural attitudes'' in Egypt and Morocco,
  Mali and Nigeria, Cameroon and Rwanda, Ethiopia and Tanzania, Namibia and
  Mozambique, Cape Verde, Madagascar and Reunion.

  I would be very interested to hear from you what she says about ``the
  role of culture, religion and tradition'' in these countries, which leads
  her to conclude that vaccines or condoms will prove useless in the fight
  against AIDS in these countries.

  For example, how have the Hausa-Fulani, Yoruba and Ibo traditions and
  cultures of Nigeria been warped by modernisation, such that the accepted
  anti-AIDS interventions will not work?

  How do the African, Moslem and Christian religions of Nigeria relate to
  this matter, such that they make it impossible for these interventions to
  achieve results?

  In what ways do the traditions, cultures and religions of Nigeria make
  Nigerian women and Nigerian society as a whole, prone to HIV/AIDS, unless
  warped Nigerian cultural attitudes are `reflected' upon, by whosoever?

  You say that what I read in the Washington Post was not what Ms Smith
  intended to say.

  Clearly, you are best placed to pose the question to the Washington Post,
  whether its sub-editors were promoting a racial objective, or were merely
  trying ``to fit the article onto the page'', when they reduced (and
  rewrote?) Ms Smith's article.
 
  Unlike you, like the normal readers of the Washington Post, I had to
  proceed from what I read, and not what had been written originally,
  which, allegedly, was subsequently edited in a particular way.

  The article I read, attributed to a South African journalist, has a
  paragraph I quoted, which begins with the word ``here''. Accordingly, I
  read ``here'' to mean South Africa.

  In my letter to you, I said the statement I read was racist, a view I
  have not abandoned, but which you contest.

  In the main, white South Africans are, in their religions, Christian and
  Jewish. They have cultures and traditions that are somewhat different
  from those in your letter you describe as ``Black''.

  I would be most interested to see the evidence you and Ms Smith have that
  demonstrates that, as a consequence of tradition, religion and culture
  among these white South Africans, ``rape is endemic'' and is ``a prime
  means of transmitting (AIDS) to young women as well as children.''

  Could you also produce similar evidence with regard to the groups you
  identify as ``Black, coloured (and Indian)?''

  The valuable information you will supply on this matter will help us to
  settle the issue whether I was right or wrong to interpret Ms Smith's
  published comment as racist.

  All rape is reprehensible. I was as distressed when I heard about Ms
  Smith's rape as happens whenever I hear of any incidence of rape.
  Accordingly and unreservedly, I sympathise with her.

  In Ms Smith's case, I immediately spoke to the then Minister of Safety
  and Security to take all necessary measures to ensure that the culprit
  was apprehended and charged.

  The Minister kept me informed about this matter constantly, relating even
  to the means the SAPS used to identify the culprit.

  I know that none of this could ever undo the grave harm and damage done
  to Ms Smith. Over this specific incident, I have no influence. I, like
  other people, did what I had the power to do.

  I have not sought to vilify Ms Smith.

  But, neither do I accept that her terrible and unacceptable ordeal gives
  her licence to propagate racism, as I am convinced her published
  Washington Post comments do.

  I also do not accept that her terrible and unacceptable ordeal entitles
  her to say wrong and absurd things about AZT and rape.

  Comment by anybody on such matters as the efficacy of drugs and the roles
  of tradition, religion and culture have to be dealt with on their merits.



  We have fought against racism throughout our lives. We have made enormous
  sacrifices to achieve the goal of a non-racial South Africa, which is yet
  to be realised. We have occupied and continue to occupy the frontline in
  the struggle to avoid a racial explosion in our country.

  We do not need anybody to educate us about the imperatives to fight
  against racism and to transform South Africa into a country that belongs
  to all who live in it.

  You would do well to listen to those who have been and continue to be
  victims of the most virulent racism.

  Difficult as it may be, the least you might try to do is to fight against
  the tendency to hold in contempt those whom white South Africa has held
  in and treated with contempt for many centuries, even if you do not quite
  understand everything they mean when they speak.

  I do not understand how you can be a fighter against racism in our
  country, if you do not understand the simple, obvious and unhidden
  reality that ``many South Africans carry in their heads a racist
  stereotype of Africans.''

  That you contest this tells me that you would not understand the racism
  in the classic white statement - some of my best friends are black - and
  its equivalent black statement - some of my best friends are white.

  As a result of your determined effort to promote AZT, you make the
  meaningless statement in your 28 July letter that it is not ``appropriate
  the politicians should decide upon technical and scientific matters.''

  The National Assembly, in which you sit as Leader of the Official
  Opposition, has to take decisions about many ``technical and scientific
  matters'', when it considers many of the draft statutes it has to pass
  into law.

  In its normal work, the executive has to take many decisions on
  ``technical and scientific matters''.

  For example, our legislature and executive have taken the decision to
  spend public funds to build a new and powerful telescope, located in the
  Northern Cape.

  You argue that neither the legislature nor the executive should have
  taken this decision, as it was a ``technical and scientific matter.''

  The US government has been discussing the highly ``technical and
  scientific matter'' of the possible development, deployment and use of
  anti-ballistic missiles, seemingly a version of the ``star wars'' of the
  Reagan years.

  This is one of the issues on which the presidential candidates in the US
  are campaigning.
  The development etc., of ABM's is highly ``technical and scientific''.
  You argue that, because of this, politicians should play no role with
  regard to the development etc of ABM's.

  You need to know this that US politicians will be involved, in a decision-
  making capacity, at all stages of the evolution of this issue, however
  ``technical and scientific'' it may be.

  They are morally obliged thus to be involved. There is absolutely nothing
  totalitarian about this. Neither does it constitute ``overriding the
  autonomy of all institutions of society.''

  I would like you to understand this that it is deeply offensive for you
  to present yourself as the great defender of democracy in contrast to us,
  whom you are determined to project as a present and imminent threat to
  democracy.

  You take exception to the statement I make in my letter of July 17 that
  ``all of us have a moral obligation not to do anything we believe to be
  fundamentally wrong'.
  The position you have taken, that there is no moral obligation that
  attaches to our actions if we are acting on the advice of technicians and
  scientists, tells me that I was correct when I said, in my July 17 letter
  to you, that perhaps we inhabit different planets.

  Let me assure you that as long as I have to occupy a decision-making
  position within our politics, so long will I take such decisions as may
  be necessary and morally defensible, whatever institution makes
  recommendations according to its mandate and possibilities.

  The idea that, as the executive, we should not take decisions we can
  defend, simply because views have been expressed by scientist-economists,
  scientist-agriculturists, scientist-environmentalists, scientist-
  pedagogues, scientist-soldiers, scientist-health workers, scientis-
  communicators, etc, is absurd in the extreme.

  It is sad that you feel compelled to sink to such absurdity, simply to
  promote the sale of AZT.

  Parks Mankahlana did not know that we were writing to each other on the
  matter we have been discussing.

  When you took the unilateral decision to give our letters to the Sunday
  Times, you should have consulted me on the issue, rather than refer it to
  Parks Mankahlana.

  My ``office'' did not write to you. I did.

  Common courtesy required that you tell me, not Parks Mankahlana or my
  ``office'', that you intended to hand our correspondence to the Sunday
  Times.

  The broader issue you raised about how the President of the Republic and
  the Leader of the Official Opposition should relate to each other is
  completely irrelevant to the matter we have been discussing.

  We have to develop our own South African conventions in this regard.
  References to such countries as Botswana and Great Britain will not
  necessarily help.

  It has seemed to me that you set great store by your being a vigorous and
  uncompromising opposition to the government.
  You have argued that unless you played this role, democracy in our
  country would be threatened.

  I am told that your party has put up posters suggesting that if you were
  not the vigorous opposition you pride yourselves to be, South Africa
  would degenerate into a ``Zimbabwe''.

  I have also heard and seen comments made that our efforts to encourage
  the development of a consensus around a jointly determined national
  agenda, amounts to an attempt at cooption and the silencing of
  alternative, critical points of view.

  This has given cause to some to reject the call Nelson Mandela made for
  the development of an adherence to a new patriotism.

  So vital to the survival of democracy is the existence of this
  consistently opposition view, that, so it has been said, various actions
  of the President cause concern.

  Among these actions was our failure to appoint certain people as
  Ministers, who were thought by some to be precisely the people who,
  within Cabinet, would differ with the President.

  It was these, so it was said, who would guarantee the health of our
  democracy, rather than, again it has been said, the time serving ``yes-
  men'' who dare not speak their minds and criticise the President, if they
  think he is wrong.

  Your Party and its supporters have been very active in promoting this
  overall view.

  I am quite happy to restate that I will not oppose this approach ``about
  the role of the opposition and the need for openness and candour, the
  need for good and robust debate, and the need for us to accept the bona
  fides of our interlocutors''.

  Contrary to what you write, I can think of nothing that would indicate
  that we have changed from this position.

  In addition, I have said this is in the National Assembly, that in any
  case, the DP and the ANC differ so radically in their philosophy and
  politics that they are, truly, objectively and effortlessly, opposed to
  each other.

  Given all this, it seems to me that your remarks in your letter of 28
  July, prompted by my comments about `common courtesy', represent an
  attempt to have your cake and eat it.

  Accordingly, you want to present yourself as an uncompromising opposition
  force, naturally, in the interest of democracy.

  Simultaneously, you want to be seen as being of such importance that you
  are given the space to help determine the decisions of the executive, and
  therefore the evolution of our country.

  In your letter, you argue that the President should assist you to evolve
  and present this Janus-face, in your interest. Frankly, I do not see why,
  in the interests of a better South Africa, I should.

  I am certain that, in time, conventions will develop, governing the
  relations between the President and the Leader of the Official
  Opposition.

  You have not listened to the suggestions I have made in this regard,
  deeming them to be inimical to democracy.

  I respect your views on this matter and accept your bona fides. The
  future will decide the matter of what stable conventional balance our
  country arrives at, relative to our respective views.

  In the meantime, I will continue to respect and defend your right to be a
  vigorous opposition, without seeking to find conventions from anywhere in
  the world, that seek to give the possibility to the executive to
  circumscribe this legal and constitutional right.

  The ruling party, which constitutes the first point of the origin of the
  mandate the President exercises as head of government, must also
  discharge its popularly mandated obligation to rule.

  I trust that, as the opposition, you will respect and defend the legal
  and constitutional right of the ruling party to govern, without seeking
  to circumscribe this by invoking supposed conventions in Botswana, the UK
  and other countries.

  I would like to encourage you that, indeed, you must campaign for the
  elimination of STD's, as well as all the other obstacles that obstruct
  our people's effort to rebuild their lives.

  There is no need, whatsoever, that you wait for the moment when the
  President and the Leader of the Official Opposition can do this together,
  sharing the same platform.

  You state that the appearance of the President and the Leader of the
  Official Opposition on the same stage, campaigning on the same health
  issue, would make ``a very great public impact''.

  You may very well be correct.

  But I can also imagine how many people there would be, at home and
  abroad, who would ask a particular question.

  That question would be - why does the elected President not have
  sufficient courage to discharge his responsibilities about the health
  challenge we face, without requiring that the Leader of the Official
  Opposition should hold his hand!

  Surely, you must admit that the executive role you seek is somewhat
  strange in any normal democracy. It is also inconsistent with everything
  you say and do everyday to convince all and sundry how rotten our
  government and its policies are.

  I do not believe that we should encourage the convention whereby the
  opposition is both an effective opposition and an effective player with
  regard to the decisions of the executive.

  The most difficult problem we face as a country and people is the wiping
  out of the deeply entrenched and pervasive racist legacy of colonialism
  and apartheid. It is about this that we should share a common patriotism.



  It would be obscene to reduce this to an HIV/AIDS issue, as you do. It
  would be a fundamental error to reduce the challenge we face to the
  incidence of disease in our country, as you do.

  You are entirely wrong to claim, as in your 28 July letter, that ``death
  and disease know no distinction of politics, creed or race''.

  Perhaps, this illustrates graphically the point that we do, indeed,
  occupy different planets.

  Contrary to what you say, even a child, from among the black communities,
  knows that our own `burden of disease' coincides with the racial
  divisions in our country.

  I think you made your point about your importance when, in the National
  Assembly, to depart from the physical position occupied by F.W. de Klerk,
  the first democratically elected Leader of the Official Opposition, you
  moved from the bench opposite the Deputy President's, to the bench
  opposite the President's bench.

  As for the rest, I wish you successes as the Leader of the Official
  Opposition.

  In keeping with what I proposed to you in my letter of July 1, to which
  you agreed, I will ask my Parliamentary Counsellor, the Hon Charles
  Nqakula, to submit the entirety of our correspondence, to date, to the
  Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the NCOP.

  I do not believe that the dialogue in which we have been engaged is of
  any help in helping the people of our country to understand the truth
  about what we have been discussing.

  The presentation of the truth is somewhat different from what you and I
  might consider to be an effective representation of whatever ``macho''
  image we might have of ourselves.

  The first common stage we have the possibility to occupy is surely this,
  which requires that we treat the truth as primary, above the impulse to
  play to the gallery.

  Please consider carefully whether you have responded correctly and
  adequately to this requirement.

  Please consider also whether, from this limited experience, you are ready
  to fight together with us, for the realisation of the objectives of an
  agenda targeted at genuine social transformation.

  Necessarily, these advisory strictures apply as much to you as they apply
  to us.

  Yours sincerely
  Thabo Mbeki
  The Hon Mr Tony Leon
  Leader of the Official Opposition
  National Assembly
  CAPE TOWN

  ANNEXURE L

  24 August 2000

  By hand and by telephone

  His Excellency Mr T M Mbeki
  President of the Republic of South Africa
  Private Bag X1000
  PRETORIA
  0001
  Dear President Mbeki

  Thank you for your letter of the 5th of August.

  I will deal first with some outstanding issues concerning the provision
  of anti-retrovirals to rape victims. I will then raise some of my
  concerns about this correspondence. I will try to be as brief as I can.

  In my letter I quoted from AMA and FDA guidelines which showed that, in
  America at least, the use of registered drugs for off-label indications
  is perfectly acceptable. This use should be based upon ``sound scientific
  evidence and sound medical opinion'' and may ``reflect approaches to drug
  therapy that have been extensively reported in medical literature''.

  In your letter you claim that the ``use of AZT in cases of rape meets
  neither of these FDA and AMA conditions''. According to your argument it
  would be illegal and unethical to prescribe anti-retrovirals to a rape
  victim in the United States. This is not the case.

  Such treatment has been extensively reported in medical literature (see
  for example American Journal of Medicine March 1999 Vol. 106). And while
  the CDC has not made a binding recommendation as a matter of public
  health policy, it does regard the provision of anti-retrovirals for rape
  victims as a perfectly acceptable clinical intervention by individual
  doctors. Mr Kearney is absolutely right in this regard. If the provision
  of ant-retrovirals to rape victims was really illegal in America then why
  do the CDC not say so, instead of providing long guidelines for such
  treatment?

  You write that in this country the view of the government is that ``it is
  illegal for medical practitioners to use drugs for purposes other than
  those for which they have been licensed'', that the Department of Health
  ``is of the view that medicines should be used for the specific
  indications for which they are registered''; and that if doctors
  prescribe registered medicines for unlisted indications they are liable
  for ``possible civil and criminal action''. On this basis you continue to
  accuse me of ``blatantly'' urging ``defiance of the law''.

  You use two legal opinions to support these claims: that of the State Law
  Advisors on Misoprostol and that of Professor S.A. Strauss.
  Unfortunately, if read carefully and in context, neither opinion actually
  supports your case.

  What both the State Law Advisors and Professor Strauss are discussing are
  the statutory powers of the MCC. In terms of the law, it is only the
  manufacturer or authorised distributor of a particular drug, who can
  apply for that drug to be registered for a particular indication. Neither
  the Health Department, nor a doctor, nor the MCC is allowed to apply for
  a drug to be registered for a particular indication. This is the sole
  prerogative of the pharmaceutical company concerned.

  What the State Law Advisors are saying is that the MCC would be acting
  outside its powers if it tried to register a drug for an indication not
  applied for by the pharmaceutical company. When they state ``where the
  authorised person or body uses his statutory powers in the public
  interest but for an unauthorised purpose, the act will be ultra vires''
  they are referring to the MCC not individual doctors.

  Thus, the advice of the State Law Advisors dealt with the authority of
  the MCC and its exercise of statutory powers. It was not concerned with
  the obligations and responsibilities of individual doctors.

  Indeed, Misoprostol continues to be used for abortions within the public
  health system, even though it has not been listed for that indication and
  a current Health Department document states the following:


     ``The current registration of Nevirapine could possibly enable any
     physician to prescribe Nevirapine for a mother-to-child transmission
     indication as ``off-label'' usage. Until the MTCT has been registered
     as a specific indication, there should be some reluctance by government
     to promote a policy of Nevirapine use. There are, however, several
     examples of such ``off label'' use of other drugs where failure to use
     them would be considered bad practice, or in some circumstances
     malpractice. These include the use of Misoprostol for termination of
     pregnancy and the use of corticosteroids for preterm labour.''

As far as Professor Strauss is concerned, you are guilty of extremely
selective quotation. You quote Professor Strauss as saying:


  ``A practitioner who uses a medicine for the treatment of an indication
  not approved of by the MCC when registering a medicine, may expose
  himself to a civil action under common law for damages if the patient
  were to suffer harm in consequence of off-label use.''

You then omit the following:


  ``A patient may successfully sue the practitioner if he or she can prove
  that off-label use in the circumstances was negligent, i.e. harm was
  reasonably foreseeable.

  South African law does not yet recognise `product liability' in the sense
  of no-fault liability for harm caused by the mere use of the product.

  Accordingly, if off-label use by practitioners has taken place regularly
  and `openly' - colleagues knowing of it and possibly doing the same -
  over a considerable period of time with a reasonable degree of success in
  the treatment of patients and without harm being caused by patients, a
  prospective patient would have an almost impossible burden to establish a
  case of reasonable foreseeability of harm. The position of the defendant-
  doctor would obviously be strengthened by scientific evidence to the
  effect that off-label use for a specific condition is quite acceptable,
  harmless and possibly effective.''

Professor Strauss then says (and you quote) ``The mere fact that off-label
use might constitute a ``technical'' criminal offence in terms of the Act,
would not lead to an inference of negligence.'' (SA Practice Management
1998 (1) pp 12-15).

Thus, according to Professor Strauss, a doctor will be liable for off-label
use only if they have acted negligently in prescribing that drug. They are
not guilty of a criminal offence and liable for civil action merely for
prescribing a drug for an non-listed indication. As the law stand in South
Africa, doctors are free to exercise their independent judgement in
prescribing drugs for off-label purposes as long as this is done in good
faith.

To deny doctors this discretion would represent a gross intrusion by the
state into the autonomy of the medical profession. It would also lead to
the health profession being strictly constrained within boundaries set by
the pharmaceutical industry - since it is only the pharmaceutical company
who can apply for their drug to be listed for a particular indication. As I
noted in my previous letter, a drug company may not choose to register a
drug for a specific indication for a variety of (non-medical) reasons: They
may not want to pay for the necessary clinical trials; or they may not want
to offend a powerful political lobby in that (or another) country.

To restate my case: Although there is a lack of direct clinical data on the
efficacy of anti-retrovirals as post-exposure prophylaxis, there is sound
medical evidence supporting the provision of such treatment. Furthermore,
it would not be against the law to make anti-retrovirals available within
the public health service for the treatment of rape victims. Currently,
such treatment is available to those who use private health care and can
afford it. Recently I heard an SABC report on how a Norwegian tourist had
been raped but was immediately treated with AZT. The effect of your
government policy is merely to deny such treatment to those dependent on
the public health care system.
You have asked for a ``rational discussion of HIV/AIDS'' (July 1). You have
also stated that we must ``treat the truth as primary'' (5 August). I would
like to raise a couple of concerns in this regard.

During the course of this correspondence, you have made it clear that you
wish to confine this debate to the issue of PEPs for rape survivors. This
is a fair request and I have respected it. However, there are certain
inconsistencies between the arguments you have used in this correspondence
and those you have used in other public statements particularly on Virodene
and the provision of anti-retrovirals to pregnant women.

In debating the provision of anti-retrovirals for rape victims you argued
that there was a lack of direct clinical data; you cited (incorrectly) the
recommendations of the CDC; and you claimed that it would be a
contravention of the rule of law to provide a registered drug for off-label
use.

On the question of providing anti-retrovirals for pregnant women you
ignored the copious amounts of clinical data, the unambiguous
recommendations of the CDC, and the fact that AZT is registered for that
indication. Instead you refused to make AZT available in the public health
service on the basis that ``the toxicity of this drug is such that it is in
fact a danger to health''.

I find it even more difficult to reconcile the arguments in our
correspondence with your statements of Virodene, which your party so
aggressively promoted as a cure for AIDS.

On 8 March 1998 you defended the Virodene researchers by saying that
``those who seek the good for all humanity have become the villains of our
time!''

You then proceeded to attack the MCC for refusing to allow the testing of
this industrial solvent on AIDS patients. You stated:


  ``Alas, `the local review board', the MCC, still refuses to accept the
  application, despite its knowledge of these `learned and highly qualified
  professionals' [whom you had quoted], and whose credentials it is
  perfectly aware of. To confirm its determined stance against Virodene,
  and contrary to previous practice, the MCC has, with powers to decide who
  shall live or die, also denied dying AIDS sufferers the possibility of
  `mercy treatment' to which they are morally entitled. I and many others
  will not rest until the efficacy or otherwise of Virodene is established
  scientifically. If nothing else, all those infected by HIV/Aids need to
  know as a matter of urgency. The cruel games of those who do not care
  should not be allowed to set the national agenda.'' (Sunday Tribune 8
  March 1998)

  Thus, on AZT and Virodene you have taken the following contradictory
  positions: AZT is a ``toxic danger to the public health'' but Virodene is
  a ``mercy treatment''; AIDS sufferers are ``morally entitled'' to
  Virodene but doctors should not be allowed to prescribe AZT to rape
  survivors; Glaxo Wellcome is driven solely by a concern ``to increase the
  sales of AZT'' but the owners of Virodene were seeking ``good for all
  humanity''; and arguing for off-label use of AZT is a ``violation of the
  law'', but the refusal by the MCC to allow Virodene to be tested on AIDS
  sufferers are the ``cruel games of those who do not care''.

  My second concern is with the way you have attempted to play the race-
  card in this debate. You have misrepresented your opponents, twisted
  their words and tried to impose your own meaning on what they said, all
  in an attempt to blindside your critics. I cannot judge whether this is
  merely a cynical attempt to silence debate, or whether you really believe
  that anyone who criticises you or your government is (by definition) a
  ``racist''.

  You write again and at length about Charlene Smith. I will leave her to
  speak for herself. I can't but agree with her that we suffer from a
  virtual epidemic of rape in this country. The racial characterisation of
  this problem must be, surely, irrelevant. All rape is equally wrong, it
  is not the colour of the rapist which is at issue but the criminal
  violence of the act.

  I am perfectly willing to enter into a separate correspondence on your
  eccentric definitions of ``racism'' and ``non-racialism''. However, I
  think it is important for us to debate the issues around HIV/Aids on
  their merits.

  South Africa is facing a massive human tragedy. HIV/AIDS will kill more
  South Africans than any war has. It is already leading to enormous human
  suffering. There is an urgent need to put in place a preventative
  campaign with a clear and consistent message. As politicians we have an
  obligation to provide political support for such a campaign and not to
  muddy the waters by squabbling with international opinion.

  The government has a moral obligation to urgently take steps to make anti-
  retrovirals available to pregnant women and rape survivors within the
  public health system. And where we lack the systems to provide such
  treatment, to put those in place.

  There is an urgent need to reform and extend the welfare system so that
  the state assists those looking after the sick, the dying and the
  orphaned.

  To fight the war against HIV/AIDS successfully our whole country needs to
  pull together. This is not the time (or the issue) to indulge in racial
  politics - to try and turn black against white.

  We now have a non-racial constitution and franchise. We have no
  segregation of public facilities or services. We should now be free to
  confront the real problems facing our country. It would be disastrous to
  respond to this crisis by trying - like the old general - to fight the
  last war.

  We live in the same country, face the same problems and share a common
  concern for our people. We must, on the HIV/AIDS issue at least, set
  aside personal differences and personal pride and work together for the
  good of the country.

  I believe that you and I ought to follow the conventions of reasonable,
  regular and frank discussion that were established during the
  Constitutional negotiations and continued by your predecessor during the
  ANC's first term in office.

  These are conventions that have been painfully built up. They were based
  upon a recognition of shared concerns, common challenges, and the
  acknowledgment of equal legitimacy. It is important that we should meet
  on occasion to discuss major problems or crises facing our country. This
  would not end the proper and robust debate between ruling party and
  opposition which is fundamental to democracy, nor would it be an
  intrusion on the functions of the Executive. But it would follow a path
  bequeathed to us by our predecessors, one which led our country away from
  a civil war. It would also send a message to the voters that we contest
  issues as opponents not enemies. We should not turn our back on that
  tradition now.

  I agree that this correspondence should be published when Parliament
  reconvenes.

  Kind regards

  Yours sincerely

  TONY LEON

  ANNEXURE M

  September 1, 2000

  Dear Tony

  Thank you for your letter dated 24 August 2000.
  As I indicated in my last letter, it is perhaps best that we close this
  written exchange of views.

  You will therefore understand why I will not respond to your latest
  letter of August 24th though I would contest many of the points you make.



  I would like to assure you that the government will continue to do
  everything it can to respond to the health challenges facing our people.

  Yours sincerely

  Thabo Mbeki

  The Hon Mr Tony Leon, MP

  Leader of the Official Opposition

  National Assembly

  Cape Town

TABLINGS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
     Standards for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
     on the Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B 51B -
     2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 4 October 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
         considered the Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment
         Bill [B 51B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) and proposed
         amendments of the National Council of Provinces (Announcements,
         Tablings and Committee Reports, p 796), referred to the Committee,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 51C - 2000].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on the Home Loan and
     Mortgage Disclosure Bill [B 53 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 4 October 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Housing, having considered the subject
         of the Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Bill [B 53 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 53A - 2000].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the African
     Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund Bill [B 65 - 2000]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 3 October 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs, having considered the
         subject of the African Renaissance and International Co-operation
         Fund Bill [B 65 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to
         it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75
         Bill, reports the Bill with an amendment [B 65A - 2000].


