---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 March 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-03-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 MARCH 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    _____

The Council met at 10:03.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I wish to give notice in terms of Rule
74(a):


  That the following matter be discussed at the next sitting of the
  Council:


     The abandonment of unwanted babies and children in our country.
Ms C BOTHA: Mr Chairperson, in the absence of Ms Versfeld, I am putting on
my sea fisheries hat, one I do not normally wear.

Ek gee namens haar kennis dat sy op die volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:


  Dat die Raad, terwyl hy daarvan kennis neem dat die Minister van
  Omgewingsake en Toerisme ook verantwoordelik is vir seevisserye en marine-
   en kusbestuur, derhalwe besluit dat -


  (1) dit 'n saak van die uiterste belang is dat die Minister onmiddellik
       'n ad hoc-raad saamstel om om te sien na die toekenning van
       visvangregte;


  (2) bogenoemde raad onder leiding van die Heath Ondersoekeenheid of die
       Openbare Beskermer saamgestel moet word;


  (3) genoemde raad uit verteenwoordigers van 'n aantal ander liggame moet
       bestaan, byvoorbeeld die Prokureursorde, die Advokatuur en
       natuurbewaringsrade, asook uit onafhanklike navorsers wat betrokke is
       by die bedryf;


  (4) raadslede verplig moet word om enige belange wat hulle in daardie
       bedryf het te verklaar; en


  (5) indien die Minister nie bovermelde aanbevelings aanvaar nie, hy
       versoek word om dringend 'n mediaverklaring omtrent hierdie
       aangeleentheid uit te reik waarin hy sy voornemens in hierdie verband
       uiteensit.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[I give notice on her behalf that she will move on the next sitting day:


  That the Council, while taking note that the Minister of Environmental
  Affairs and Tourism is also responsible for sea fisheries and marine and
  coastal management, therefore resolves that -


  (1) it is a matter of the utmost importance that the Minister immediately
         appoints an ad hoc board to take care of the allocation of fishing
         rights;
  (2) the aforementioned board should be appointed under the guidance of
         the Heath Investigating Unit or the Public Protector;


  (3) the board in question should comprise representatives of a number of
         other bodies, for example the Law Society, the Bar and nature
         conservation boards, as well as independent researchers who are
         involved in the industry;


  (4) the board members should be compelled to declare any interests that
         they have in that industry; and


  (5) if the Minister does not accept the aforementioned recommendations he
         is requested, as a matter of urgency, to issue a media statement
         in respect of this matter in which he expounds his intentions in
         this regard.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting:


  That the Council -


  (1) expresses its horror and dismay at the recent incident in Amanzimtoti
       in which a woman was mauled by two vicious dogs, after which both her
       arms had to be amputated;


  (2) expresses its deepest sympathy with the victim and her family; and


  (3) calls on all spheres of government to take whatever steps are
       necessary to prevent a recurrence of this terrible incident.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 CALL ON UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT TO RETURN ELIAN GONZALEZ TO HIS FATHER IN
                                    CUBA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms L JACOBUS: Mr Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the United States government has, since last year,
         continued to deny the request by the father of the little Cuban
         boy, Elian Gonzalez, that Elian be returned to him in Cuba;


  (2) expresses serious reservations about the attempts by the US
         government to block the latest requests by the father, Juan Miguel
         Gonzalez, for his son to be transferred to his nephew, Manuel
         Gonzalez; and


  (3) calls on the US government to return Elian to his father, where he
         belongs, as soon as possible, to avoid further compounding his
         traumatic experiences of the past four months.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

              CONGRATULATIONS TO HANSIE CRONJÉ AND THE PROTEAS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr J L THERON: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:
  Dat die Raad gelukwensing oordra aan Hansie Cronjé en die Proteas vir
  oorwinning in die toetsreeks teen Indië.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr J L THERON: Mr Chairman, I move without notice:


  That the Council conveys its congratulations to Hansie Cronjé and the
  Proteas on their victory in the test series in India.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr M BHABHA: Yes, I object, Chairperson, because this motion has been
passed already.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I am informed,
hon member, that this motion has already been passed. Are you aware of
this? [Interjections.] Order, hon members! We cannot all speak at the same
time. I ask this House to be in order. Hon member, maybe we should defer
the adoption of this motion so that we can check our records. We will give
a ruling in due course.
         OUTRAGE AT SEXUAL ABUSE OF YOUNG GIRLS AT FUNDRAISING EVENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Mr Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with shock the contents of a recent newspaper article in which
         it was reported that girls as young as 14 years old had been
         sexually molested at a fundraising dinner;


  (2) condemns in the strongest possible terms the continued violent abuse
         and harassment of women;


  (3) expresses its concern that failure to act upon these allegations will
         entrench existing stereotypes, which is detrimental to women; and


  (4) therefore calls on the Ministries of Safety and Security and of
         Justice to investigate these allegations as a matter of extreme
         urgency so as to send out a message that such sexual abuse of
         children will not be tolerated.

Mr M V MOOSA: Mr Chairperson, may I add an amendment to that motion? I move
as an amendment:


  To insert the following words after ``urgency'' in paragraph (4):


     and on the relevant Ministers to ensure that those responsible for
     these deeds, be apprehended, arrested and convicted.

Chairperson, I think that would be more appropriate.

Amendment moved by Mr M V Moosa agreed to in accordance with section 65 of
the Constitution.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with shock the contents of a recent newspaper article in which
         it was reported that girls as young as 14 years old had been
         sexually molested at a fundraising dinner;


  (2) condemns in the strongest possible terms the continued violent abuse
         and harassment of women;


  (3) expresses its concern that failure to act upon these allegations will
         entrench existing stereotypes which is detrimental to women; and


  (4) therefore calls on the Ministries of Safety and Security and of
         Justice to investigate these allegations as a matter of extreme
         urgency, and on the relevant Ministers to ensure that those
         responsible for these deeds, be apprehended, arrested and
         convicted so as to send out a message that such sexual abuse of
         children will not be tolerated.


        WELCOMING OF DELEGATES TO DEMOCRAT UNION OF AFRICA CONFERENCE
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr P A MATTHEE: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek stel voor, sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem van die konferensie van die Democrat Union of Africa wat
       tans in Kaapstad plaasvind onder die voorsitterskap van 'n voormalige
       lid van hierdie Raad, Mr David Malatsi, LPW, tans 'n lid van die
       Provinsiale Wetgewer van Mpumalanga; en


  (2) al die afgevaardigdes van ten minste 13 Afrika-lande na die voormelde
       konferensie hartlik welkom heet en hulle 'n vrugbare en aangename
       konferensie en verblyf in Suid-Afrika toewens.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr P A MATTHEE: Mr Chairperson, I move, without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the conference of the Democrat Union of Africa which is
         currently taking place in Cape Town under the chairpersonship of a
         former member of this Council, Mr David Malatsi, MPL, currently a
         member of the Provincial Legislature of Mpumalanga; and


  (2) warmly welcomes all the delegates from at least 13 African countries
         to the aforementioned conference and wishes them a fruitful and
         pleasant conference and stay in South Africa.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   REDEPLOYMENT OF STAFF OF DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE TO ACTIVE DUTY IN COURTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Mr Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) welcomes the steps taken by the Department of Justice to redeploy
         some of its staff at the Head Office to active duty in courts;


  (2) notes that many of these staff are experienced and competent
         magistrates and prosecutors who had been promoted to management
         positions at Head Office;


  (3) is confident that this step will speed up the hearing of cases in
         court; and


  (4) wishes to commend the department for its vision and sincerity to
         address the problems in the criminal justice system.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 NEED FOR DISCIPLINE AMONG OFFICIALS OF DEPARTMENT OF WELFARE AND DEPARTMENT
                               OF HOME AFFAIRS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Mr Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) notes the abysmal state of affairs in the Ministry of Welfare as
         admitted by the relevant Minister, Minister Skweyiya;


  (2) further notes the untenable situation which came to light in the
         Ministry of Home Affairs of Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi, where his
         director-general had taken a case on appeal to the Cape High Court
         in direct violation of the Minister's injunction not to do so; and


  (3) therefore calls upon the President to instil team discipline in the
         conduct of functionaries who are failing to discharge their
         responsibilities with commitment and dedication, failing which
         these miscreants should be brought to book in no uncertain terms.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                            MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE
                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Before we proceed, I
want to deal with the motion the hon member Mr Theron wished to move
earlier. At the last sitting of the Council, that is on 9 March, a motion
was moved by the hon Chief Whip of the Council calling on the Council to
congratulate the South African national cricket team, the Proteas, on their
victory in India, having beaten the Indians two to zero on their home
ground. That motion was passed, and it therefore cannot be moved again.

                          LOTTERIES AMENDMENT BILL

 (Consideration of Decision of Joint Programme Committee on fast-tracking of
                                    Bill)

Order disposed of without debate.

Decision of Joint Programme Committee ratified in terms of Joint Rule
216(4).

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND
         ADMINISTRATION - REVIEW: INTERVENTION IN OGIES MUNICIPALITY

Mr M BHABHA: Chairperson, the members are in possession of a detailed
report in regard to the visit of a delegation to Ogies. I will attempt to
highlight some of the more salient features in this report.

On 6 March 2000 a delegation went down to Ogies to execute its obligations
in terms of section 139. To be more specific, it is required in terms of
section 139 to review an intervention that commenced sometime in June, I
think, last year. As a committee we were compelled to go and it was
imperative to do so because this is the longest-standing existing
intervention that we have had in this House.

Judging from correspondence between the department, this House and Ogies,
there was also an impression that the intervention had been terminated
unilaterally by the province. We had to go and investigate this. When we
interviewed the various role-players in the town, it appeared that it was
not the intervention that had been terminated but, in fact, the services of
the administrator. What the province found was that the challenges
confronting the town required skills other than those that the present
administration possessed and that they needed a different approach.

Let me just give members some of the facts and our impressions of what has
happened since the intervention commenced. Firstly, there has been some
improvement - and that is a qualified ``some'' - in the services and in
conditions there. However, the fiscal reports do not look promising at all.
The reasons may be various. One, of course, is that the base upon which the
intervention was made at the time was so bad that it is highly unlikely
that there could be any improvement in a year's time.

Secondly, the administrative restructuring that has taken place,
particularly where the skills of one administrator were relied upon, may be
found wanting, and a different approach is required. In so far as the
credibility and the commitment of the residents are concerned, I must say
that if we are to judge that on the basis of the rate of repayment on
services, then it has increased from a rate of 32% to 33%, to one of 58% to
62%. Therefore there has been a significant increase, but I must add that
this is not going to solve the problems of Ogies.

When we discuss matters with the provincial delegation, in particular the
MEC, we have to be mindful of two things. One is that whatever measures
that are put in place cannot be of a permanent nature, because the new
Demarcation Board reports are out, and in its new demarcation proposals
Ogies will not exist as a municipality after 1 November, but will form part
of the Witbank council. In many ways we have to establish systems so that
we can bite the bullet until 1 November, and do so in such a way that
services are sustained until 1 November.

The other thing is that one cannot employ people, only to find, when 1
November comes, that one is sitting with supernumeraries because one
council now forms part of another council. Those were some of the
challenges we had.

If hon members look at they recommendations at the end of the report, they
will see that we have recommended the following, and I will go through the
rationale and the reasoning behind it:


  That the MST ...

That is, the management support team -


  ... submits a business plan to the MEC and the NCOP by 6 April 2000,
  identifying priorities, problem resolution mechanisms and time-frames for
  implementation.

Hon members will see now that there is an introduction of a municipal
support team. A municipal support team is paid by either the province or
the national Government to try to restructure the council without any
permanent obligations. They are thus on a contract basis and they come as a
team, not as a person. One can rely on a wider base of skills.

Secondly, what we have found - and we will be making a recommendation as a
committee to the department regarding section 139 interventions as a whole
- is that in an intervention and in implementing certain recommendations,
it may be required that certain employees need to be redeployed or their
services terminated, but before the intervention that falls within the
purview of the task of the council. The MEC does not have the right to do
that because it is a contract between the municipality and the employee.

However, if one has a recalcitrant municipality or is unable to implement
that, are there perhaps measures that need to be introduced which allow the
legal status in a contract between a municipality and an employer to be
subsumed by the province? I think that has to be investigated. I am sure
the department is hearing what we are saying here, and I hope they take the
recommendation to the Ministry.

There is another area that seems to concern us. We are in a transitional
stage, and in many ways section 10 of the LGTA is still implemented. It is
still in force until 1 November 2000. Section 10 gives MECs certain
draconian powers to just move into a municipality. It is too harsh, but
elements of it may be required in forthcoming legislation.

I will give hon members an example of why. What if a council does not meet?
One can only take over executive obligations, not legislative obligations.
However, if the legislative obligations are not being carried out by a
council in order to ratify the executive obligations, the intervention is
not worth the paper it is written on. The suggestion this committee is
going to make is that elements of section 10 of the LGTA, perhaps, should
be included in the forthcoming systems Bill.

We have found - and this is based on fact - that the key areas of Ogies
municipality and the administration, and particularly the key position,
which is the CEO position, are unable to carry out their obligations. Hence
I am talking about the employment contract. For whatever reason, it is not
necessary to go into it now, but that is the conclusion that this committee
came to. Members will note that in the third recommendation we have now
asked the CEO to sign a performance contract to the effect that if he or
she, on 1 November, when the restructuring takes place and there is a new
council in terms of the new demarcation, is unable to perform, then his or
her fate must be judged on his or her performance. It is as simple as that.
We cannot afford, and no municipality can afford, nonperforming members or
employees, particularly in key positions. That is the third recommendation.

Fourthly, there is an improvement in the element of trust as is indicated
in the report, but much has to be done. The residents of Ogies are now
pinning their hope on the fact that a new demarcation is taking place and
they just have to bite the bullet. I must tell hon members that the
committee, when it did visit Phola Park particularly, was pleasantly
surprised at conditions there. They are not as bad as may be reflected in
the documentation. It could be argued that this is because of the
municipality and some could argue that this is despite the municipality.
That is an issue that we can debate.

We have tabled this report to the committee. The committee has recommended
that this intervention continue. We are also going to make recommendations,
as I have already stated, to the department on certain recommendations
which we have learned from our experiences. I urge the House to vote that
the intervention continue because, certainly, if the intervention ceases
now, we will have problems, and Ogies is not in a position to take over its
own affairs.

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, will the hon member take a question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Are you
prepared to take a question, hon member? Yes. What is the question?

Mr M V MOOSA: I was wondering whether the hon member could give the House
an indication of how long he foresees the intervention continuing, if the
House votes that the intervention continue? Surely there must be a time
limit to some of these interventions and the outcomes thereof. So, could he
give us an indication of the length?

Mr M BHABHA: Chairperson, I think this is a first - a party member asking
another party member a question. However, I think it is a very relevant
question. [Laughter.]

We would have liked to put a time constraint on this, but unfortunately we
cannot. This has to be linked to certain events rather than to time. Of
course, it would be unreasonable to expect the intervention to carry on ad
nauseam and ad infinitum. However, the issue is that there are certain
events that have to take place. We are in a dilemma - I direct this to Mr
Moosa - in that we are not certain whether the events will come first or
the 1 November elections. This is the hiatus we have regarding the events
and circumstances that are unfolding. Certainly it is a huge concern for
us. I can tell hon members that when the intervention took place, the
conditions were so bad. The fiscal figures are perilous, to say the least,
and I do not know whether there are any stopgap measures.

If the hon Moosa is asking me a direct question, I am going to give him a
direct answer. I think we will sit with this baby until 1 November. That is
how bad the situation is.

Debate concluded.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

            REMUNERATION OF PUBLIC OFFICE BEARERS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M BHABHA: Chairperson, I have three minutes and I am going to be very
brief. This Bill seeks to provide for the payment of the National Assembly
members, permanent delegates and provincial legislature members who are
entitled to salaries and allowances.
It stipulates the date from which a permanent delegate is entitled to a
salary and allowances, and the payment of salaries and allowances of a
premier and a member of the executive council by provincial legislatures.
It also provides for other related matters.

I just want to comment on one issue here. The original Bill had something
like nine provisions. These have now been reduced, as hon members will see,
to three, if I read that correctly. The reason was that this Bill was fast-
tracked and had to be passed before the end of this financial year to
legitimise certain increases that you, Chairperson, and I enjoy. Pressure
would have been exerted on me if I had not passed this Bill. I know that
you, Chairperson, would have been the first person to slaughter me.

The fact of the matter is that we then removed six or five provisions from
the Bill and decided that they should be introduced as a separate Bill.
Those provisions relate to the remuneration of traditional authorities and
other matters which require further consideration. We thought we would not
be doing justice to those provisions if we dealt with them so hurriedly.

Therefore, the matters which are of absolute urgency are now before hon
members, and, emanating from the provisions which were rejected from the
original Bill will come another Bill. Does the House not think there is a
slight tinge of ingenuity here? You could compliment us, Chair. However,
the point is that there will be another Bill following this one. Lest we
get confused, there will be another Bill discussing the issues that were
excised from the original Bill.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon member, I do not
want to say that you are intimidating these members to vote in favour of
this Bill. [Laughter.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. The decision is to be
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Ms Q D MAHLANGU: Mr Chairperson, may I ask a question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): No, I have moved too
far for the question stage. We are already voting on the Bill.
[Interjections.] If you have a question you may ask it during declarations
of vote.

As the decision is being dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I have now to ascertain the presence of the delegation heads
and then give provinces an opportunity to declare their votes if they so
wish.

Is any province willing to declare its vote? No one is.

Ms Q D MAHLANGU: Chairperson ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon member, can you
get your act together?

Ms Q D MAHLANGU: Chairperson, there was a concern raised by Gauteng
province about the salaries of the MECs being paid from the legislature
instead of from their departments. That was the issue that Gauteng raised
and that is the declaration we want to make.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon member, I must
state that that is not a declaration of vote.

Is any other province willing to make a declaration of vote? Hon member,
are you representing Mpumalanga? Are you the delegation head?

Mr M BHABHA: Yes, Chairperson. I received the permission of my delegation
head. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon member, can you
please take your seat? We have just ascertained who is the delegation head
and it cannot change so abruptly.

Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

                          LOTTERIES AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M V MOOSA: Mr Chairperson, I want to start out by congratulating those
who ventured to play the lottery, and those who won. I am told that there
were six winners. Each of them won about half a million rand. That was very
nice. I was also a little saddened, because I also played the lottery and I
did not win. [Laughter.] In fact, I had three numbers that matched, which
means that I have won a prize, but I do not know how much. [Interjections.]
It is probably about R20 or something. I have won R23. I wish to announce
that. [Interjections.]

I need to say that the Lotteries Act, when it was first established, was
drafted in a way which took into account most of the concerns that
stakeholders had regarding the lottery. These concerns were mostly in
regard to security, the fact that the lottery should not be compromised,
and the fact that there should be no fraudulent activity around the
lottery.

One of the provisions that was put in the main Act was located in section
14. That provision said that people who were involved with the lottery
could not play the lottery. However, in the drafting process and in the
excitement that people had making sure that everything was foolproof, they
cast the net so wide that almost everybody who was involved in some way or
the other with the lottery would not be able to play the lottery.

That would include, for example, the people who process the tickets at all
5 000 outlets. Because they operate the computers, they would not be
allowed to play the lottery. It would include people in Telkom who deal
with the computer lines between the local lottery outlets and the mainframe
computers in Pretoria. It would affect everybody. People who handle the
computers - in fact, some argue, even people who clean the computers -
would not be able to play the lottery. The net was thus cast so wide that
potentially tens of thousands of people would not be able to play the
lottery because of the way the Act was drafted.

The security measures that were put in place for this Act were extremely
good. In fact, many argue that we have one of the most sophisticated
lottery systems in the world. That is because South Africa is coming in at
the tail end of most of these things. We have learnt from the lessons of
other countries so that any fraud that can take place in our lottery can
only take place after the draw. In other words, when one watches the
television at 8:30 on a Saturday night and the draw takes place, if one
wants to cheat the lottery, one can only do it at that time, because before
then one will never know what numbers will be drawn.

The numbers are drawn through an airball system, as hon members might have
seen on television, and that is not linked to the computer at all. So one
would first have to wait till 8:30 and see what numbers come up, and when
those numbers come up, one would have to go and cheat the computers.
However, one cannot really do that, because by seven o'clock on a Saturday
evening, the computers are shut down, and the backups that are taken from
the computers are taken to a number of different centres. They go to an
independent backup system with the auditors and to another independent
backup system that goes to the National Lotteries Board, and of course the
main controller of the lottery, Uthingo, also takes a backup.

It is thus virtually impossible for anybody, including Uthingo, the
director, the chairperson, the President or anybody to cheat the lottery.
The lottery system is virtually foolproof.

That being the case, we decided that it was unfair to exclude so many
people from being able to play the lottery. The general view was that we
should delete this clause, which this Bill tries to do.

In principle we felt that it might not be necessary, but we drafted another
amendment, and we named this the Conroy amendment, because Dr Conroy had
suggested that, in principle, the directors of Uthingo and the members of
the National Lotteries Board should not play the lottery, because it was
distasteful. We know that even they cannot cheat the lottery. Even if they
wanted to they could not do so. However, it is just distasteful.

That is how it would come across in the media. From the perception of the
lay person who is playing the lottery, if a director of Uthingo or the
chairperson of the National Lotteries Board wins the lottery, it would
create quite a stir. Because of that, Dr Conroy's amendment was taken on
board. We have allowed for a clause which prevents those people from
playing the lottery.

That being the case, it is a very simple Bill. It is a technical Bill. I
want to call upon this House to support this amendment in order to make the
lottery a better one. I also want to wish all South Africans well in all
future lotteries, and hope that one of those winners will be a member of
this House who sits in this seat and whose surname starts with an ``M''.
[Laughter.]

Debate concluded.

Question put.

Mr N M RAJU: Mr Chairperson, will the hon Mr Moosa take a question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): No, we have already
begun to vote on the question. You are too late.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

           CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
                        FAREWELL TO SECRETARY TO NCOP

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon members
should be aware of the departure of the Secretary to the NCOP. We thought
it would be appropriate to allow political parties an opportunity to bid
farewell to the Secretary.

As you will remember, the Chairperson expressed her sentiments to the
Secretary during our previous sitting. I want to take this opportunity to
associate myself with the sentiments expressed by the Chairperson. I will
now allow political parties an opportunity to bid farewell to the
Secretary, if they so wish.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Mr Chairperson, it is a sad day for us today. We all know
that Marion Sparg, the Secretary to the NCOP, is leaving us by the end of
the month.

One must acknowledge the vital role she has played in shaping this
institution. As hon members know, we have not completed this process as
yet. We appreciate her co-operation, dedication and the work she has done
for us. We are going to miss her, and may God bless her.
Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek neem die vrymoedigheid om die
bedanking in Afrikaans te doen, want ek sien die agb Sekretaris het
Afrikaans tot in matriek gehad. Sy het ook Latyn tot in matriek gehad, maar
ek sal my daarvan weerhou om my bedanking in Latyn te doen!

Gedurende Desember 1997 het me Marion Monica Sparg by hierdie Huis
aangesluit en die groot taak as administratiewe hoof belas met die
administrasie van hierdie administratiewe warboel-huis aanvaar. Haar
aanstelling geskied ná 'n lang en omvangryke loopbaan in die ANC, en
daaroor gaan ek my nou nie uitlaat nie en sy sal my verskoon as ek dit nie
doen nie.

In haar CV sê sy haar loopbaandoelwit is om 'n bydrae te lewer tot goeie
regering en die transformasie van die openbare administrasie. Ons sê vir
haar dankie vir hierdie doelwit en vir haar vermoëns wat sy gebruik het om
in hierdie Huis rigting te gee juis ten opsigte daarvan.

Ons wens haar ook sterkte toe daar waar sy nou heen gaan, en ons glo dat sy
ook hierdie loopbaandoelwit sal aanpas en toepas, saam met haar vermoëns,
om in die kantoor van 'n vorige kollega van ons hier, Bulelani Ngcuka, 'n
wesenlike verskil te maak en ook 'n bydrae te lewer om misdaad in Suid-
Afrika in bedwang te bring. Ons wens haar sterkte toe en alles van die
beste. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, I am going to be so bold as to say
thank you in Afrikaans, because I see the hon Secretary had Afrikaans until
matric. She also had Latin until matric, but I will refrain from expressing
my thanks in Latin!

During December 1997 Ms Marion Monica Sparg joined this House and accepted
the big task as administrative head charged with the administration of this
administrative house of chaos. Her appointment followed a long and
extensive career in the ANC, and I am not going to comment on that now and
she will forgive me for not doing so.

In her CV she says that her career objective is to make a contribution to
good government and the transformation of public administration. We thank
her for this objective and for her abilities which she used to give
direction in this House precisely in this regard.

We also wish her everything of the best where she is now going, and we
believe that she will also adapt and apply this career objective, together
with her abilities, in the office of a former colleague of ours here,
Bulelani Ngcuka, to make a decisive difference and also to make a
contribution to bringing crime in South Africa under control. We wish her
well and everything of the best.]

Mr K D S DURR: Mr Chairman, I associate myself with the comments of my
colleagues. On behalf of the Western Cape, we wish Marion Sparg well. I
think that one needs to understand that these are epoch-making times for us
in our parliamentary history. New habits are being learnt, new conventions
are being established and implemented, complex arrangements are being made
and the people that work behind the scenes are the people that are making
all that happen.

Therefore it is not only a question of wishing one well, but on an
intergenerational basis saying to Marion Sparg that we are grateful for her
dedication and for the work she has done. We have not always known what she
has done, except to know that whatever she is doing, she is doing well and
that things are run smoothly. We do want to say that we appreciate it.
Obviously, her background as a journalist and in public administration as
well as her political pedigree has helped her.

She is a principled person. She has sacrificed much for her political
convictions over her lifetime and she has applied that same dedication
here. We appreciate that and we wish her well for the future.

Mr P G QOKWENI: Chairperson and members, as a representative of the UDM, I
wish to express regret here at having to lose the services of someone of
the calibre of Marion Sparg. However, unreservedly, we would like to join
others in this House in paying tribute to Marion for the valuable
contribution that she has made to the growth of this Chamber and for her
leadership role and the responsibilities she has discharged generally as a
participant in a collective that developed the conceptual framework of the
NCOP and, in particular, as a leader of the management support structure.

We pay this tribute in full recognition of the significance our new
democracy attaches to the effect of partnerships in transforming our
beloved country and of the fact that we each must act together like the
bricks that constitute the wall from which none of the bricks must fall out
to cause an unwanted hole. As a component of the political leadership, we
would not have realised the success that this NCOP has become, had it not
been for the dedication of Marion and her staff to partnership and
collective contribution.

We appreciate her humility in allowing South Africans to draw from her
wisdom and service to develop this institution into an effective agent of
co-operative governance and to strengthen participatory democracy.

We wish her success in her new career.

Ms C BOTHA: Chairperson, Marion Sparg's name has been known to me for a
very long time.

Although we may have differed with her methods, I think none could deny her
courage and the courage of her convictions. She did not hesitate to do what
she believed was right, no matter the consequences. I think her name will
stand in South African history with those of other women of courage that we
have bred.

What friends have told me about her is that she has always selflessly put
her own interests behind those which she considered to be the interests of
the country. In 1996, when she was offered a very lucrative position in the
private sector, she chose to serve the NCOP. I believe that she would
relate to a particular campaign in 1996, for which, I think, she coined the
slogan, ``Thanks a million!'' This slogan is probably appropriate at this
moment from the NCOP to her.

The DP wishes her well.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, members of the House, it is with sadness
that we gather to say goodbye to the NCOP's first lady Secretary, Marion
Sparg.

She will most certainly be remembered, mostly for bringing a degree of
stability and order to the NCOP process. During her term of office she
worked to see Salga properly incorporated into the NCOP process. She was
also the driving force behind the introduction of an information management
system for the NCOP. In many ways she operationalised the constitutional
constructs regarding the NCOP.
The IFP wishes her well in her future endeavours, knowing that she will
serve the people of South Africa well, wherever she goes.

Sithi-ke thina be-IFP: Hamba kahle, ndlelamhlophe. [We in the IFP say go
well, we wish you all the best.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Mr Chairperson, throughout our association with Marion
Sparg, I have found her to be a very competent person in her field of
operation.

I have found her to be a less talkative person, but somebody who always
displayed a very pleasant and likeable disposition.

On behalf of the UCDP I wish to congratulate her on her promotion or her
new field of operation. I wish her God's blessings.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Thank you, hon
members. On behalf of the presiding officers, I want to say to Marion that
we wish her well in her pastures new.

The Council adjourned at 10:58.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 10 MARCH 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 10
         March 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     National House of Traditional Leaders Amendment Bill [B 15
              - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Portfolio Committee
              on Provincial and Local Government - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 20973 of 10
              March 2000.]

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     1.     The Joint Programme Committee on 8 March 2000 took a decision,
         in accordance with Joint Rule 216, that the Lotteries Amendment
         Bill [B 13 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) be fast-tracked.


          In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in both
          Houses for ratification.


     2.     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


         Bills passed by National Assembly on 9 March 2000 and transmitted
         for concurrence:


         (a)     Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Amendment Bill [B
              11D - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Select
              Committee on Local Government and Administration - National
              Council of Provinces).


         (b)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 8B - 2000] (National Assembly
              - sec 76(1)) - (Select Committee on Finance - National Council
              of Provinces).


         Note:   During the Second Reading debate on the Division of
                  Revenue Bill in the Assembly, it was announced that the
                  following two technical alterations would be effected
                  administratively to the Bill agreed to, before its
                  transmission to the Council for concurrence:


                  (a)  That on page 8, in line 1, "3A, 3B to 3C" be altered
                       to "3A, 3B or 3C".


                  (b)  That on page 8, in lines 49 to 50, "assume the
                       responsibilities" be altered to "assume the relevant
                       responsibilities".

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication Board for
     1998-99.

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Nuclear Safety Council for 1998-
     99.

3.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    Report of the Medical Bureau for Occupational Diseases for 1998-
         99.


     (2)    Government Notice No 344 published in the Government Gazette No
         20848 dated 4 February 2000, Mental Health Care Bill published for
         comment.
     (3)    Government Notice No 93 published in the Government Gazette No
         20837 dated 4 February 2000, Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied
         Health Service Professions Amendment Bill published to inform the
         public that the Minister of Health intends to table the Bill in
         Parliament during 2000.


     (4)    Government Notice No 105 published in the Government Gazette No
         20855 dated 11 February 2000, Correction Notice to Government
         Notice No 10 of 7 January 2000 made in terms of the Choice of
         Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1996 (Act No 92 of 1996).


     (5)    Government Notice No R.137 published in the Government Gazette
         No 20880 dated 18 February 2000, Regulations regarding performance
         of community service by dentists made in terms of the Medical,
         Dental and Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974 (Act
         No 56 of 1974).

                            MONDAY, 13 MARCH 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Housing on 9 March 2000 submitted a draft of the
         Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Bill, 2000, and the memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Housing and the Select Committee on Public Services,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The following papers have been tabled and are referred to the
         relevant committees as mentioned below:


         (i)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
                 Committee on Health and the Select Committee on Social
                 Services:


                 (a)   Report of the Medical Bureau for Occupational
                     Diseases for 1998-99.
                 (b)   Government Notice No 344 published in the Government
                     Gazette No 20848 dated 4 February 2000, Mental Health
                     Care Bill published for comment.


                 (c)   Government Notice No 93 published in the Government
                     Gazette No 20837 dated 4 February 2000, Chiropractors,
                     Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions
                     Amendment Bill published to inform the public that the
                     Minister of Health intends to table the Bill in
                     Parliament during 2000.


                 (d)   Government Notice No R.137 published in the
                     Government Gazette No 20880 dated 18 February 2000,
                     Regulations regarding performance of community service
                     by dentists made in terms of the Medical, Dental and
                     Supplementary Service Health Professions Act, 1974
                     (Act No 56 of 1974).


         (ii)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
                 on Health, the Select Committee on Social Services and the
                 Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
                 Life and Status of Women:


                 Government Notice No 105 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 20855 dated 11 February 2000, Correction notice
                 to Government Notice No 10 of 7 January 2000 made in terms
                 of the Choice of termination of Pregnancy Act, 1996 (Act No
                 92 of 1996).


         (iii)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
                 on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on Economic
                 Affairs:


                 Report and Financial Statements of the Nuclear Safety
                 Council for 1998-99.


National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:
     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Committees, viz:


         NCOP Rules Committee:


         Appointed: Vilakazi, J N.
         Discharged: Bhengu, M J.



TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The Report of the Department of Education for 1998-99 [RP 62-2000].



COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
1.    The Chairperson and the Deputy Speaker, as co-chairpersons of the
     Joint Rules Committee, present the First Report of the Joint Rules
     Committee, dated 10 March 2000, as follows:


     The Joint Rules Committee, having considered proposals for the
     amendment of the Joint Rules, recommends the following amendments to
     the Joint Rules:


     Joint Rule 71:


    To amend Joint Rule 71 (dealing with the Joint Subcommittee on Support
    for Members) by the addition of the underlined words and the deletion
    of the words in bold brackets:


     Chairpersons


     71.    The [Deputy Speaker and the permanent Deputy Chairperson of the
              Council] chairperson of the Assembly Subcommittee and the
              chairperson of the Council Subcommittee are the co-
              chairpersons of the Joint Subcommittee.


G N M PANDOR     B MBETE
Co-chairperson   Co-chairperson
Joint Rules Committee  Joint Rules Committee
Parliament  Parliament

10 March 2000

Report to be considered.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
     on the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Amendment Bill [B 11D -
     2000] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 10 March 2000:


         The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration,
         having considered the subject of the Remuneration of Public Office
         Bearers Amendment Bill [B 11D - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
         76), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a section 76
         Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on the Lotteries
     Amendment Bill [B 13B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 10
     March 2000:


         The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having considered the
         subject of the Lotteries Amendment Bill [B 13B - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a
         section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
     on Ogies Municipality, dated 10 March 2000:


         The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration,
         having considered progress in respect of the intervention in the
         Ogies Municipality, reports as follows:


     A.     Background


         On 6 March 2000 a delegation of the Committee visited the Ogies
         Municipality in performance of the NCOP's constitutional
         obligation to regularly review interventions.


         The delegation comprised Mr M Bhabha (Chairperson), Mr E de Koker
         (Committee Secretary), Ms D le Roux (NCOP Procedural Services
         Manager) and Mr D Franks (NCOP Researcher).


     B.     Status of intervention


         The delegation confirmed that the Provincial Government would
         continue its intervention in Ogies. It also established that the
         Administrator's contract, which expired on 8 January 2000, would
         not be renewed.


         The Provincial Government has instead appointed a team of
         consultants from Peregrine Treasury Solutions to act as a
         Management Support Team (MST) in the municipality. The MST, who is
         funded by the Mpumalanga Provincial Government and the national
         Department of Provincial and Local Government, will assume
         responsibility for the performance of the municipality's financial
         obligations. All other executive obligations will be performed by
         the CEO.


     C.     Progress of intervention


         1. Provision of services


              There has been little improvement in the delivery of essential
              services. Recently, the town's electricity supply was cut off
              because the council failed to meet the payments due on its
              current account with Eskom. The electricity was reconnected
              after the Provincial Government entered into negotiations with
              Eskom. A payment plan will be finalised at a meeting between
              the National Energy Regulator, Eskom, the Provincial
              Government and the Ogies Municipality later this month.


              A bulk water supply project, involving a total of R2 million
              from the CMIP Funds, awaits approval from the Department of
              Provincial and Local Government. However, the current
              distribution of water has resulted in losses to the
              municipality because stolen water meters have made it
              impossible to bill certain consumers. There are plans to have
              the stolen meters replaced with plastic meters.


              The Ogies Municipality also awaits a decision by the
              Provincial Department of Housing and Land Administration to
              transfer land to the municipality for use as a legal dumping
              site. An environmental impact study will need to be done
              before the matter is finalised.


              The Provincial Government is presently investigating the
              possibility of temporarily appointing a Technical Manager to
              see to maintenance and repair work on municipal vehicles and
              equipment.


         2. Financial management


              The municipality is still not able to meet all of its
              financial obligations. Although the council has approved
              credit control and indigent policies, the implementation of
              these policies has been delayed by the process of verifying
              the indigents' register. The MST is responsible for completing
              this process.


              The MST is also responsible for compiling financial statements
              for the Ogies Municipality, which will then have to be
              approved by the Auditor-General.


              The municipality presently operates without any capital
              reserves or investments. Although it is able to meet its
              current operational expenditure, the municipality remains
              unable to pay its major creditors. The latest financial
              information in respect of the municipality puts its current
              debt at R36 322 514, while the municipality itself is owed an
              amount of R12 643 115.


              The Provincial Government has recently initiated a
              rehabilitation plan in this and other municipalities, which
              aims to revise the tariff structure, introduce cost
              curtailment measures in respect of operational and political
              expenditure, and establish sufficient pay-points and a proper
              billing system. However, the delegation learnt that the
              council was not charging interest on any of its arrears
              accounts. Following the visit of the delegation, the council
              has undertaken to review this policy.


         3. Administrative procedures


              The Provincial Government is not satisfied with the
              administrative procedures currently in place. The CEO is
              responsible for putting the necessary systems, procedures and
              policies in place.


         4. Meetings of council


              The council has not met since October/November 1999. However,
              following the visit by the delegation, councillors now appear
              willing to meet.


         5. Interface with community
              Despite attempts by the Administrator, councillors have not
              met regularly with the community. This has reinforced the
              community's lack of faith in councillors.


         6. Competency of councillors


              Although councillors remained competent to fulfil their
              legislative obligations during the course of the intervention,
              the executive committee of the council did not meet at all.


         7. Training of councillors


              Councillors have been offered skills and capacity-building
              courses in the area of their choice. However, due to their
              lack of response, nothing has materialised.


         8. Training of staff


              The Administrator was responsible for developing a training
              programme to improve the skills of the municipal staff.
              Personnel have regularly attended the courses on offer;
              however, staff in the Treasury Division are still in need of
              urgent training.


     D.     Recommendations


         The Committee recommends as follows:


         1. That the MST submit a business plan to the MEC and the NCOP by
              6 April 2000, identifying priorities, problem resolution
              mechanisms and time-frames for implementation.


         2.      That the CEO assume responsibility for the performance of
              all executive obligations, except the financial obligations of
              the municipality.


         3. That the CEO sign a performance management contract with the
              MEC for Local Government and Traffic in the Mpumalanga
              Province.


         4. That the council initiate programmes to win back the trust of
              the community.
         5. That the intervention continue.


     Report to be considered.

                           TUESDAY, 14 MARCH 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following paper was tabled on 10 March 2000 and is now referred to
     the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and the Select Committee on
     Social Services:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication Board for
     1998-99.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Education:
     (1)    Government Notice No 1398 published in Government Gazette No
         20650 dated 19 November 1999, Notification that the President has
         assented to the Education Laws Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No 48 of
         1999).


     (2)    Government Notice No 1399 published in Government Gazette No
         20651 dated 19 November 1999, Notification that the President has
         assented to the Higher Education Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No 55 of
         1999).


     (3)    Government Notice No 1400 published in Government Gazette No
         20652 dated 19 November 1999, Notification that the President has
         assented to the National Student Financial Aid Scheme Act, 1999
         (Act No 56 of 1999).


     (4)    Government Notice No 1422 published in Government Gazette No
         20666 dated 25 November 1999, Appointment of persons to serve as
         members of the South African Qualifications Authority made in
         terms of the South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act
         No 58 of 1995).
     (5)    Government Notice No 1423 published in Government Gazette No
         20669 dated 10 December 1999, Transfer of funds and other moveable
         assets of the State to the public schools made in terms of the
         South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).


     (6)    Government Notice No 1473 published in Government Gazette No
         20692 dated 10 December 1999, National policy regarding
         instructional time for school instructional offerings made in
         terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of
         1996).


     (7)    Government Notice No 82 published in Government Gazette No 20844
         dated 4 February 1999, Norms and standards for educators made in
         terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of
         1996).


