---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 May 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-05-11
---

THURSDAY, 11 MAY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Deputy Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -
       (a)  President Thabo Mbeki's unequivocal support for legitimate land
           claims in the context of decolonisation and the African
           renaissance, democracy and the rule of law in Zimbabwe, in his
           address to Parliament yesterday; and

       (b)  the positive response of the markets to the leadership given by
           President Thabo Mbeki yesterday;


  (2) commends the President for his wise and principled approach to the
       crisis in Zimbabwe; and

  (3) calls on all role-players in Zimbabwe, South Africa and the
       international community to support the President's tireless efforts
       to achieve peace, stability, justice for all and democracy in
       Zimbabwe.

[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  legislation relating to the regulation of firearms has yet to be
           tabled in Parliament;

       (b)  there is a high degree of public interest in this matter; and

       (c)  some 2 000 submissions by interested members of the public lie
           unopened and unread in a parliamentary office;


  (2) expresses its grave concern that the views of interested parties are
       being ignored in the drafting of the legislation; and

  (3) calls upon the Minister to give an explanation to this House and the
       public regarding whether he intends -


       (a)  proceeding with this legislation; and

       (b)  taking account of submissions from the public on this matter.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the killing of business people at Ulundi and that the culprits
       have not yet been arrested;

  (2) believes that the continued killing of IFP members at Nongoma is not
       acceptable at all;

  (3) urgently requests the police in the Nongoma-Ulundi area to arrest the
       culprits and secure the lives of the innocent people; and

  (4) notes with concern the raging debate about establishing a peace
       process in the area.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the appointment of a judicial commission of inquiry to
       investigate match-fixing allegations in cricket;

  (2) believes that the establishment of the commission will go a long way
       towards getting rid of corruption in sport;

  (3) commends the President, the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
       Development and the Minister of Sport and Recreation for establishing
       this commission; and

  (4) congratulates Judge Edwin King on his appointment as the chairperson
       of the commission.

[Applause.]

Mnr I J PRETORIUS: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -
  (1) kennis neem van 'n berig in Business Day van 9 Mei 2000 oor beweerde
       omkopery deur onwettige immigrante in die Lindela-repatriasiesentrum
       in Krugersdorp en dat die Adjunkminister van Binnelandse Sake, me
       Lindiwe Sisulu, regstappe teen M-Net se televisieprogram Carte
       Blanche oorweeg na aanleiding van 'n program wat op Sondagaand, 7 Mei
       2000, gebeeldsend is;

  (2) versoek dat vasgestel word of enige waarheid in die berig van
       Business Day steek dat onwettige immigrante 'n fooi betaal aan die
       firma Dyambu Operations, wat aan hoë-profiel-ANC-politici behoort, om
       deportasie uit Suid-Afrika vry te spring; en

  (3) versoek dat vasgestel word of die adjunkminister en ander eienaars
       van Dyambu Operations, naamlik die Adjunkspeaker, Baleka Mbete, en
       die Gautengse LUR vir openbare veiligheid, mnr Mokonyane, na
       aanleiding van bogenoemde berig oorweeg om 'n verklaring oor die
       aangeleentheid te doen.

[Tyd verstreke.] [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of
motion follows.)
[Mr I J PRETORIUS: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes a report in Business Day of 9 May 2000 on alleged bribery by
       illegal immigrants in the Lindela Repatriation Centre in Krugersdorp
       and that the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ms Lindiwe Sisulu,
       is considering legal action against M-Net's television programme
       Carte Blanche in consequence of a programme that was broadcast on
       Sunday evening, 7 May 2000;

  (2) requests that it be established whether there is any truth in the
       report of Business Day that illegal immigrants pay a fee to the firm
       Dyambu Operations, which belongs to high-profile ANC politicians, to
       avoid deportation from South Africa; and

  (3) requests that it be established whether the Deputy Minister and other
       owners of Dyambu Operations, namely the Deputy Speaker, Baleka Mbete,
       and the Gauteng MEC for public safety, Mr Mokonyane, are considering
       making a statement on the matter, in consequence of the above-
       mentioned report.

[Interjections.] [Time expired.]]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) is appalled at the dereliction of duty by the Premier of the Northern
       Province and his continuous refusal to announce the findings and
       recommendations of the Ralushai commission of inquiry, which was
       appointed way back in 1997 to investigate irregularities in the
       appointment of traditional leaders, the disputes over traditional
       leadership and the legitimacy of some traditional leaders, including
       paramount chiefs and kings;

  (2) notes that traditional leaders in the Northern Province are disgusted
       at the recent announcement by the Premier of the Northern Province
       when appealing for assistance by the traditional leaders to release
       and handle the Ralushai report;

  (3) is aware that the report was submitted, Nicodemus-like, to Rhyne
       Thulare Sekhukhune III and his half-brother Kenneth Kgagudi
       Sekhukhune by the premier;

  (4) is aware that the report is being withheld for petty political
       reasons, and that the premier is duty bound to release the report in
       terms of section 32 of the Constitution of the Republic of South
       Africa ...

[Time expired.]

Dr S A NKOMO: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the global pharmaceutical industry makes a profit of
       US $300 billion and that less than 10% of this is spent on medical
       research aimed at the poor, who make up 90% of the world's
       population;
  (2) recognises that there are unequal power relations between companies
       and governments in the developing world, resulting in monopolies on
       the distribution of drugs, causing artificially high prices;

  (3) urges the pharmaceutical companies to supply essential medication at
       affordable prices to governments or, failing this, to issue
       compulsory licences under the Patents Act for essential medication;
       and

  (4) calls on the pharmaceutical industry to withdraw its court action
       against the Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act of
       1997.

[Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House –


  (1) notes that -
       (a)  both President Mugabe and the white farmers in Zimbabwe have
           failed, since independence, to put in place an effective
           mechanism to address land distribution;

       (b)  such failure is one of the major contributors to the present
           land crisis;

       (c)  the war veterans do not have an exclusive right to land solely
           because they fought during the war; and

       (d)  the land belongs to the people of Zimbabwe as a whole; and


  (2) resolves that a land reform forum be established involving
       representatives from diverse communities of Zimbabwe, business and
       government, to address the issue.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDCP:


  That the House notes that -


  (1) the proposed introduction of a black language across the education
       system will prove beneficial in the long term for all South Africans;

  (2) ideal preparations have to be made to ensure that such indigenous
       languages are taught by speakers of those languages, so that learners
       will derive the maximum benefit;

  (3) the singing of the national anthem by all will ensure that at the end
       of the day all South Africans will develop the desired patriotism;
       and

  (4) the introduction of character-building movements such as the Scouts
       and Girl Guides should also be the norm if we hope to produce future
       South Africans of substance.

Mrs N B GXOWA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes with shock the submission of Busiswe Maqungo to the Portfolio
       Committee on Health in which she described how her HIV-positive baby
       died after being refused treatment;

  (2) endorses the Government's ruling that all Aids-related opportunistic
       infections should be treated and that HIV-infected people have equal
       rights to medical services;

  (3) calls on all medical professionals to honour their commitment to
       treat all in need of medical care and to be especially sensitive to
       the needs of those infected with the HI virus;

  (4) condemns the cruel and heartless treatment of baby Nomazizi Maqungo;
       and

  (5) urges the Department of Health to promote and distribute the
       patients' rights charter so that all patients and health
       professionals are aware of the rights of those needing medical
       treatment.

[Time expired.] [Applause.]
Mr N J CLELLAND: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the value of the rand improved as a consequence of
       President Mbeki's undertaking in this House that his Government will
       act against land invasions in this country and uphold the rule of law
       with regard to property rights;

  (2) trusts that the ANC Government will hold firm in this undertaking,
       even in the face of opposition from individuals within its own party
       and among its supporters; and

  (3) calls on President Mbeki to diplomatically suggest to his counterpart
       in Zimbabwe that a similar course of action would be desirable with
       regard to that country.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move:
  That, in view of the ongoing debate about the alleged cost of patent
  antiretroviral medicines and other medication for treating opportunistic
  infections linked to Aids, the House -


  (1) calls on the Minister of Health to engage urgently and actively in
       partnerships with all eight companies providing anti-Aids therapies
       in South Africa in order to ascertain the best possible prices that
       can be negotiated for bulk purchasing of the various medicines by the
       state; and

  (2) believes that in this way we will be able to put to bed, once and for
       all, speculations about whether or not it is necessary to abrogate
       patent rights, so that the Government can offer cost-effective
       treatment to millions of people with HIV; and

  (3) ascertains what the cost of such treatment would be to the state at
       current rates of infection.

Mrs M S MAINE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the increasing high rates of youth unemployment in South Africa;
           and

       (b)  that this affects mostly recent school-leavers and does not even
           spare graduates;


  (2) recognises that this is caused by the general lack of relevant
       skills, experience and poor education and training inherited from
       apartheid;

  (3) commends Government, labour and business for establishing funds for
       skills development programmes for the youth; and

  (4) urges the Government to speed up the implementation of the
       Presidential Jobs Summit's resolution with regard to employment of
       the youth.

Dr P J RABIE: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the recent alarming decline in the value of the rand in
       relation to the American dollar stopped when the hon the President
       announced in Parliament that the illegal repossession of agricultural
       land without compensation would not be tolerated in South Africa;

  (2) disagrees with the statement made by the hon the Minister of Finance
       to the Portfolio Committee of Finance on 9 May 2000 that the recent
       decline of the rand in relation to the American dollar is not
       attributable to untenable actions of the supporters of the Zanu-PF
       government in Zimbabwe, but to the strength of the US dollar; and

  (3) calls upon President Mbeki to repudiate President Mugabe in public to
       end the gross violation of human rights in Zimbabwe immediately.
[Interjections.]

Mr S ABRAM: Chair, I give notice that at the next sitting of the House I
shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the Government's intention of making available 2 million
       hectares of land to upcoming commercial farmers through the relevant
       provincial MECs; and

  (2) calls on the Government to ensure that -


       (a)  the said land is parcelled up into commercially viable economic
           units, so that genuine empowerment and employment opportunities
           and entrepreneurs are created;

       (b)  it creates mechanisms, for example co-operatives and finance at
           special rates, to assist such upcoming farmers;

       (c)  the expertise in the Department of Trade and Industry, the
           organised agricultural sector and all other stakeholders, be
           drawn in to ensure the sustainability of the entire process; and
       (d)  the entire process be regularly monitored and overseen by the
           Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs, which shall report
           regularly to Parliament.

Ms L M T XINGWANA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the continued suffering of and discrimination against women, in
           particular black women and young girls, because of laws of
           succession that are unconstitutional and discriminatory; and

       (b)  the critical situation of many black women and children who
           continue to be evicted and rendered homeless once their husbands
           or fathers die; and


  (2) urges the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to
       speed up the transformation of these inheritance laws, which continue
       to discriminate against women and children on the basis of their
       colour, religion and sex, and to ensure that these are consistent
       with our Constitution and Bill of Rights.

[Applause.]

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND
          TOURISM - AFRICAN-EURASIAN MIGRATORY WATERBIRDS AGREEMENT

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 21 - Minerals and Energy:

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, the Department of Minerals and Energy is
entrusted with important and precious resources of this nation, all of the
energy and all of the minerals. Actions we take, therefore, affect the
broader economy and society directly or indirectly. Minerals and energy
contribute significantly to the South African economy through exports in
raw and beneficiated form. Energy and mining also employ almost 400 000
workers. The RDP remains an important ideal and guide for the work that we
do. Energy is also important because it is a basic need, required to fulfil
reconstruction and development targets, and minerals are key in building
this economy, especially when value is added within our shores.

Our work has to be done within a sound, well-managed institution. Charles
Handy, the well-known English business guru, in his book Gods of
Management, refers to four Greek gods that, he says, symbolise the
different ways of managing organisations. He says one is a Zeus manager and
institution if one believes in patriarchal traditions and power. I hope, at
least on this side of the House, we do not have people like that. One is an
Apollo manager if one believes in order and reason, and an Athena manager
if one is a warrior and has a fighting spirit. The god Dionysus is for
creative individuals. Our department takes a leaf from all these gods,
except Zeus, of course, the god of patriarchy. With myself and the Deputy
Minister, Zeus has no chance. [Laughter.] But I will get back to this
analogy.

In pursuing the clearly set-out policy in our line of function, we seek to
improve the quality of our expenditure by ensuring that our limited
resources are used maximally. The Deputy Minister will elaborate on aspects
of our budget. While noting that excellent work is being done by officials
and support organisations, the time to re-engineer ourselves as a
department has come.

The department has finalised the process of strategically aligning its core
business and key objectives with the latest policy objectives and key
priorities of the Government. This has also provided us with a framework
within which our departmental organisation and establishment structure
should be determined. Major events in our calendar such as mining summits,
the unfolding integrated energy plan, our commitment to the protection of
the environment, and our commitment to rural development and to the
advancement of the social plan should, in many ways, direct us.

We are currently in a process of revising the structure of the department
so as to ensure that we have the capacity to deliver on our core mandate
and the unfolding challenges. It is evident, from our analysis, that the
size of our department is not comparable with the volume of the work that
we have to do, especially the energy component that was previously
designated as the energy council. We are not asking for a bigger
department, but what I will go on to explain is the creative way in which
we wish to re-engineer our department so that we can continue to do more
with less. I would like to extend a word of appreciation to and commend the
staff of the Department of Minerals and Energy on the quality and quantity
of work delivered with such limited capacity.

Our restructuring of the department will be guided by the following
principles: relevance to the future; improved service delivery; being in a
position to move staff in and around the department; and using project
management skills to deliver on time on special projects as well as
ensuring cost-effectiveness and quality of expenditure. To this end, a
system of performance management and development has been developed to
evaluate and identify both the performance and development needs of the
employees in the department. This system is linked to our strategic plan,
and we therefore envisage a management tool characterised by a structure
and quality of cadre capable of being deployed right across the structure
of the department.

The department is a technical and service institution charged with the
provision of quality service to have a profound impact on the quality of
life of our people, rich and poor alike. The department has to be
professional, humane and technically sound. In addition, we also have a
regulatory responsibility, which means that we should be able to manage
those projects that we are entrusted with.

We therefore see the importance of restructuring ourselves into a diamond-
shaped institution. The bulk of our staff, located in the stomach of the
diamond, will be highly promotable and will be mobile vertically,
horizontally and across all the work areas of the department. Our middle
management, therefore, in the belly of this diamond, will be critical and
will play a more permanent role. They will have to be creative in the
implementation of policy, like the Greek god Dionysus. They will have to be
good technocrats, like Apollo, and, like Athena, they must have a fighting
spirit in the pursuance of the challenges of reconstruction and
development.

Some of the training programmes that we have put in place in that regard
include mineral law administration and environmental management, a pupil
inspectors-of-mines programme, a gemology course for ourselves and for our
SADC member countries, a scholarship that takes students to Malaysia on
petroleum studies and various aspects of project management. I would like
to indicate that I am taking time to explain this because I believe that
only through having a sound institution with well-capacitated people in an
enabling environment, can we deliver on the task that we are charged with.

The Ministry, together with the officials, has worked very hard to isolate
the key areas on which we are expected to deliver. We are, indeed, poised
to go through very exciting times and will, in the process, empower many of
our younger cadres in the Department of Minerals and Energy to become well-
rounded technocrats and leaders, and reward those senior managers who
provide outstanding leadership and training opportunities to junior
managers. We intend to give an annual award to those senior managers who
are able to provide this leadership.

I would now like to look at our minerals area. Our new minerals policy can
only be truly appreciated within the context of our unfortunate history.
With the advent of mining law in South Africa, blacks were not allowed to
participate fully, except as labourers. In the mining industry, we had laws
on our Statute Book which expressly prevented and prohibited black people's
access to minerals, prospecting and mining rights.

For instance, the Mining Rights Act of 1967 provided that no prospecting
permit should be issued to any coloured person or any association of
coloured persons or any corporate body or company in which coloured persons
held controlling interests, any black, or any nominee of such a black
company. The provision was amended only in 1991; therefore it is barely 10
years that the prohibition of black participation in the minerals and
mining industry was removed from our Statute Book.

Hon members should bear in mind that the Constitution of the Republic of
South Africa requires Government to take legislative and other measures to
redress the results of the racial discrimination of the past. It is,
therefore, imperative that our mining laws must be able to address this
legacy.
In May 1998 my predecessor, Dr Penuell Maduna, uGubevu, gave a speech in
which he set out the new mineral and mining policy for South Africa, a
policy that I am also committed to, a policy that will, and should, lead to
a new mineral resource dispensation in South Africa, a policy that should
ensure that some of the aspects and remnants of the past are eradicated,
and result in a mining dispensation that is different from that that was
envisaged by Cecil Rhodes and perpetuated by his corporate offspring for
generations and generations.

Since January last year a committee consisting of senior officials of the
department has been converting the policy principles contained in the new
minerals policy into legislation. I would like to highlight aspects of the
proposed Bill on fundamental principles.

The most important principle contained in this chapter is that mineral
resources are part of our patrimony, with the state as the custodian of our
mineral resources, having the right to exercise full and permanent
sovereignty. The issues of redress and socioeconomic development, the
social responsibility of investors and sound environmental management are
some of the key considerations.
This proposed Bill also covers mineral resource management. In this section
we establish the criteria for the application of the use-it-and-keep-it or
use-it-or-lose-it principle. This simply means that the person who utilises
his or her mineral rights through either prospecting or mining will be
assured of security of tenure, while those who fail to do so will be
prevented from holding mineral rights and thereby excluding new
entrepreneurs. There will be submission of and access to prospecting and
related information in order to ensure that information gathered by
prospectors is not hoarded, but is made available to other entrepreneurs.

This proposed Bill will also cover mineral regulations. This section will
ensure that there is a regulatory framework for the new proposed minerals
and mining legislation, and it is through this section that we will also
seek to entrench black economic empowerment and increase the chances for
the creation of South African companies with both black and white working
together in genuine partnerships. The proposed Bill will establish the
mining and mineral resources development board, whose main function will be
to advise the Minister on various aspects of minerals and mining
legislation and policy.
An aspect of this proposed Bill is transitional arrangements which, I know,
most people in the industry are worried about. This is the core or the
transformation thrust of the proposed Bill. The chapter that deals with
this aspect settled the criteria to allow holders of rights relating to
existing and active prospecting and mining operations to obtain the new
form of prospecting or mining rights under the new dispensation. It also
allows us to normalise and bring uniformity to the minerals and mining
regulatory framework.

The proposed Bill will also repeal the current Diamonds Act and replace it
with a section that will allow us to encourage beneficiation and, once and
for all, to sort out the anomaly of the corporate governance of the SA
Diamond Board, where those who are regulated sit on the board and regulate
themselves. The Government is convinced that this will bring about major
transformation in the industry, and I would like to thank all those who
have worked with us in that respect.

In accordance with the resolutions of the Jobs Summit held in 1998 that we
should hold sector summits, we had a mining summit on 25 and 26 February
2000. The outcome of the summit was consensus on five sector strategies to
achieve the stated objectives, including an industry promotion strategy in
order to disseminate reliable information about the industry; a mineral
beneficiation strategy to both add value to exports and increase employment
levels; a strategy to manage the impact of cyclical volatility in the
mining industry to reduce job losses and alleviate the social impact of
downscaling when this does occur; and a co-ordinated rural development
strategy to enhance the potential for alternative forms of employment. The
Deputy Minister will say more about this, but I must highlight to members
that that was one of the most meaningful exercises that we have gone
through in this department.

Our associated institutions, in particular the Council for Geoscience and
Mintek, will continue to play an important role, as they did during this
summit, in order to make sure that we can effectively implement the
recommendations. These are both well-established and internationally
renowned institutions that will now be required to redirect their
capacities towards our newly identified national objectives in promoting
the minerals industry.

Progress on implementation is being made. Labour and the National Union of
Mineworkers, in particular, have provided and displayed a maturity which
has contributed to the progress that we are poised to make, and I would
like to thank the portfolio committee for their contribution in this
respect.

We are, indeed, focused in our objectives to advance the cause of the
mining sector as a sunrise industry like never before. This,
notwithstanding other developments such as the volatility of gold, the
slump in coal and the rise of the new economy. The mining industry,
contrary to the predictions of some prophets of doom, will outlive all of
us in this House. If it is not grown, it has to be mined. Everything that
we have is either grown or mined.

The microphone in front of me is mined, the spectacles hon members are
wearing are mined, the body parts of the car that they drive are mined,
their cellphones are mined, and the railings in this room are mined. I
cannot believe that anybody could even think that mining is a sunset
industry, because one will always need these things.

Ngithi kumaqabane masivumelane-ke ngokuthi izimbiwa ziyimpilo yethu. Ngeke
ize iphele le mboni. Inekusasa eligqamile, njengoba ngisho nje. Lokho
okungatshalwanga kwamila, kumbiwa emigodini. Okumbiwa phansi yikho okwakha
izindlu, izinsimbi, imizimba yezimoto, omabonakude njalonjalo.

Ake ngidlulele engxakini. Ingxaki ekhona yingxaki yamadayimane.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[To my comrades I say we must agree that mineral resources are part and
parcel of our lives. This industry will remain forever. I am sure that its
future is bright with hope. What has not been planted has grown naturally.
Here I am referring to the mines underground. Mineral resources are used to
build houses, for iron, car bodies, television sets and many other things.

Let me focus on the problem. The problem that we have concerns diamonds.]

A campaign against illicit diamonds has been raging. The Fatal Transactions
campaign run by European NGOs and some European governments, as well as by
the UN Security Council, has highlighted the way revenue of diamond and
petroleum products sales are being used to fund armed conflict in certain
African countries, especially Angola and Sierra Leone.

Ngithi kumaqabane nginebhadi-ke ngoba zombili lezi mboni zikimi: uwoyela
namadayimane lapho okugcwele khona otsotsi. [To my comrades I say I am
unlucky because I have both the oil and diamond industries, which are full
of thieves.]

The Ministers responsible for mining and minerals from diamond-producing
countries in Africa met in South Africa in February. We weighed the
different options that could be followed to find lasting solutions and to
avert the potential threat of conflict that diamonds have on the economies
of the producing countries.

As Ministers of energy, maybe we should also look at what could be done
about the oil industry problem because, like diamonds, it also contributes
negatively in some cases. We decided that a joint initiative of African
diamond-producing countries be established to address the potential threat
of conflict. We agreed, amongst others, on a set of regulatory monitoring
systems, which African governments should be responsible for, in order to
deal with illegal trade.
As I am talking to hon members, in Kimberley, there is a two-day conference
of international experts that we have convened in order to look at these
issues. Our standpoint, as South Africa and other Southern African
countries in particular, is that we need to enhance the mechanisms that we
already have in place that govern this industry, instead of accepting ideas
that are being forced onto us by northern countries. This will mean that
the regulation of this industry is going to become very difficult. In
addition, we do not want to fuel Afropessimism by insisting that diamonds
coming from Africa be marked in a specific way, which would then
distinguish them from diamonds coming from anywhere else in the world.

We also wish to ensure that the mining companies and shareholder interests
in those companies are, in some way, aligned with the needs of the
communities in which they operate and countries in which mines are
allocated, in order to stop the poverty that causes people to become so
desperate and to do some of the unthinkable things that are happening
there. At this juncture I would also like to highlight the problems we are
facing regarding the theft of metals and minerals in our mines. This poses
a significant danger, as syndicates are now operating underground. We hope
that the law-enforcement agencies will look into that.

I would like to move to energy. The development objective and vision that
the Department of Minerals and Energy has for energy provision in this
country is to ensure secure access to a balanced mix of alternative energy
sources to last us for decades, in fact, for centuries. Our purpose is to
satisfy the basic needs of our people by ensuring security of supply,
affordability for domestic and commercial users, efficiency and equitable
access to energy in those areas that are not currently serviced.

It is also our intention to improve the effectiveness of the electricity
industry by consolidating fragmentation and facilitating increased
competition over time. This can only be determined by our unique needs in
South Africa, such as the integrated development strategy, the African
renaissance, and our limited resources and access to energy sources. We
want to make sure that we promote electricity development in the region and
consolidate security of supply, not only for South Africa, not only for
SADC, but for the continent.

Energy is the engine for economic growth and development for both the
country and the region. South Africa enjoys the benefits of low-cost,
reliable energy. That will always be a strategic advantage for our country.
The electricity distribution industry is therefore a key to the entire
economy, and it is critical to protect this. Any changes that we make
cannot give up these established gains.

Recently, in a book launched by the National Electricity Regulator, or NER,
to mark 100 years of electricity in South Africa, we were shown very
fascinating insights regarding the role and the relationship between energy
and mining, and the important role that energy, and affordable energy in
particular, has played in ensuring that we have been able to develop our
industries and especially mining. We are also lucky that we have a very
effective utility, Eskom. It is internationally known and locally
acknowledged as a major top-performing business. Its technical performance
is amongst the best of the best, and its price is amongst the lowest in the
world, underpinning the viability of South African industry. It is also
highly regarded by investors and plays a significant socioeconomic role in
the region.

Eskom has just turned on their 2 000th switch for the year 2000. That, in
many ways, has demonstrated their capability. Government strongly supports
Eskom's strategic intent to be a pre-eminent African energy and related
services business of global stature, and to ensure that they become the
preferred partner in Africa and internationally. This is very strategic and
we want to ensure that, in the process of doing that, we introduce
competition at the same time and Eskom is also able to play a role in
assisting in the areas where we have not reached.

We have now moved from a number-driven electrification programme to a
strategy-driven approach. It is in this context that our national
electrification programme is evolving. Our plans are to match those of
housing, of water, of telecommunications and of the Department of Trade and
Industry, in order to ensure that energy is an engine for local economic
development and that we are able to bring energy to the 3 million
households which still do not have energy, in such a way that we enhance
the quality of their lives and their local economies.

In realising the Government's policy of universal access to energy, as
contained in the White Paper, it has become imperative that alternative,
nongrid electrification technologies be considered as an integral part of
our integrated energy plan for large-scale application. The Deputy Minister
will address this. Electricity distribution restructuring is proceeding.
Consultants were appointed.

Ngiyabonga kuBhungane ngokuthi angisize ngalaba bafana ukuze ukwazi ukuthi
lo msebenzi wami uqhubeke. Siyabonga kakhulu. [I would like to thank
Bhungane for assisting me with these boys so as to enable me to continue
with my work. Thank you very much.]

The electricity sector is initiating a new wave of technological innovation
as it faces the challenge of meeting South Africa's economic needs beyond
the first decade of this century. To meet these needs in the most
competitive, cost-effective and environmentally sustainable manner, Eskom
has, over the last years, been developing its research and development
capacity to inform its integrated electricity planning process, and we hope
that will make a contribution.

In particular, we would want to indicate the appreciation that Government
has for Eskom's efficient lightning initiative, aimed at reducing
electricity demand, increasing efficiency and reducing emission through the
promotion of compact fluorescent light bulbs throughout South Africa. In
their pigeonholes, hon members will find globes which light eternally,
courtesy of Eskom, as a demonstration of the technologies that are evolving
in order to save energy. [Applause.]

I would like now to move to another issue, and in the process give hon
members exciting news. Yesterday, at 22:30, oil started flowing from South
Africa's second oil field at a rate of 10 500 barrels per day. This
represents approximately 3% of South Africa's crude oil requirements. The
Oryx field is expected to produce oil for at least three years. Soekor
Exploration and Production, South Africa's state-owned oil company,
developed the field in record time and within the budget. I am glad that we
have been able to achieve this. [Applause.]

The liquid fuels industry presents Government with a number of policy
challenges, which were outlined in the recently published White Paper. The
main policy challenges for this sector include the following: an efficient
and internationally competitive liquid fuels industry; an equitable balance
between the interests of the industry, participants and consumers; an
industry supportive of Government's broader social and economic goals; and
a meaningful inclusion of historically disadvantaged groups.

The Government believes that the desired attributes for the industry will
ultimately be met in an environment of minimal Government intervention.
However, the environment will be regulated. Therefore we are talking about
deregulation in a regulated industry and reregulation. A six-person task
team has been appointed, and must look into these matters to ensure that
25% of the industry is ceded to black economic empowerment, which must
include women. This six-person task team will include Government, the SA
Petroleum Industry Association or Sapia and the African Minerals and Energy
Forum, or Amef.

The past year has been very difficult for this sector, especially for
consumers of petrol, from a pricing point of view. Oil prices rose by 300%,
and the rand-dollar exchange rate declined by 7,9%. Despite this, over the
same period the petrol price only rose by 28%. So even though members and
the general population felt that the petrol price was very high, we did our
best to ensure that we cushioned, to some extent, that pain.
We, however, had serious challenges to the structure of the oil companies
in South Africa. The ownership structure of oil companies poses a major
constraint to attaining empowerment objectives, to some extent, and that is
why that has to be managed. In general, the major oil companies operating
in South Africa are not South African owned, nor do they make shares
available for local purchase. Only Sasol is South African, while Total has
42% South African ownership. Therefore there is a need to find a mechanism
that will ensure that the oil industry complies with the aspirations of the
people of South Africa.

Black companies currently only hold less than 3,7% of the petroleum
products market. Much of this has been in form of bulk sales to big
clients. Adjusting the figures to a worldwide 20%-stake in Petronas/Engen,
the figure increases to 9%, which is still insignificant. This is why the
black economic empowerment process, which is needed prior to any change in
regulation, is so critical.

With regard to oil and gas, the hard work done by the petroleum agency is
showing signs of paying dividends. Recently, Forest Oil announced that they
had found a significant gas field offshore on the west coast - about 80km
offshore. We need to look at this with a lot of interest, because it could
dramatically change the profile of our energy supply.

As promised in the White Paper, we are reorganising the Central Energy
Fund. The national oil company will have been put together by the end of
July, because work there is proceeding. Soekor and Mossgas are going to
form one company - a commercialised company under the Central Energy Fund,
while the rest of the CEF will be a company that will look after the
strategic interests of the country, regulatory matters and development. We
are, therefore, encouraged that this will ensure that the resources that
are there in the Central Energy Fund will be used effectively for the
people of South Africa.

This department has done a lot of work in the area of rural development,
especially focusing on those areas that are dense labour-sending areas, the
areas to which miners go back once they are retrenched. I am pleased that
there has been co-operation between the industry, the unions and Government
in order to ensure that we are able to achieve that. I would like to thank
the many departments that have worked with us in that respect and, in
particular, the many workers and NGOs who continue to assist us in order to
realise this.

In conclusion, I would like to thank my Deputy Minister for her cameraderie
and wit; my director-general for unfailing loyalty and leadership; all our
senior managers who are workaholics; all our staff at all levels;
colleagues and leaders in associated institutions; colleagues in labour and
business; the research institutions the Energy Development Research Centre,
the Mineral and Energy Policy Centre and the Institute for Policy and
Social Research; my staff in the Ministry for their amazing capacity to
tolerate me and be ever ready to serve, literally, at any hour of the day;
my family for their sacrifice and support; my parents in Durban and at
iXesi; and the committee, as well as my chairperson, who is so original and
so exciting to work with. [Applause.]

Mnuz D M NKOSI: Sihlalo, oNgqongqoshe namaSekela, Sekela Mongameli,
ngiyanibingelela. ISabiwomali 21 seziMbiwa nezaMandla siyasemukela. Kukhona
isicelo sokuthi izindleko, izikweleti namacala ngenunzi kwedluliselwe futhi
kwehlukaniswe kwisabelo sezimali.

UNgqongqoshe ophethe izimali kumele abheke labo okufanele bakhokhelwe
ngokwenza umsebenzi. Uhlelo olusha lukaHulumeni luzokwenza ukuthi sibheke
iziphakamiso zokuguqula indlela umnyango omi ngayo. Kufanele ukuthi
uMnyango wezokuMbiwa Phansi nezaMandla ube ngendlela yokuthi sikwazi
ukufeza izidingo zabantu nomnotho wezwe.

Ikomidi lizoxoxisana ngokuthi iSabiwozimali sisebenze esikhathini
esingaphezulu konyaka ngokubonisana ngohlaka lweSikhathi esiPhakathi
Nendawo lokuSetshenziswa kweziMali [Medium-Term Expenditure Framework]
okuzodlulela eminyakeni emithathu eSabelweni seziMali. Okubalulekile
engifuna ukukhuluma ngakho ngumsebenzi wekomidi. Ngokubambisana,
singamalungu ekomidi, sikwazile ukuvakashela abasafufusa kwabezimayini
ezindaweni zaKwaZulu-Natali, eNyakatho-Kapa kanye naseMpumalanga.
Esikubonile kuyasisiza ukuthi sibe nolwazi olungcono ngempilo yabantu
bakithi. Kunesidingo sokuthi abantu abafuna ukuziphilisa ngezimbiwa
banikezwe ulwazi, izinto zokusebenza, amakhono kanye nemali.

Siyakujabulela ukubonisana okufana nokweBakubung mining initiative futhi
sikhuthaza ukuthi uNgqongqoshe akwakhele phezu kokubonisana ukuthuthukisa
umnotho wezwe lakithi. Ngibonga umoya omuhle ezinkampanini ezinkulu
ezinjengo-Chamber of Mines no-Billiton nabanye ngokuzosiza ukuthi sikwazi
ukuxoxisana ngempumelelo.

Abantu abamnyama nabesifazane kufanele basebenze ngokusemthethweni yikhona
uHulumeni ezothola intela. Abebayo nabangasebenzi ngokomthetho bazothola
ithuba lokuthi bakhe umnotho ngokubambisana noHulumeni. Ngizophakamisa
ekomidini esikhathini esilandelayo ukuthi izinkampani ezintsha ezifana no-
ERPM no-Rainbow Minerals, oKuyasa kanye nezinye, zikwazi ukuxoxisana
nekomidi ukubhekelela ikusasa labantu abamnyama nabesifazane ezimayini.

Ngesonto eledlule ikomidi lavakashela emigodini yegolide. Ezinye zezinto
ezimqoka ezivelile ngukuphucula intengo yezimbiwa kanye namalungelo
ezimbiwa, ezempilo nezokuphepha emgodini. Ngabe uNgqongqoshe wezemiSebenzi
uzokuthatha konke yini lokhu na? Kukhona amahlebezi athi iKhabhinethi
seyisithathile isinqumo ngalokho. Silindele ukubonisana noNgqongqoshe
namalungu ekomidi ngeLebowa Minerals Trust futhi sizimisele ukubambisana
nayo yonke imiphakathi nezinhlangano ezithintekayo.

Kuzobaluleka ukuthi uNgqongqoshe noMnyango wezokuMbiwa Phansi nezaMandla
balungiselele ukuthi sibonisane ngendaba yentengo kaphethilolo kanye
nodizili nopharafini. Okunye ngukuthuthukisa isimo somnotho kwabamnyama
ngokomgomo kaHulumeni wokuthi u-25% unikezwe abantu abamnyama.

Mayelana nowoyela ikomidi lePhalamende, ngokombiko womVikeli womPhakathi,
libonisana ngendlela yokuxazulula impikiswano phakathi kukaQabane uMaduna
owayenguNgqongqoshe wezokuMbiwa Phansi nezaMandla nehhovisi likamCwaningi-
Jikelele wamaBhuku. Ziningi izinto ezibalulekile ezivelile malungana
nomkhakha wemboni kawoyela okufanele sizibheke. Ngicela uNgqongqoshe
aphawule.

Kuqala unyaka, mhla ziyi-15,16 ne-18 kuFebhuwari 2000, saxoxisana nezakhiwo
esisebenzisana nazo kanye neziGungu zeSayensi. Kuyacaca ukuthi umsebenzi
usemningi. Sidinga ucwaningo ngezidingo zezwe nokuthuthukisa amakhono
abantu. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu speech
follows.)

[Mr D M NKOSI: Chairperson, I take pleasure in saluting hon Ministers,
their Deputies and the hon the Deputy President. We accept Vote No 21 of
the Department of Minerals and Energy. There is a request to reduce costs,
debts and cases of nuclear energy and that these must not be included in
the budget.

The hon the Minister of Finance should consider those who should be paid
for doing the job. The Government's new programme will enable us to look at
the proposals to change the way the Department of Minerals and Energy is
structured. It should be structured in a way that enables us to focus on
people's needs and on the economy of our country.

The portfolio committee will discuss how the budget was used a year ago by
referring to the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework which will be
transferred to a three-year budget. The important thing I want to talk
about is the work of the committee. As a committee we were able to visit
small miners in KwaZulu-Natal, the Western Cape and Mpumalanga. What we
have seen has assisted us in getting a clear picture of the lives of our
people. There is a need to empower those who want to undertake a mining
venture with knowledge, implements, skills and money.

We are happy about the discussions like the one of the Bakubung initiative.
We encourage the hon the Minister to establish the economy of our country
on the foundation of consultation. I would like to express our gratitude
for the good spirit big companies like the Chamber of Mines, Billiton and
others have shown by making our negotiations with them a success.

Black people and women should be officially employed so that the Government
will be able to tax them. Thieves and unofficially employed people will
then have an opportunity to build the economy together with the Government.
Next time I will propose to the committee that new companies like ERPM,
Rainbow Minerals, Kuyasa and many others should negotiate with committees
to enable them to look at future opportunities for black people and women
in mining.

Last week the committee visited the gold mines. Important issues that were
discussed included the need to improve the price of mineral items, mineral
rights and health and safety in mines. Will the hon the Minister of Labour
accept all these proposals? There are rumours that the Cabinet has already
taken a decision on this matter. We are waiting for a chance to negotiate
with the hon the Minister about the Lebowa Minerals Trust. Again, we are
prepared to co-operate with all communities and organisations concerned.
It will be important for the hon the Minister and the Department of
Minerals and Energy to be prepared to enable us to negotiate successfully
about the price of petrol, diesel and paraffin. Another issue is that of
improving the economic situation of black people in line with the
Government's policy that says 25% of the economy should be given to black
people.

Regarding oil, according to the Public Protector, the parliamentary
committee will try to resolve the split between the former Minister of
Minerals and Energy, Comrade Maduna, and the office of the Auditor-General.
There are many issues that have cropped up regarding the oil industry which
need to be discussed. I want the hon the Minister to commitment on this.

Early this year, from 15, 16 to 18 February, we, together with the Science
Council, negotiated with structures with which we work. It is clear that
there is still a lot to be done. Research into people's needs and into how
to improve people's skills must be undertaken. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Chairperson, I note the Minister's comments about the new
minerals and energy Bill which is in the pipeline. I would like to say this
to the Minister: The DP is very conscious of the need for black empowerment
in the mining industry, as well as the needs of small-scale miners in that
regard. However, we are also very conscious of rights entrenched in the
Constitution, and accordingly we will be monitoring how the Minister
reconciles these two competing interests when the Bill comes before the
House.

I wish to focus in this debate on the liquid fuels industry and the
anomalies in the pricing structure which lead to higher fuel prices. In
April, as the Minister said, we saw the fuel price in South Africa jump 35
cents, to a record of 322 cents per litre. We accept, as the Minister has
pointed out, that the fuel price is sensitive to the dollar price of crude
oil and therefore, inasmuch as the dollar price of Brent has hit record
levels in recent months, the blame cannot be shouldered entirely by
Government. However, fuel is probably the last commodity vital to the
economy which is still regulated and it is clear that the way prices are
determined has the effect of boosting the consumer price of fuel.

We have to ask ourselves a simple question: Why is fuel at the pump in
South Africa 50 to 60 cents cheaper in neighbouring states, despite the
fact that they do not have a synfuel producer in the form of Sasol and
Mossgas, which produce 40% of our fuel requirements. These anomalies need
to be answered. Part of the answer lies, of course, in the fact that our
oil industry is regulated and structured in a way that has produced
effective monopolies in the supply chain.

The first anomaly, on which I am pleased to say Government has finally
acted, is the 8 cents a litre levy for the Equalisation Fund, which was
used to subsidise Sasol and Mossgas when the oil price dropped below
certain levels. This direct subsidy came to about R1,5 billion a year, but
because synfuel makes up 40% of all fuel produced in South Africa, and
because the levy is paid on all fuel produced in South Africa, Sasol and
Mossgas received not just 8 cents a litre, but an effective 20 cents a
litre on their own production. If one looks at the way in which Sasol has
been making profits over the past few years, one sees that it has been well
over R8 billion over the past decade.

The original agreement which provided for the subsidy was designed, and
rightly so, to make Sasol viable in the event of low crude oil prices. But
the agreement also provided for Sasol to contribute to the fund when the
dollar price of oil was above a certain level. The original agreement,
effective from 1 July 1989, provided for Sasol to pay back this protection
to the Central Energy Fund, that is 25% of additional profits before
taxation, when the crude oil price rose above the critical level, at that
stage $28,70. This had to be the case in order to make sure that there was
a proper distribution of the risk in that industry. Since the ANC
Government came to power, no contribution has been received from Sasol,
despite the fact that the dollar price of oil has been above this critical
level. Government needs to explain why this vital clause in the agreement
has suddenly disappeared, to the detriment of the consumer.

Also in urgent need of attention is the distortion caused by the arbitrary
price fixing by monopolies such as the pipeline and rail systems. While we
are talking about that, we also need to ensure level playing fields in
respect of not only the pipeline and rail systems but in terms of road
transport as well. We have to make sure that they compete on level playing
fields in terms of the distribution of fuel throughout South Africa. To
hold down costs throughout the country is vital. The cost of transporting
fuel has to be competitive and tariffs have to be set at realistic levels,
not the arbitrary levels we have at the moment.

Another anomaly that needs to be rectified - and it goes back to Sasol - is
the 4 cents a litre customs and excise duty on fuel - I repeat, customs and
excise duty - even though 40% of the country's requirement is produced
locally by Sasol and Mossgas. That is an anomaly that Government has to
explain.

Finally, the status and enforceability of the rationalisation plan needs to
be discussed as a matter of urgency. Petrol stations are springing up all
over the place, resulting in uneconomic levels of pump throughput,
resulting again in an average loss for fuel retailers of something in the
region of 0,7 cents a litre. This is just plainly unsustainable and adds to
the inefficiency of the industry, and ultimately a further demand for
higher fuel prices at the pump. Petrol stations are effectively kept
solvent by cross-subsidisation from forecourt boutiques or, more
worryingly, disguised vertical integration by the major oil companies.

Clearly the industry has to be restructured and reregulated, as the
Minister says, as a matter of urgency. Our Government accepts this.
However, the White Paper sets certain milestones before this can take place
- one of them, as the Minister has reiterated, being the 25% black
empowerment presence in the industry. The DP has no problem with black
empowerment in this industry, but this has proved to be a major difficulty
and a major obstacle to the much-needed reregulation of the industry.

During the days when the White Paper was drawn up, the country was
experiencing a boom in black empowerment companies. Conditions today are
much more difficult and those companies are finding it difficult to raise
the necessary risk capital, even more so in the case of the oil industry
where returns on capital are at the lowest level in a decade - down from
11,8% in 1990 to 4,5% in 1998. Now no entrepreneur is going to invest in an
industry where levels are so low and where the length of time that one is
going to have to wait in order to get that return is very long.

In this connection, I think even Government itself has recognised problems
there, and that is why the black empowerment commission ...
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: We look forward to the Minister reregulating this industry
as a matter or urgency.

Mr J H NASH: Mr Chairperson, Deputy President, Minister and Deputy
Minister, I am very happy to be able to address this House today. I am very
pleased that we have decided to utilise the bulk of the budget to ensure
rural development. Energy is a very important aspect of rural development
to ensure the success of modern health and technology.

Today I want to deal with other energy forms important for rural
development, and in particular with paraffin and gas. I have always
contended that the paraffin and liquid petroleum gas prices should not be
linked to the inbound landed costs or IBLC and international produce
prices, as these products are produced through local refining, and not
imported as the import parity pricing system currently implies.

Paraffin is one of the most important components of energy in the rural
areas. What has recently been noticeable is that when the petrol price
increased by 6%, the diesel price by 9%, the paraffin price rise was far
larger at approximately 14%. It is not possible to see how the paraffin
price increase is the highest, even though it is refined from the same
barrel with the same rand-dollar exchange rate.

This is the price that affects the rural communities most, as it is the
fuel of the poor. The oil companies do not seem to be willing to make fuel
affordable for the poor. Even the retail firms are exploiting the
situation, as the large chain stores charge prices far in excess of the
suggested price. This is as a result of the fact that the Department of
Minerals and Energy deregulated the price of five-litre paraffin cans.
After the deregulation of five-litre cans, the paraffin price seems to be
higher than when it was a regulated commodity.

This should be a lesson to the DP, which naively believes that deregulation
is the universal panacea to high commodity prices. Then again, it is by
historical accident that the DP is in the opposition benches, as with its
future vision for the industry, it should rather have been a liquid
petroleum gas company, because its proposals are pure hot air and gas.
[Laughter.] The paraffin price is not transparent and this needs to change,
as the secrecy of the past should not dominate the industry in the present.
[Interjections.] I want to give you a drink of paraffin, perhaps!
[Laughter.]

In other countries, liquid petroleum gas is a third of the price that it
costs in South Africa. Here again, the high price is due to the problematic
pricing formula for liquid petroleum gas. The oil company, in making
exorbitant profits from liquid petroleum gas, puts it out of reach of the
people who need it most. Our new national gas discovery off the west and
east coasts should provide an impetus for cheaper gas to the Cape rural
communities. As this is not imported gas, Government should give priority
to these gasfields. In the final analysis, gas is a product of the energy
chain which is key to rural development, and should become a major focus
area for Government. Government should seriously consider re-examining the
IBLC pricing mechanism in order to effect changes to the apartheid pricing
formula which overrewarded the oil companies at the expense of the
consumer.

Black economic empowerment in the oil industry has not yet occurred in a
meaningful way owing to the reluctance on the part of the oil industry to
effect genuine empowerment. [Interjections.] While some oil companies claim
that in the retail sector the percentage of black dealers is close to the
White Paper on Black Economic Empowerment's target, the reality is still
that of apartheid. Lucrative sites are still based on apartheid norms as
dealers reflect the former Group Areas Act. Some oil companies bleed black
service station dealers dry through the erosion of dealer margins and by
unfairly increasing the cost of leases. They also do not hesitate to take
prominent members of the community to court as part of the process of
squeezing out black dealers. This is part of a strategy tending towards
vertical integration. [Interjections.] In the near future, Government will
have to call for an inquiry into conditions of black service station
dealers, which might include public hearings. The time for change in the
liquid fuel industry is now.

Electrification is also a matter which needs to be examined. The fact that
we are trying to use low levels of power when we should be using 20
kilowatts of power, should come to an end. The supposed rationale for this
is that it is expensive to install power lines. The long-term quality of
electrification programmes needs to be carefully assessed.

I have been pleading for a long time now for a poverty tariff, and this is
what I want to end off with today. Surely pensioners and the unemployed can
benefit from a tariff which is set for the poor. We are skirting around
this matter, playing the fool around pricing. We are sick and tired of
hearing that the poor must suffer. In a period of enlightenment, we cannot
take seriously the perspective of parties who believe that deregulation
will solve the apartheid legacy. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers present and hon
members, the Minerals and Energy portfolio is one of those portfolios which
could make South Africa realise its full economic potential. It has to be
recognised that this department has had three Ministers within the past six
years. The present Minister is now saddled with the tremendous task of
delivering to the people. In spite of the difficult decisions that will
have to be taken, we appear to be facing in the right direction.

I believe that if the Department of Minerals and Energy and the portfolio
committee continue to work together, as we have in the past, we can achieve
magnificent results. The IFP will continue vigorously to represent its
view, but also to support all solid and good policies. What is of great
significance is that the department's share of the total budget,
incorporating the allocations to the associated institutions, has again
increased in the current financial year. The ratio of allocation currently
stands at 67% to the associated institutions and 33% to the department
itself, whereas it was 70% to 30% in the previous financial year. Although
the difference in ratio of allocation appears small, it is highly
significant, as it continues a trend that was established in 1996. The
trend should be encouraged, as it has long been argued that the associated
institutions represent too large a drain on the resources of the
department.

It should be noted that the amount allocated to the repayment of nuclear
energy loans has decreased by about R49 million, as opposed to the increase
of about R62 million in fiscal year 1999-2000. This is a welcome reduction,
but it should be kept in mind that the loan repayment amounts vary from
year to year due to the different repayment schedules of the financial
institutions involved.

The allocation for the next financial year, 2001-02, might therefore again
represent an increase in this allocation. While it is accepted that these
loans have to be repaid, it remains disconcerting that the repayments
continue to represent a financial drain on the resources of the department.
It is recommended that the department be assisted in its endeavours to move
the loan repayments to another state department, for instance the
Department of Finance or the Department of State Expenditure. In this
manner the skewing effect that the loans have on the budget of the
Department of Minerals and Energy would be removed and a more accurate
picture would emerge.

The increase of some R8,7 million in the budget allocation for the
promotion of mine safety and health should be applauded, as it demonstrates
the department's commitment to improving the work environment of South
Africa's mineworkers. In the previous financial year this allocation was
increased by R2 million, and it is to be hoped that further increases will
follow in the years to come. What is really required is increased
allocations to the training of mine inspectors and to the system of
ensuring compliance with the Mine Health and Safety Act. Without the latter
two aspects being strenghtened, it is futile to expect a dramatic drop in
accident and fatality rates on South African mines.

The allocation to mineral development has been increased by R6,7 million,
but again most of this increase will go towards the improvement of
conditions of service. Part of the increase will be used for expenditure on
developing the small-scale mining sector. This aspect should be supported.

A matter falling under the minerals and energy umbrella is the fuel pricing
mechanism used in South Africa. It is well known that we have no control
over the major inputs to the petrol and diesel price, that is,
international oil prices and our foreign exchange rates against the dollar.
But it is equally well known that more than 50% of the fuel price paid by
the customer is due to Government taxes and levies on the basic price.

The Department of Minerals and Energy is currently reviewing the pricing
mechanism, but it is not expected that this process will lead to major
savings for the customer. The only way to achieve the latter would be to
reduce the portion of Government taxes and levies, but in order to do this
alternative sources of revenue should be found. One alternative would be
that the income from fuel taxes and levies be replaced from the National
Revenue Fund, to which all South Africans contribute through their personal
and corporate taxes. This would, no doubt, create a huge dilemma for the
Minister of Finance, but would improve tax collection by the SA Revenue
Service.

It should be noted that the budget allocation to Mintek and the Council for
Geoscience has decreased by R4 million and R3 million respectively. The
main reason for the decrease is the process followed by the Department of
Arts, Culture, Science and Technology when deciding the allocations of the
various science councils. The so-called competitive funding system has a
high premium, and is already bringing in additional revenue that the state
would otherwise not have had.

However, to return to the decreased allocation to Mintek, it should be
noted that new technology is urgently required in order for South African
mining to position itself for the future. This is especially true in the
case of gold mining, in which depths of mining are ever increasing. If
South African gold mines do not possess the technology to mine gold at
ultra-deep levels, it could reasonably be expected that some of the biggest
gold producers would have close some of their operations in the next 10 to
20 years.

This will have a major negative impact on employment levels and revenue
generation. Mintek is ideally placed to tackle the question of deep-level
mining, in conjunction with private mining companies, and its budget
allocation should, therefore, in future be increased for this specific
purpose.

Overall the 2000-01 budget of the Department of Minerals and Energy is
supported by the IFP, with the reservations I have mentioned. The budget
shows a definite commitment to fiscal discipline and gives effectiveness to
Government's recognition that the mining and energy sectors are important
role-players in the growth and development of the South African economy.
[Applause.]

Mr S K LOUW: Madam Speaker, allow me to focus on a very important issue in
our country - the mining industry, which is supported by an extensive and
diversified resource base and has, since its inception, been a cornerstone
of South Africa's economy.

While we have been looking with a critical eye at the activities in the
mines, the gold price has been on the edge. The impact that the gold price
could have on marginal mines could lead to a devastating situation in the
workplace, and raise alarming concerns for companies having to deal with
the problem of restructuring the workforce. The legacy of retrenchment
remains behind as a festering social problem for our country.

The changes which have come about in our country make it necessary to
prepare the industry for the challenges which are facing all South Africans
as we approach the 21st African century. I want to commend the Minister on
her statement at the opening of the mining summit:


  In the 21st century Africa is not going to allow a white mining industry
  to continue.

But while we are preparing ourselves to take on these challenges we must
focus on the demanding aspects of the mines. We are producing gold in our
country, but what we desperately need to work on is the liberalisation of
gold in our country. The sales of gold will definitely enhance the gold
price as we would then be able to allow the regional authorities to appoint
agencies and sell gold and platinum on the domestic market for the new
entrepreneurs in the jewellery industry. Through this process, we shall be
able to jack up the beneficiation programme for the disadvantaged people.

I fully agree that the Minister and the tripartite structure should
establish a beneficiation committee that could drive this programme. It is
also important to know that the tourist, as well as the disadvantaged
Atteridgeville entrepreneurial jeweller, would certainly welcome this
opportunity.

I am from a mining constituency and I would be failing in my duty if I did
not touch on the nerve centre of the mining industry, that is health and
safety. My constituency had to face a serious mining fatality and witnessed
how the enthusiasm of the miners was nowhere to be found. The morale and
the comradely working spirit were lacking, being threatened by the cloud of
death hanging over the mining community. The rescue workers and medics were
emotionally moved as they struggled to pull out the bodies of the deceased
on stretchers at the Mponeng and ARMS gold mine in Orkney. I want to salute
those comrades, whom we remember today, for the role they played in the
restructuring of the mining industry through their untimely deaths and
severe injuries.

I know that the department has been historically underresourced, and needs
to increase its budget to allocate personnel and resources to integrate and
collaborate with departments such as Housing, Health, Environmental Affairs
and Tourism, and Transport on cross-cutting policy challenges. We must bear
in mind that the responsibility for safety can no longer be passed onto the
shoulders of mine owners and mine inspectors. Responsibility should be
borne by the workers as part of the alliance agreement. We have to move
forward with much more renewal in the areas of health and safety, and we
must continue to do so in order to maintain the low fatality rate and
remain on top of issues. It is absolutely important for the workers to know
that the involvement of the employees is critical. The employees must
create passion with regard to safety in the hearts and minds of people.

The continuation of training models and safety must be part of our pride in
the workplace. The alliance should know that, together, we shall be able to
reach our goal for improving safety. We must create a culture of
involvement through which the capabilities and competence of employees are
lifted. This I observed during our study group tour at the West Driefontein
mine, where a trusting culture is developed through leadership credibility.

The creation and maintenance of an efficient tripartite structure is built
upon sufficient planning and appropriate strategy direction. The need to
train and establish proto teams to rescue the injured is critical for each
mine. This was an emotional issue for the rescue teams that were brought in
from other mines to the ARMS gold mine in Orkney.

Miners are familiar with the environment at their mines and would be in a
position to identify the place of the accident more easily and faster, and
even shorten the delaying process of searching for those in need of rescue
and any casualties, and injuries can be attended to immediately. It will
also be cost-effective, because the incentives and all other bonuses for a
proto team from the other mines would be cut out. This effort should lead
to a sensible implementation of the Mine Health and Safety Act which should
embody the appropriate balances and clearly define acceptable practice and
standards.

In addition, mines and mining groups should adopt a compassionate but
affordable corporate policy on HIV/Aids. Our efforts and fight against this
deadly disease should be doubled. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr A H NEL: Madam Speaker, there are a lot of things that the hon the
Minister is doing correctly, and she is, to my mind, a great improvement on
the previous Minister. [Interjections.] I find her a reasonable and
moderate person who listens to all sides of an argument before making a
decision.

There is also a lot of positive development happening in our mining
industry. I was impressed by the discussion at the mining summit between
Government, mine owners and the unions. Although robust, it was in the
interests of building a minerals industry that will enhance competitiveness
and increase the contribution to the development of our country, as well as
the welfare of employees.

I agree with the Minister that the mining industry cannot only be a white-
owned industry. The Minister must make use of the positive attitude and
actions of the Chamber of Mines to facilitate a better distribution of the
mineral resources of our country.

The Minister has spoken on various occasions, and also today, about the use-
it-or-lose-it principle. It is essential that Government spells out exactly
what is meant by that. Does it mean that people who paid for the mineral
rights they own will be compensated when they do not use them and lose
them? Or does it mean that Government can just regulate on the matter, in
which case it means that Government does not see mineral rights as property
rights? South Africa can only lose if a perception is created that people
would not be paid for that to which they hold legal title.

We are always criticised for saying that property rights and vested
interests and rights must be respected. The perception is that we only
fight for white rights and interests. Of course this is not true. We fight
for the right of an individual, now or in 10 years' time, to hold title,
and that the right be respected. If we succeed, and we must, in getting a
better distribution of the natural resources of our country, then in 10
years' time most people who will have property rights will be black.
Respect for property rights now is as important as it will be in 10 years's
time.

Daar is 'n opbloei in klein mynbou en van beginners in die mynbedryf.
Daarom moet ons sorg dat die toetrede tot die bedryf vergemaklik word. In
'n onlangse vraag aan die Minister het ek gevra hoe lank dit neem om 'n
prospekteerpermit te bekom. Die antwoord was drie tot vier maande. Daarom
is dit onaanvaarbaar dat twee persone van Komaggas in Namakwaland, wat
reeds in 1997 om prospekteerpermitte aansoek gedoen het, nou nog niks
gehoor het nie. My inligting is dat hierdie aansoek op die Minister vir
Landbou en Grondsake se lessenaar lê. Dit is mos totaal onaanvaarbaar. Dit
is dan juis dié mense wat ons wil help om die bedryf te betree.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[There is a resurgence in small mining and beginners in the mining
industry. That is why we must ensure that entry to the industry is
facilitated. In a recent question to the Minister I asked how long it took
to obtain a prospecting permit. The reply was three to four months. It is
therefore unacceptable that two persons from Komaggas in Namakwaland, who
applied for prospecting permits in 1997, have still not heard anything. My
information is that this application is lying on the desk of the Minister
for Agriculture and Land Affairs. Surely this is totally unacceptable. It
is precisely these people that we want to assist to enter the industry.]

I now want to come to a very serious matter. In November last year, I asked
the Minister a question about the investigation of the Office for Serious
Economic Offences into the appointment of Emmanuel Shaw to the office of
chairman of the Central Energy Fund. The reply was that the investigation
had not yet been concluded, and that - and I quote:


  A statement from the former Minister of Minerals and Energy was requested
  on 28 July, and is still being awaited.

  A statement from the former Minister of Minerals and Energy will be
  necessary before the investigation can be concluded.

In February this year I asked whether the statement of the former Minister
was still being awaited. The reply, under the heading ``A Draft Reply for
Consideration'', that reached me was, and I quote:


  The perception that a statement which is supposed to be made by my
  predecessor, Mr Maduna, in this matter is essential for the finalisation
  of the investigations, is incorrect and misleading.

The reply further stated that Mr Maduna had already discussed this matter
with an official of the Office for Serious Economic Offences in August last
year and that it had been indicated that that statement was not a
prerequisite for the finalisation of the investigation.

What are the facts? It is obvious that the replies to essentially the same
question differ quite substantially. Secondly, both replies were tabled in
Parliament under the name of the Minister. The question before us, then, is
not whether, but when, the House was misled. Was it in November last year
or in February this year?

I know that this is a very serious allegation and I am not making it
lightly. I said in the beginning that I found the Minister a moderate and
reasonable person, so it is very difficult for me to understand this out-of-
character behaviour. My guess is that the question of February was referred
to the previous Minister and that the reply emanated from him.

Can it be that, while the Minister was out of the country, this reply was
sent to me without her seeing it and that that is why it is called ``A
Draft Reply for Consideration''? Whatever the case, the fact is that the
House was misled. In her own words the Minister said, in February, that
what she had said in November was incorrect and misleading. The Minister
must realise that her name is at stake here. The sooner she explains
everything and/or apologises, the better. [Applause.]

Ms M M RAMAKABA-LESIEA: Madam Speaker, hon members, fellow members, it
gives me pleasure and pride to speak in this debate today. I am proud
because, as a woman from the dusty township of Guguletu, I never imagined
myself standing at this podium speaking on the Vote of Minerals and Energy.
I feel pleasure because after my many years of struggle, I stand here with
confidence and look back at the achievements of my Government in just six
years of existence.

My growing up in Elsie's River and removal later, owing to the Group Areas
Act, to Guguletu exposed me to the poor provision of electricity resources
by the apartheid regime. All the households in Guguletu were built without
any electricity, there being poor street lighting only. In our houses, our
source of energy was paraffin and wood and coal stoves, whose devastation
on the environment and, therefore, on one's health can still be felt today.

There was no will at all to provide in the energy needs of the poor
majority. Firstly, subsidies were given to white farmers under the
apartheid regime. Energy policy was governed primarily by the desire for
greater energy security, hence the government spent billions of rands on
Sasol and Mossgas. Even here, the overriding desire was not to provide
energy to people, but to ensure that the apartheid war machine was not
found wanting. We know now how this has devastatingly affected our economy.
Secondly, everything was done under strict security. The curtain was the
National Key Points Act, which made it a crime for people to go close to
energy installations.

Our Government today is presented with serious challenges and yet with
incredible opportunities. There is a dire need to improve effective service
delivery to the entire country, the chief challenges being the
transformation and restructuring of the minerals and energy industry as a
whole.

Energy provision is essential and very important for the development of our
country. The Government has evolved a national electrification strategy
whose focus is to recognise that access to a minimum electricity service is
an essential development tool. The objectives of this strategy are,
firstly, to give previously disadvantaged people and small businesses
access to electricity in order to enhance their quality of life and boost
economic development; secondly, to improve the effectiveness of the
electricity industry by consolidating the fragmentation and facilitating
increased competition; and, thirdly, to promote regional electricity
development.

Another key focus which we should not lose sight of when we talk about
energy, in general, and electricity, in particular, is the focus on women.
This should not be seen only in terms of access to electricity, but the
actual role women should play in industry. I just want to touch on access
to electricity by rural women in particular. We have in the past talked
about the triple oppression of women, that is, women oppressed as a class,
as blacks and as women. The life of women in the townships and rural areas
captures this triple oppression even today. When one looks at their access
to energy and electricity and also at such institutions, one realises what
I said earlier - the enormous challenges facing our Government.

The statistics on electrification at the end of 1998 were 42,5% for rural
areas and 76,7% for urban areas. The overall percentage was 62,7% in 1998.
But, if one views this against the backdrop of 36% before the ANC
Government came into power, then one would realise the pride that one has
in belonging to the ANC, the ANC that cares for the people and the ANC that
is an agent of change. The electrification programme aimed to provide
electricity to about 2,5 million households by the end of 1999.

There is a need to put emphasis on the access of women to managerial and
other senior positions at various institutions and on regulatory boards. I
have said that women are the key users of household energy. Therefore it
stands to reason that they should be drawn in, at policy level, as this
would assist in developing women-friendly policies. This is what I call
affirmative action, that is ``regstellende optrede'', which simply means
``corrective action'', corrective because it seeks to right the wrongs of
the past, ensuring that every sector of our society is gender-conscious,
not only in terms of statements, but also in terms of policies.

We have moved a distance in a short period. Rural villages and squatter
areas are brightened with lighting provided by this caring Government. Even
those who saw darkness in the tunnel are now ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, it would be a great omission on my part to
leave this podium without mentioning that it is, indeed, a privilege and an
honour to serve on a portfolio committee chaired by the hon Duma Nkosi
rather than those political hecklers and howlers over there. [Laughter.]
The UDM believes that the role of the Department of Minerals and Energy in
the mining industry should not only be supportive in terms of rendering
services of an administrative nature to the mining industry and the mining
community, but also be supportive, enabling and stabilising in terms of
developing viable strategies for social and enterprise development aimed at
creating jobs and job opportunities. Unlike the Department of Labour, the
Department of Minerals and Energy is not actively engaged in the creation
and maintenance of the capacity to monitor, analyse and disseminate mining
and market information to potential investors inside and outside the
country. The publication and distribution of a promotional booklet, Invest
in an intensive and a diverse minerals industry, does not suffice to
attract foreign investors. The Government should create a conducive
atmosphere which would attract foreign investors.

The creation and maintenance of links with mining houses entrepreneurs in
the communities is almost nonexistent. The department has not yet created
resource centres in various provinces capable of responding to demands,
queries and the carrying out of research on mining and mineral potential.
The department has not, like the Department of Labour, established
provincial business, mining or energy units for investment and market
information. Publication and research has been left entirely in the hands
of the private sector.

The UDM believes that the role of the Government in the mining industry
should be to facilitate access to opportunities in the minerals industry
for those previously disadvantaged, including equipping individuals, groups
and communities with the necessary skills and resources to enable them to
compete in the market place, as opposed to leaving the mineral wealth in
the hands of the few mining conglomerates and transnational corporations.
Black economic empowerment should penetrate the pockets of these big mining
conglomerates and transnational corporations. The UDM calls on the
Government and all the mining houses in this country to involve the
previously disadvantaged people, groups or individuals, in joint ventures
and management and shareholding of their various companies.

We were gratified this afternoon when, in her speech, the Minister
mentioned that efforts are being made to introduce legislation relating to
minerals in this country. It is appalling that, while South Africa has a
very high mineral potential, especially in Gauteng, the North West,
Mpumalanga, the Northern Cape and the Northern Province, no effort has been
made to ensure that people within the country benefit from the minerals
sector since this would create more jobs, especially now that some 47 800
jobs have been reported to the gold crisis committee as being at risk.

The health and safety of our people who work in the mines and in the
petroleum sector are indeed of singular and paramount importance. [Time
expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, hon members,
distinguished guests, we are optimistic and, as the Department of Minerals
and Energy, we have every good reason to be.

Here we are, a country of about 40 million people, a country which has
successfully and peacefully effected the transition to a democratic
society. We know that the road ahead is still long, but much has been done
and much has been achieved. Our key challenge, as a country, is to ensure
that the channels provided by the democratic processes, channels such as
our Government, departments, institutions and other state bodies, actually
deliver on the commitments we made when the people of our country entrusted
us with their hopes and dreams during the second term of Government.

Considering the importance of the industries that we have to govern, the
budget for Minerals and Energy is very modest. Moreover, the department as
such will only receive 38% of the total budget during this financial year.
The rest goes to our associated institutions, in particular to the SA
Nuclear Energy Corporation, which will receive approximately 40% of the
budget, of which about 10% goes for the repayment of the strategic loan.

This loan repayment, which has been inherited from our predemocratic past,
distorts our budget in the sense that we cannot utilise these funds to meet
our policy objectives and the social needs of our people. I want to agree
with Mr Lucas that we do need to address this issue. It is one of the key
aspects that we, as the Ministry, intend to take up. There is, however, a
positive trend, which resulted from careful management since 1994. The
department's share of the total budget for Minerals and Energy has
increased from 15% in 1994 to the current 38% in order to ensure proper
delivery. We will have to ensure that this trend continues.

The Cabinet decided that the LMT, the Lebowa Minerals Trust, should be
abolished. We have instructed the department to prepare legislation to
implement the decision and currently the issue of the LMT is being
discussed by the portfolio committee, which intends to bring it to
Parliament soon.

During the past decade the mining industry in South Africa has constantly
been under threat of downward pressure by world commodity prices and the
declining dollar gold price. This has impacted negatively on the industry.
As a result of the above, downscaling, decreases in production and
retrenchments have resulted. The gold crisis has also taught us that we
have to reorganise and restructure the industry in order to ensure its
future competitiveness. The challenge is to develop strategies that address
the consequences, not only in South Africa, but also within the SADC region
and on the rest of the continent.

Government, the National Union of Mineworkers and the business sector were
actively engaged in discussions with selected West African countries, and
engaged the United States, the UK and the African-Caribbean countries with
the purpose of presenting gold crisis sale announcements which were
economically and socially harming Africa. We, as South Africa, are proud to
say that this process successfully bore fruit, given that the current rate
of the gold price has improved.

Currently the gold crisis committee is dealing with 25 cases of impending
retrenchments. Initially 47 000 jobs were deemed to be at risk. Of this
number, only 15 000 jobs were lost. This is an indication of the
effectiveness of our efforts. In an effort to find an appropriate response
to the structural decline in the industry and resulting from the
resolutions of the Presidential Jobs Summit of 1998, the Minister and the
department, together with business and labour, hosted the successful mining
summit in February, to which the Minister referred. The social plan was the
outcome of the mining summit, but it was also the outcome of the Jobs
Summit in 1998, in response to the pressing need to manage the social
impacts of the cyclical volatility of the industry.

During the mining summit, the following main strategic objectives were
identified with respect to the mining industry: The specific adaptation of
social plan facilities to meet the needs of the mining industry; targeting
assistance at marginal mines; the establishment of downscaling review
processes; developing an early warning information system of mining
closures; linking high productivity to an aggressive market strategy; and
retraining retrenched mine workers and communities in other skills,
including marketing and beneficiation.

I also want to say, regarding some of the issues that Mr Ramodike has
raised, that if one looks at some of the documents in the department and
our total programme, they do address the issues that he is addressing, and
I think it is important for him to familiarise himself with what is
happening within our Ministry, for a true perspective. The sector
partnership committee, which is a tripartite structure agreed upon during
the mining summit, will oversee the implementation of the social plan
structure which will serve to advise the Minister. Future forums at mine
level are envisaged as part of an early warning system, and I would advise
members of the committee to make sure that they try to participate in these
forums so as to make sure that they understand what is going on.

The beneficiation of our minerals is another strategy for economic growth
that we have identified and that we are pursuing aggressively, as members
may well know. South Africa provides approximately 25% of the raw material
for jewellery production worldwide, and yet contributes less than 0,5% of
fabricated jewellery. In fact, the jewellery manufacturing sector
fabricates between 10 and 12 tons of gold jewellery per annum and employs
approximately 4 000 people, which we believe can be improved.

Over the past century, most of the South African mineral deposits were
developed by big mining houses which utilised their in-house technical and
financial expertise and, therefore, one of our objectives is to change this
trend. We have seed capital of R2 million available to the national
steering committee which was launched in June, and a further R3,4 million
has been transferred to this fund so as to try to meet the needs of the
small-scale miners.

We have formulated the national small-scale mining development framework.
One key issue, which we all know, is that this industry has been male
dominated for the past years; but the Minister and I have to make sure that
this industry is representative of the demography of South Africa. We
facilitated the establishment of SA Women in Mining Association last year,
whose objective it is to capacitate women through mining in local and rural
areas, and we are proud to say that this association has been launched
successfully.

In our report on gender equity, there was a clear call for the redressing
of imbalances in the participation of women in the mining sector. The
report states that links should be developed with existing bilateral
programmes and other technical assistance programmes, such as the UNDP.
This will enhance resource mobilisation for capacity-building initiatives.

The establishment of Sawima was a result of this initiative. This also
takes us further to the support from the SADC Women in Mining Trust, which
was formed in 1997, and comprises women involved in mining from the
Southern African countries. Therefore Sawima is part of this. The vision
and mission of Sawima is to be the force behind the revival of a strong,
vibrant and transparent mining sector that enhances the positiveness of
women in mining and where gender imbalances and prejudices do not exist.

The department has identified a clear lack of participation of the youth in
the energy sector, and I am proud to address the president of the Youth
League and say that, as this department, we do recognise that there has
been a lack of youth participation in our department or in the energy
sector. Capacity-building in the form of energy information dissemination
and youth education was seen to be the basic step in informing youth on the
energy sector. Hence, the conference which has been organised by my
department for 16 to 19 May 2000. I believe it is the first ...
[Interjections.] Hayi wena! [Stop it!] Stop howling! [Laughter.]

I believe it is the first time in our history that we have embraced our
youth, our children and our future in our programmes. It behoves us to
nurture them and help them prepare themselves for the future, particularly
in the field of energy. I wonder what the hon Geldenhuys did for the future
of this country. If it had not been for his government in the past, the
youth in 1976 would not have made this country what it was then.
[Interjections.]

Today, we are here because of the youth of South Africa. The hon Geldenhuys
made no effort. [Applause.] In fact, he is responsible for most of the
youth being disadvantaged today. It is his own product. That is where it
comes from. We are supposed to be a better country with all the resources
we have, but he has set this country backwards. So he must please stop
making a noise. [Interjections.]

The White Paper on Energy Policy committed Government to undertaking an
integrated energy policy process and developing an integrated resource
framework to meet the challenges of the future energy supply and demand.
These processes will assist Government in determining the country's future.

Mr I J PRETORIUS: I think the Deputy Minister is too young.

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Exactly, I am young. Does the hon member think I am
old, like him? [Laughter.]

This process will assist Government in determining the country's future
energy needs by analysing South African scenarios. Therefore, South Africa
will require a plan for energy. This plan has to be an integrated one. In
developing this plan we need to look at all the energy carriers and find
the optimum balance between them, in line with Government policy. This plan
should enable us to make mid-term and long-term energy.

I now want to address the importance of renewable energy. The objectives of
a renewable energy policy and strategy should seek to ensure access to
adequate affordable energy sources, to develop communities through a
balanced mix of conventional and alternative energy sources, thereby
improving the quality of lives of the people, and to promote the use of
clean energy technologies in support of the environment.

To facilitate the implementation of the White Paper, the department is in
the process of developing a detailed policy and strategy document on
renewable energy. This document will serve as an input into the proposed
integrated sustainable rural development strategy, and a planned workshop
on rural development and rural electrification that will be supported by
the World Bank later this year.

As part of the implementation of the White Paper that was published in
1998, new legislation was developed to improve governance of the nuclear
sector. The President signed the Nuclear Energy Act of 1999 and the
National Nuclear Regulator Act of 1999 into law in December last year. The
two Acts came into operation on 24 February 2000, at which the names of the
Atomic Energy Corporation changed to the SA Nuclear Energy Corporation
Limited, and the name for the Council for Nuclear Safety changed to the
National Nuclear Regulator. In line with the new Acts, the board of
directors has been constituted. The next step in the transformation process
will be appointing the new chief executive officers.

Some of the issues that the new Act addresses are the separation of the
legislation that governs Sanec, the SA Nuclear Energy Corporation and the
National Nuclear Regulator in the same Act, reformulation of the governance
regimes of these parastatals so that a more transparent and accountable
situation is established, and empowering the Minister of Minerals and
Energy to restructure Necsa in the manner proposed in our White Paper.

Eskom is investigating the pebble-bed modular reactor, or PBMR, which is
the objective of the potential expanding of South Africa's nuclear power
generation capacity. While Government recognises Eskom's ongoing research
investigation into the PBMR, no decision has been taken.

Lastly, I would like to thank the hon the Minister for the good work we are
doing together, and I also want to thank the chairperson of the portfolio
committee, and the portfolio committee as a whole, for the co-operation we
got, especially our being two women who ...

An HON MEMBER: And Dr Geldenhuys.

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Dr Geldenhuys? Nonsense! [Laughter.] I also thank all
our parastatals, the private sector in our area, and the mining and energy
sector for the support we got throughout the year.

Lastly, I want to thank my two boys, who are not here, for the tolerance
they have had of their mother who is always not there and not able to take
care of them and for their behaving quite well. I believe they will be part
of this sector in future. [Applause.]

Ms S D MOTUBATSE: Madam Speaker, Ministers and members of Parliament, in
his address to this House 10 months ago, President Thabo Mbeki said: ``We
are on track.'' At that time I had only been in the House one month and I
did not understand it, but after working through the portfolio committee
that I am placed in, I started understanding the meaning of this. Truly,
the   ANC-led Government has promulgated good pieces of legislation and
policies on minerals and energy.

In small-scale mining, where many women are found, I am proud today to say
that section 5(2) of the Minerals Act has formalised their work by granting
them authorisation for prospecting and mining without any discrimination.
Going through the legislation and policy, I must say to the Minister that I
find it substantive enough for implementation. The departmental structures
and institutions associated with this sector are doing their best to
implement these policies, which is a Government priority as well. All South
Africans know the importance of women. Our history shows that women are
always at the forefront; be it social or economic, women always do their
best when they are at work. When I was young my grandmother used to mine
kaolin. At that time I only knew it as ``bete'' because in Sepedi we do not
pronounce the ``v', we just called it ``bete''. The Ndebeles call it
``iyede''.

Today South Africans are proud of Ndebele colours, which are known
worldwide. This is the work of women. It was achieved through the hard work
of women mining different colours of kaolin and painting their houses.
There were no paints at that time. Women were grouping themselves, forming
consortiums and mining whatever minerals were available. There were no
trained geologists amongst them, but they could find out where the minerals
were. They relied solely on their empirical knowledge, but they succeeded.

The launch of the SA Women in Mining Association in December was another
milestone achieved by women in this sector. South Africa has great
potential in small-scale mining and the research done shows that there is
potential in gold, diamond, clay and sand. This can create jobs and open
opportunities for women, if well managed. When analysing problems faced by
women in small-scale mining, I should be fair enough to acknowledge the
initiatives of the Ministry, the service providers and the institutions
associated with this department in addressing the problem. There is an
institutional support, and the national steering committee has done its
best to break some of the barriers frustrating women in mining.
Technologically, women appreciate the work of Mintek and the CSIR, but we
believe that there is room for improvement.

With regard to financial institutions like Khula and Ntsika, I wish to say
it is possible to break down and show or reflect the number of women in the
services that they are rendering, especially in the mining sector. I hope
that the institutions will also build capacity and bring qualitative
changes in small-scale mining.

Health and safety is a key issue in the running of this risky business. It
is at present difficult for small-scale miners, but I think they also need
to adhere to the safety measures. There is a need to reorganise the small-
scale miners into co-operatives, and we need their commitment on this work.

With regard to the energy sector, we fully support the Minister on the
effort to come up with an integrated energy supply for households. However,
I wish to caution the House that women do not want and cannot be seen to be
household energy manageresses only. The research shows that women are also
concerned about their lives.

When dealing with health and safety we should take cognisance of the
problems faced by women. Women are exposed to open fires and to fuels and
chemicals used at home. Indoor pollution from using coal and wood is often
forgotten when we draw up policies. Accidents related to the use of
paraffin, gas leakages and candles, resulting in burns, often occur at home
and affect women and girl children. With better provision of household
energy, we can save lives and money in the health sector.

We wish to see more women employed in the mine safety and health
inspectorate. I believe that these inspectorates do not belong to the
offices, but to the mines. That is where they are supposed to work - not
shifting papers. In conclusion, I think that human resource development
should be seen from a different angle. Development of women in this sector
is human resource development for the country.

With regard to SADC, it is important to harmonise our national policies
with the broad regional interests. Also, the discussion between the
Department of Minerals and Energy and the Department of Agriculture and
Land Affairs is important, because when we go out to the communities, we
realise that there is a gap in the policy with regard to mineral rights and
land rights.

I must congratulate the Minister and the department on the progress made on
the sectoral education training authority. This sector is ahead of others,
and I wish to commend the department for this. I, therefore, support the
budget. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Minerals and Energy has said
that the African 21st century is not going to allow a white mining industry
to continue. Some argue that there is no white mining industry as,
overwhelmingly, most participants are black and that ownership vests
largely with pension funds and investment houses which benefits every
policy holder. Yet, many are undeniably exempt from the decision-making
process. The ACDP continues to support full participation by all South
Africans at all levels of the economy.

Our present challenge in South Africa is, undoubtedly, education and skills
training. Official policy needs to balance the imperative of a competitive
operating environment, the need to ensure security of tenure and the
property rights of existing holders and exploiters of mineral rights, and
the political priority of broadening participation in the mining industry.
Mining is not a low-risk business. It requires a long-term commitment and
deep pockets, with no guarantee of profit. Much depends on fickle and
volatile markets.

The ACDP agrees that attention also has to be given to small-scale mining,
as it has the potential to create jobs. The need for beneficiation of
minerals is obvious, however, obstacles such as legislation and regulations
apparently make gold inaccessible to craftsmen. We appeal to Government to
investigate these claims and propose relevant changes.

With regard to the energy sector, there are serious concerns as to whether
it is in South Africa's interest to commit itself to a long-term nuclear
energy programme where technical and economic uncertainties exist. However,
the current research programme at Koeberg on the pebble-bed, small nuclear
power generator to generate low-cost power without the attendant dangers of
meltdown, could be worthwhile. We have already disbanded and lost a huge
portion of our nuclear research capacity, which has vital medical and
health spinoffs for South Africa. Finally, as one of the world's premier
producers of uranium, if there is a safe way forward, we should look at it.

The ACDP commends the Minister, the department and the portfolio committee
members on their efforts to find solutions which take the industry forward.
We will vote in favour of the budget.

Prof I J MOHAMED: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister and hon
members, it is a pleasure for me to support the Vote of the Department of
Minerals and Energy. The portfolio committee wants to express their
condolences to the Director-General of the Department of Minerals and
Energy on the death of his mother and child. The Vote for the Department of
Minerals and Energy of R577,7 million for this year decreased by R39,7
million or 6,4% from the revised estimate of the previous year. This
decrease, without even taking into account inflation, is not good.

It is clear that mining and minerals play a declining role in the economy.
However, mining and minerals are still responsible for a large part of the
gross domestic product, and employ a major part of the labour force of
South Africa and neighbouring countries. The department is also committed
to playing an integrated role in the provision of energy over the whole
energy spectrum, including nuclear energy. I believe this should justify a
greater allocation of funds to the Department of Minerals and Energy. This
should help the department to address the problem of job losses in the
mining industry and the problems of small-scale mining, as well as to
develop the necessary capacity.

The Vote allocation to the Department of Minerals and Energy decreased
during the period 1996 to 2000 by a massive 21,3%, without taking inflation
into account. This decrease is largely due to the changing role of the SA
Nuclear Energy Corporation and its decreased funding. Of course, we must
remember that the funding of Sanec is out of proportion to its contribution
to the energy programme of the department, as the Deputy Minister already
said, but I shall not address that problem yet again. The point I wish to
make is that there is a shift away from the attempt of the old Atomic
Energy Corporation to be a one-stop nuclear fuel fabricator and supplier.

The functions of Sanec are now as follows: Firstly, the decommissioning and
decontamination of certain nuclear fuel facilities and the storage of
nuclear waste and related regulatory functions; secondly, the separation of
its commercial project based on its radiation and florination activities as
a stand-alone project; and, thirdly, the possible continued operation of
the Safari reactor for isotope production and its possible utilisation for
academic training.

There are peaks in the funding of Sanec, as repayments of loans become due.
The loan repayments will reach a peak of R265,5 million in 2002-03, in
comparison with R37,6 million this year, and R35 million next year. In
fact, Government funding of Sanec is projected to increase from R199,3
million this year to R425,5 million in 2002-03. The external income of
Sanec has also decreased quite substantially, but is now beginning to
increase and should only reach the level of 1996-97 in 2002.

Over the past six years I have pressed for a reduction in the funding of
Sanec. This reduction, however, was always coupled with increased
allocations to other Department of Minerals and Energy projects of national
importance. These additional allocations did not occur.

I want to note some other concerns relating to this decrease in the funding
of Sanec. First, Sanec has lost approximately 7 000 staff members since
1987, and approximately 2 000 since 1994. While this haemorrhage is taking
place in Sanec, as well as in other science and technology organisations,
we are desperately trying to draw young people into science and technology.
Clearly, something is wrong.

Secondly, we have pressed for the past six years for an integrated waste
management policy, but there is no indication that we are any nearer to
getting there. Surely the National Nuclear Regulator should be called upon
to help in getting such a policy off the ground, to which Sanec cutbacks
could be allocated, and I am not referring to the loans. In the light of
public concerns about the Koeberg nuclear spent fuel pools reaching
capacity and the reracking of these I asked the question in Parliament
whether the public could be given an assurance about safety. Part of the
reply read:


  In 1996 Cabinet endorsed the principle that Koeberg's spent fuel can be
  stored at Koeberg for up to 50 years. Final disposal of the spent fuel
  will then have to take place if alternative options like reprocessing are
  not available.

To endorse storage for up to 50 years does not answer the question of
reaching capacity soon, and what should happen to the spent fuel coming off
the plant now. Also, to suggest that the reprocessing is a possible
alternative is very misleading, because reprocessing produces plutonium,
which is even more lethal, and further nuclear waste, and so the problem is
compounded. The hon the Minister should rap the official who wrote that
over the knuckles.

Thirdly, the funding of Mintek and the Council for Geoscience has been cut.
Given the importance of these to mining and minerals, this must be
deplored. I have long pleaded that some of the funding of Sanec should be
diverted to these important organisations. Again, I am not referring to the
loans. It now appears that economic capacity is being cut.

Lastly, our communities are very concerned about uranium, cyanide and heavy
metals present in slime dams right on their doorsteps. We should fund the
NNR to address this problem. We are pleased to associate ourselves with the
Minister and her department and my comments are meant to strengthen them.
[Applause.]

Mr B G BELL: Madam Speaker, it is an honour to speak on behalf of the DP in
this debate on the Vote for the Department of Minerals and Energy. There
are a few factors I would like to discuss. One is the proposed integration
of the health and safety inspectorate with the Department of Labour. The
second item I would like to discuss is the establishment of small mines.

When we talk of the integration of the inspectorates, in order to achieve
this it would be necessary for the staff of the Department of Labour to be
fully trained in the operation of large and small mining operations. In
order to be an effective inspector, the incumbent must be able to read a
situation, and not only criticise but also contribute to the safety of the
operation and be able to give advice. This ability only comes from training
and experience.

Labour inspectors, certainly, if they have had sufficient training in their
field, will be able to contribute towards peaceful industrial relations on
the mines. But if they attempt to interfere with mining operations, they
may upset the smooth running of the mine. Conversely, if inspectors trained
in mining are asked to interfere in the industrial relations field, they
may cause upsets, as the mining environment is different to all other
fields. We ask that any plans to completely integrate the two be shelved.
Although there may be benefits moneywise, the final result could be
disastrous.

If we talk of the establishment of small mining operations, it is essential
to encourage entrepreneurs to become established in the mining industry.
Those of us who have listened to Clem Sunter tell of his latest book, Never
Mind the Millenium, What About the Next 24 Hours, and have heard his talk
on hedgehogs and foxes, will appreciate the importance of this to our
country's goodwill and development in the future. But there are numerous
difficulties to be overcome in establishing a mining operation. To discuss
all of these will take many hours of talk time, so I will touch on a few of
the more daunting ones.

Firstly, regarding money, the cost of establishing a mining operation is
enormous and whoever attempts this must first have a lot of money or access
to a great deal of it. Shortage of capital will lead to the mining engineer
being forced to cut corners and, as the production of the ore body is
essential to gathering more money, this aspect cannot be ignored. The
result could be that safety is sacrificed to achieve the main objective of
production and lives are lost. Regarding a market, the establishing of a
mine requires many firsts, none more important than a market to sell one's
product in. Once one has a market to send one's product to, the rest falls
into place.

A great deal has been said on the ownership of mining rights in South
Africa, and it is a subject all on its own. So far, the large mining
companies which own large tracts of mining rights have been willing to sell
off to small companies areas of an ore body that are not large enough for
them to mine economically. In order to establish a mine operation, the
entrepreneur must first complete the required infrastructure - roads,
railway lines, water, electricity and communication. All of these are
extremely expensive, but absolutely essential.

It is essential that all mines adhere to our stringent mine safety rules
and regulations. There is a tendency to allow our small operators to ignore
some rules as they are expensive to comply with and do not appear to be
economic. Should we in order to meet our objective, allow this to happen,
the mining industry in South Africa as a whole will suffer and may
collapse.

Although the establishment of a small-mining fraternity is very desirable,
it is not a good idea to allow the standards to drop. I thank all for
listening and hope that some of what I have said will help to make our
mining industry a wonderful area to work in and live in, as much as I did
over the past 47 years.

Ms N V CINDI: Madam Speaker, boNgqongqoshe ngokulandelana, [and the various
Ministers] allow me to pay tribute to our late Kgosi Lebone II of the
Bafokeng community, who passed away after a short illness. The Bafokeng are
mining the rich world known as the platinum region in the North West
province. Mineral rights were given to the Bafokeng community. They could
mine and manage their project or property and make a living out of that
mining.

I want to focus specifically on small-scale mining as a source of income
which communities could benefit a lot from. The biggest concern is obvious
- the limitation of access to mineral rights by disadvantaged communities.
Communities want access to information about planned mining activities. I
am from a constituency which is poor, but rich in minerals. This is an
opportunity for people in that rural area to seize in order to make a
proper living.

People of Boskuil, Kareepan and Oesenskraal and the surrounding areas
should know and understand mining, and the Department of Minerals and
Energy should assist in this. Similarly the investors in mining should make
an effort to understand the wishes and interests of the communities and
support them in achieving those. It is an ideal opportunity for mining
companies to enter into agreement with communities in relationships of
social benefit. The undeveloped infrastructure could be developed, and the
environmental impact of the mining should be addressed by the small miners
with the assistance of big mining companies.

Compensation for loss of agricultural land and costs such as moving
households where the deposits occur should be addressed by the communities
with the assistance of the department and the big mining companies. What we
will have to realise is that tens of thousands of South Africans are
putting their lives at risk each day by reopening disused mines and
illegally digging for gold, diamonds and coal.

These people, who live in some of the desperately poor parts of our
country, risk rockfalls, suffocation, blasting accidents and breathing in
of poisonous gases. They use mercury and chlorine, which are both very
dangerous substances. They ignore the health and safety regulations of the
department by wanting to ensure a living for themselves out of these
minerals which they believe will create a better life for them. With the
necessary equipment, like picks and shovels and wheelbarrows, available,
they can challenge the day's task with confidence. With the support of the
department, they should be able to set up co-operatives to be able to buy
some machinery to carry out these heavy tasks.

Our study group had the opportunity to visit some of these small-mining
projects. I was emotionally moved to witness how pregnant women, children
and the aged arrived in the early hours of the morning with pieces of axes
and wheelbarrows to dig for coal, which is later sold for a mere R5,00 to
another community, and business continues as if everything is legal and
normal. I wish all the members of this Parliament could see this
heartbreaking situation of pregnant women, children and the aged digging
below the earth for a living.

Some projects even provide an income for 3 000 people in the community, but
the biggest concern remains the lack of education and training. They are
totally unaware of the proper mining procedures and practices. They need to
be assisted by the department to participate in the national steering
committee which develops community projects.
 
I have even seen women set up a brick-making operation out of the clay
which they are mining at great risk to themselves. This project needs to be
applauded. It is, therefore, necessary for us to encourage and facilitate
the sustainable development of small-scale mining, which is the real answer
for empowerment, and the bringing of the poor and marginalised into the
mainstream of our society.

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, history has imposed on our generation an
enormous obligation to undo the evils of one of the most comprehensive
systems of oppression ever seen anywhere in the world. Everywhere we turn,
in every sphere of our lives we care to glance at, the legacy of settler-
colonialism stares us in the face.

Our generation is obliged to do all it can to bequeath a country to future
generations in which inequality based on race is reduced or eliminated. In
order to do this, our generation needs to keep its focus firmly on
everything that needs to be transformed and democratised, and that focus
must never be lost for one single moment. Future generations will have
every justification to spit on our graves if we fail to do our part, and,
as a result of our inaction, leave them a country where they would still
have to make revolution in order to realise economic justice.

The liquid fuel industry in our country is one in which white domination is
almost absolute. The five major oil companies - the sisterhood of BP,
Engen, Shell, Caltex and Total - reign supreme. These sisters have cornered
the oil market, fenced it in, barricaded the gates and locked them. It is
almost impossible for newcomers to enter this multibillion rand industry.
The newly established black companies that are trying to come in, such as
Exel Petroleum and Afric Oil are struggling to keep the paltry 3% of the
market that they have.

This sisterhood absolutely controls the transportation, storage, refining
and distribution of petroleum products in our country - hence their
ubiquitous presence everywhere on our highways, roads and streets. They are
synonymous with motoring and filling-up. When one says one is going to fill
up one's car, one means that the sisters are going to fill one up.

This situation was engineered by the oppressive and racist system of the
past where blacks were prohibited by law from participating in the economic
activities of this country, except of course, at the level of servants or
labourers. This ugly state of affairs cannot be allowed to continue, and
just as it was deliberately, systematically and consciously designed by the
state, it similarly requires a deliberate and systematic action by the
Government of the day for its correction; market forces cannot be trusted
to do it. The Department of Minerals and Energy must use all available
means and measures to promote black oil companies.

An HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!

Mr M A MANGENA: Where such means do not exist they should be created. I
have a big fan on this side. [Laughter.]

It is heartening to see some parastatals, such as Transnet and others,
awarding tenders for the supply of petroleum products to black oil
companies. We hope all other parastatals, Government departments and state
organs will do the same. We hope that there are no discordant voices in
this regard, that we are in fact singing the same chorus with the
Department of Minerals and Energy and that the gusto of our singing will be
matched in time by an equally robust restructuring programme of the oil
industry. We urge the sisterhood of five to secure the future of this
industry and of the country, by integrating the majority of the people of
this country in their companies at the levels of meaningful shareholding,
management and other forms of general participation.

One of the ways of measuring the standard of living of a people is by
looking at the amount of electricity they consume. Different percentages of
our people use electricity for cooking and lighting, but on average more
than 50% of households use wood, candles and paraffin for cooking and
lighting. And there is no need to guess who is doing this; it is black
people who have no access to electricity in large numbers.

Eskom is to be commended for the enormous strides they have made in the
past few years in providing electricity to large numbers of our people,
especially in the rural areas. This availability of electricity simplifies
people's lives by freeing them from the burden of collecting the ever-
vanishing firewood, having better lighting for their homes, and the use of
cheaper and convenient domestic appliances.

That over 1,7 million households were connected to the national electricity
grid for the first time in the past five years means that the lives of
several million of our people were improved. In fact, Eskom is one of the
most valuable assets this country possesses. It does not only provide
electricity cheaply and largely reliably to many parts of our country, but
it is also working in partnership with other entities in several African
countries to light up our continent. We would be a foolish nation indeed if
we did not protect and nurture it into becoming an even bigger giant than
it is at present. More importantly, Eskom should be encouraged, supported
and assisted in whatever way is necessary and possible to provide more of
our people with electrical energy.
The story of our country cannot be told without mentioning its minerals. We
are blessed with all sorts of minerals and yet to the majority of the
people that wealth has meant exclusion, exploitation, pain, humiliation,
death by rockfall, and death by inhalation of poisonous gas or suffocation.
The migratory labour system, the ``tonosa'' episodes - mass parades of
thousands of naked men for so-called medical examination, the huge and
filthy single-sex hostels and starvation wages were all the aspects of
minerals activity that blacks knew. A minority racial group expropriated
all the wealth connected with our rich mineral resources. More than one and
a half centuries since mining started, this is still more or less the
position in our country.

Yes, a few small agreements are being reached here and there to extend the
benefits of mining to some people from the black community. The prominent
one is between the Bafokeng of Phokeng and Amplats which guarantees
substantial royalties to that community for the mining of platinum on their
land. There are others which are not so impressive, signed here and there,
but in the general and overall configuration of mineral wealth in our
country these agreements represent a drop in the ocean.
Once more we need to sing one chorus with all the gusto our collective
vocal cords can muster. Our song must say that the mining industry must be
deracialised in such a way that it benefits all in our country. In this
connection, would it not be better to use entities such as the Lebowa
Minerals Trust to bring more and more of our people into a meaningful
relationship with mineral wealth, instead of dissolving LMT - as I
understand this is the position? Would it not be better to find ways and
means of transforming it into such a vehicle, especially if one considers
that we do not have such a vehicle?

Finally, it was really heartening to see the Minister of Minerals and
Energy giving the management, the workers and their families so much
support during the tragedy that befell Rainbow Minerals Mine recently. It
was good to see her camping at the mine, sleeping there and giving the
heroic rescue workers more support and encouragement. [Applause.] We would,
however, like to see safer mining in our country so that such tragedies are
eliminated. [Applause.]

Mr M R BALOYI: Madam Speaker, it is acknowledged that one of the
Government's success stories of the RDP's deliverables has been the
household electrification programme for the period 1994 to 1999, and that
the realisation of such a target came about as a result of co-ordination
between the Department of Minerals and Energy and the delivery
institutions.

To this end, I want to pay homage to the department and the following
institutions for their role in this matter. Firstly, Eskom for its efforts
in not only meeting its set targets in terms of connection figures, but
also for its bias towards making electricity accessible to the rural masses
of our country.

I mani loyi a tshemba leswaku tindzhawu leti a ti siyiwile endzhaku ti nga
phakeriwa gezi hi ndlela leyi swi nga endlekisa xiswona eka nkarhi lowu wa
Mfumo wa ANC? Hi loyi a nga swi vona loko swi endleka eka tindzhawu to fana
na va-Namakgale, N'wamarhanga, Phalawubeni, Thomo na le ka Masemola kwale
Xifundzankulu xa N'walungu. Na loyi a itshembaka leswaku ku nga ri khale,
ri ta phakeriwa na le ka Shimange, ka Silwane, na tin'wana tindhawu.
(Translation of Tsonga paragraph follows.)

[Whoever would have thought that places that were excluded from electricity
supply by the apartheid government would now have succeeded in obtaining an
electricity supply under the ANC Government? This was seen happening at
places like Namakgale, N'wamarhanga, Phalawubeni and Masemola in the
Northern Province. It is also anticipated that the supply of electricity
will take place in the Shimange settlement, in Silwane and in other
settlements.]

I hope the people of Ndwedwe in KwaZulu-Natal, Elandsfontein in Mpumalanga
and Ramokgolela in the North West will agree with me that they got
electricity right in their rural settlements. I know that it was not a
smooth ride for Eskom to prioritise supplying one settlement with
electricity before another, as this could lead to violent confrontation in
some areas, as happened at Makurung and Nkuzana in the Northern Province
where lives were lost, property damaged and schooling disrupted for a whole
year because those settlements were scheduled to receive electricity later
than they expected.

I further commend Eskom's small business development programme, community
development programme and the schools' electrification programme, which
were rolled out in areas where grid electricity was supplied. Also to be
commended are Eskom's joint ventures. In this case I refer to Phambili
Ngombane for the supply of electricity in the Khayelitsha area of the
Western Cape. To be commended as well are the Transitional Electricity
Distributor for the supply of electricity in parts of Mpumalanga, and
Uitenhage electricity supply for their Eastern Cape ventures. Local
authorities in general, and in particular the Mutale-Masisi-Vhutswena
transitional local council in the Northern Province and the Rustenburg
district council need to be commended for providing financial support, in
partnership with Eskom, for assisting in the electrification of settlements
that would otherwise not have access to electricity owing to their
remoteness.

The conclusion of the RDP target-driven era marshals us into the 2000
electrification programme, which is viewed as a transitional period to the
future integrated national electrification programme, during which period
the Government will assume the political responsibility for integrating
electrification with other delivery programmes. A notable development
during this transitional period is the fact that, in addition to Eskom's
target of 250 000 grid connections and local government's 130 000 grid
connections, 23 000 connections are to be done on nongrid solar systems
and, on the Eskom grid target, an upgradeable 2,5 amp limited load has to
be installed.

These are critical challenges that need marketing and consultation, coupled
with a convenient upgrading mechanism. My advice is that the department pay
special attention to these and other challenges observed in the RDP era
such as electricity vending, regarding which, despite the fact that
electricity was within reach in some areas, many people in some of these
areas had to resort to other sources of energy, because the vending
stations were not within convenient distances for them to buy electricity.

Significant progress has been made, to date, in the restructuring of the
electricity distribution industry. This restructuring is all about the
amalgamation of the more or less 400 distribution authorities that are in
existence today, distributing electricity at different standards and
conditions, and charging different tariffs, some exorbitantly high and
others conveniently low, while some share the same geographical
jurisdictions. The end result is bad competition, the absence of a generic
tariff structure, and operational and regulatory difficulties. Some of
these entities thrive while others stagger. It is necessary to restructure
the industry so that we have clearly defined and manageable distribution
entities ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President,
hon members, it is important that we practise our new motto on our coat of
arms: !ke e:/xarra //ke.

I would like to thank hon members for a meaningful debate. There were
clearly sets of issues that kept on coming to the fore from different
members. Clearly, the issue of restructuring in the petroleum industry is
paramount in the minds of the members, and I assure hon members that the
six months which we have given ourselves to come up with an implementable
plan will not be compromised. However, what I think is more important is
that we will be furthering economic empowerment after there have been
lessons of economic empowerment that has gone wrong. It is going to be
critical that we do not fail. The same could be said of the mining
industry, because some of the initiatives that we have undertaken so far
have not been that successful. We obviously need to ensure that we use the
experiences that we have had and the lessons that we have learnt.
Very important is something which has also come across very strongly and
that is the issue of access to finance. In the restructuring of both
industries, we have actually raised that issue with the industry. We hope
that they will also remain true to their promises and to the agreements
that we are trying to reach with them to ensure that we also establish a
financing mechanism to ensure that the empowerment companies do not end up
overgeared and unable to ever meet their commitments and therefore
resulting in the whole empowerment effort becoming a circus.

I would just like to highlight a few things. One of the hon members raised
the issue of our co-operation with the Chamber of Mines. I want to assure
the member that, even though we do not agree on everything, we actually
have a very healthy and robust working relationship, and in fact, I would
like to thank them for the frank discussions that we normally have on a
variety of issues.

I would like to tell hon member Mr Nkosi that we are also committed to
ensuring that we find a mechanism to support the junior miners, because in
South Africa we have the very big and the very small with regard to miners.
We need, therefore, to do something about creating the size in between.
ERPM and Rainbow Minerals Mine fall into that category and the challenge
that we intend to put to them, namely to do more to support, also has to be
managed, because we do not want to overburden them when they are trying to
take care of themselves. But, the principle is well taken.

Regarding the issue of the relocation of mine inspection, it is an issue
that is under discussion. I would like to assure the members that it has
not yet been concluded. Labour and business have also made submissions.
They would also prefer that we keep the mining inspection within the
Department of Minerals and Energy. Between ourselves, the Department of
Labour and the Department of Health, we are determined to make sure that we
take the best and most effective decision in order to make sure that we do
not compromise the safety of workers.

A number of members raised the issue of beneficiation. As I explained, as
did the Deputy Minister, we have extensive programmes which may not be
extensive enough at this point in time, but there is a plan to look at
beneficiation. This includes a trip, in a few weeks' time, to West Africa
by ourselves, labour and the industry, to go to look at training by
goldsmiths in West Africa, whom we intend to bring into South Africa to
assist with job creation through training in the jewellery sector. There is
also a jewellery training school at Harmony, in Welkom, which Government
and other different institutions have been involved in establishing. Thus
something is happening there, but obviously more can be done.

Regarding the issue of the petrol price being higher in South Africa than
in other countries who have lesser facilities than ourselves, the truth of
the matter is that, yes, we tax our petrol. That is why we have efficiency
in the system. In some other countries, governments subsidise petrol, for
instance, and they have enormous problems. In some cases, when the petrol
price is very high and they are unable to cope, they are forced to divert
resources which they need in other sectors in order to absorb the shock. In
some cases, a country simply runs out of petrol.

One thing that I can assure members will never happen in this country is
that they will never stand outside with a spakupaku [plastic container] in
front of a pump that does not have petrol. Between myself and the industry,
we are committed that it will never happen. So if one pays just a little
tax to me for that not to happen, surely that should be so. [Laughter.]
That does not mean that we are not committed to reviewing the structure.
There is a study that is going on looking at the inbound landed costs or
IBLC in particular. Thus, that issue is well taken. When we have the
results of the study, we will make an announcement.

An issue which did not arise directly, but which I would like to raise, is
that I would like the House, especially the members of this side of the
House, to note that all of us congratulate James Motlatsi, who is now
retiring as a president of NUM, on the sterling contribution that he has
made. [Applause.] I think that when the history of mining is written
properly in South Africa, with proper scientific analysis of what happened
and how the mining industry made its passage from being a backward-looking
industry to now being a forward-looking industry, the name of James
Motlatsi will be mentioned, because he is definitely a factor.

One member, Comrade Nash, raised the issue of the paraffin price. As
Comrade Nash will know, Government does not take tax when it comes to
paraffin, because we realise that it is mostly the poor who use paraffin.
However, there are all kinds of anomalies in the value chain that
Government has no control over, which, in some cases, then result in the
price going up. We are also concerned about that fact. In fact, he
specifically asked why the recent price hike for paraffin was larger than
those of other products. That is because the product prices are linked to
the international market prices. Petrol, diesel and paraffin serve
different markets. So their prices are not exactly the same. He must also
note that the Government does not actually tax paraffin.

There was also a question about why paraffin and the liquid petroleum gas
prices were linked to the IBLC. The liquid petroleum gas prices are not
linked to the IBLC by Government. This is an oil company practice, but we
agree that the prices are higher than they should be. So, we somehow share
that concern also.

About the issue raised by Mr Nel concerning Mr Shaw and on what I said and
did not say, I will come and see him so that we can rephrase the question
and start again nicely. We can restate the question and we will then try to
see that we get an appropriate answer. Where an apology is due on my side,
I will definitely make it. But I would like to study the record again, as
explained by the hon member.

About the issue of mineral rights, also raised by Mr Nel, I do not know if
the hon member is implying that a person should be compensated or rewarded
for not using his mineral rights. This is the practice all over the world.
The South African mining companies mine all over the world with the same
kind of legal dispensation. I do not know why in South Africa, in
particular, after having had all these privileges, we would still want to
give them this extraordinary protection, which is not found in other
countries where they mine happily. I really think we should not test people
because, as the President said, we are, in this country, committed to
making sure that no disruptions happen and that anything that happens
happens within the law. But, please, let us not push the people too much.

There was also a question about Sasol not paying back the Equalisation
Fund. I do not think that the member understood the decision, because the
Cabinet decision is actually based on a sliding scale. Therefore, the
question that the member is raising does not arise in quite the manner in
which he was raising it.

On the issue of the pipeline price, we are currently drafting legislation
in order to regulate the pipeline. So, there will be legislation for
members to look into and to comment on. About the rationalisation plan,
which is leading to losses by service stations: this is actually not quite
accurate because the retail margin is adjusted once a year. It has recently
been adjusted. This has been done, in recent years, on the recommendation
of the small business advisory services. That was done in consultation with
the affected target group.

The issue of the role of our institution in supporting small business was
also raised. Particular mention, for instance, was made of Mintek. I think
parts of the kind of review or reinforcement that we are looking at in
Mintek have exactly to do with what the members are raising. We see Mintek
in future playing a much more significant role in the provision of
technology, so that some of the accidents and environmental hazards that
members were referring to, that tend to happen especially in relation to
small miners, do not happen. We also see Mintek playing a significant role
in manufacturing technology that responds to the size of and challenges
facing small miners. We therefore concur with the member.
Something which did not come up in my speech earlier on, which I would like
to smuggle in, is the fact that Mossgas is making a profit. Ngicela
niqhwabe. [Please applaud.] [Applause.] There was a time when we thought
that Mossgas was a lost cause. I think it is interesting that it is now
turning the corner.

On the issue of fatalities in the mines, we are committed to making sure
that we improve the situation. Arising out of the mining summit, we have
also been given some challenges, both by industry and the unions, to look
afresh at the issue of decreasing the incidence of mine accidents. But one
of the things on which we all agree is that better education is critical in
this sector. Many of the accidents that happen in the mines also have to do
with the level of education of the workers, which is a shared
responsibility between Government and the employers.

We also agree that when it comes to proto teams, it is important that each
mine is able to develop a team which is also racially reflective of the
people who work in that mine, so that when there are accidents people who
are familiar with the mine are able to go underground. In my few in-and-out
trips underground, I can tell members, I have been in a big hurry to come
to the surface. I realised that the people who work there, in many cases,
spend a lot of time working in one area and they actually develop a very
intimate knowledge of the area. It would be a pity if we did not use that
knowledge to strengthen the people's capacity to rescue their comrades in
times of need.

This year, we honoured one of the miners who rescued trapped miners in
Orkey, and I think that members, as well as those who benefit from miners'
efforts, sometimes do not realise the extent of the miners' work and the
risks that they take. I think it is important that we continue to raise the
issue of safety, as it has been raised here.

On the issue of rural electrification, I think Comrade Motubatse raised a
point concerning the quality of the service that we will and should provide
to women in the rural areas. We are determined not just to provide
household solutions, but also to provide community solutions. We are
committed to not just providing solar energy, but also to providing hybrid
solutions, with generators that can ensure that one kick-starts local
economic development in rural areas. Instead of just providing umbane
welanga [solar power] for each house, we should actually provide the
community with energy so as to create better opportunities for them. I am
also committed to that, because if I were a woman living in the rural
areas, there is no way I would accept a solar panel and let it end there.
In case I get redeployed to an off-grid rural town, I want to make sure
that there is capacity there.

I appreciate Comrade Mangena's comments very much, and we promise him that
we will make sure that we live up to the expectations with regard to
restructuring and transformation in both the mining and the mineral
sectors. Phambili Ngombane in Khayelitsha is one of the exciting projects
we have in the energy sector, and we hope that there will be many more of
them. The Deputy Minister is working very hard to ensure that we stimulate
the renewable energy industry so that we have many more Phambili Ngombanes.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 14 - Home Affairs:

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, His Excellency the Deputy
President ...

The SPEAKER: Order!

The MINISTER: ... hon members, it gives me very great pleasure to present
the Vote of the Department of Home Affairs for the financial year 2000-01.

It is appropriate that I pay tribute to my deputy, Dr Lindiwe Sisulu, who
has held office with me for the second term. She has been a pillar of
strength in assisting me with the running of this often very demanding
portfolio.

Mr Billy L Masetlha has been deployed by the President from the SA Secret
Service to assume the position of my director-general with effect from 1
December 1999, officially starting with the department on 8 December. Mr
Masetlha has already made his presence felt in the running of the
Department of Home Affairs, and although I have welcomed him and presented
him to the public through the media, I also wish to welcome him from this
forum. [Applause.]

As hon members know, the two line functions falling within the ambit of the
activities of the Department of Home Affairs are migration and civic
services. The Chief Directorate of Migration is responsible for control
over the admission of aliens to their residence in and departure from the
Republic, while the Chief Directorate of Civic Services' responsibilities
comprise mainly population registration, citizenship and all matters
pertaining to the issue of travel documents.

When I presented my department's budget last year, I outlined the
challenges confronting it. Looking back at that address, we can take pride
that the department has successfully conquered some of the past challenges.
This gives me the confidence that we will be equally successful in dealing
with the present and future challenges which may offer opportunities to
increase the quality of government in South Africa and the delivery of
services to the citizenry.

Last year the department was confronted with the seemingly insurmountable
challenge of providing bar-coded IDs to all eligible voters who needed
these for the election. Many prophets of doom forecast the impossibility of
accomplishing this task and this allegation became the subject of two court
actions, if hon members recall, and raging public controversy in the media.
In the end, on the day after the elections, not a single eligible voter
complained that he or she was disenfranchised because of a failure by the
Department of Home Affairs to provide the required documentation. I feel
that it is my duty once again to pay high tribute to the hard work and
dedication of our public servants in the department, in spite of the often
inefficient and, at times, disastrous logistical conditions under which
they work.

In confronting tomorrow's challenges we must count on the same dedication
of service, which is increasingly becoming the culture of our Department of
Home Affairs. As the Minister I often receive reports about the
insufficient service output of our offices, queues, delays and
administrative malfunctions, which undoubtedly exist. However, given the
size of our pool of human resources, I receive relatively few complaints
about discourtesy, inefficiency or lack of dedication on the part of our
public servants. My administration will continue to stress a culture of
public service and dedication. The training of human resources will remain
one of my major priorities.

I must note the insufficiency of the budgetary allocations. The needs of
migration control and civic affairs did not input sufficiently in the
overall process of governmental priority determination. Since 1994, in real
terms, there has been a decline in the resources allocated to our
department. One can only spend so much less, and work so much smarter and
achieve so much more within the confines of what one has, and still fulfil
one's obligations. In other words, the famous analogy that one can only cut
one's coat according to the cloth one has applies. Thereafter, spiralling
demands are destined to render systems and practices completely
dysfunctional. The Department of Home Affairs has reached, I am afraid,
that critical threshold.

The insufficient funding in every sphere of activity of my department is
hampering the production of desired outputs. Moreover, projecting required
future outputs against key indicators such as population and migratory
trends, suggests a continued widening of this gap, inevitably followed by
an incapacity to confront the resultant unmanageable imbalance. Against
this existing significant disparity between actual departmental financial
needs and allocated funds for the 2000-01 financial year, the allocation
has increased by a mere 0,85%.
This lack of funds impacts severely on staffing and consequently on the
level of service delivery. The results of the moratorium on the filling of
vacant posts, reluctantly introduced due to budgetary constraints and
annually rising overspending, are daunting indeed. Similarly, the
moratorium on employer-driven terminations has impaired our capacity to
manoeuvre increasing inefficiency. During the current year, the
overspending on personnel came to a staggering R24,62 million. This amount
was made up as follows: Superfluous personnel - 136 in number - came to
R10,6 million; 51 additional posts to the establishment came to R5,2
million; the shortfall on running costs of foreign offices came to R7,0
million; and refunds in terms of the Judge White commission ruling came to
R1,82 million.

The department has requested a substantially higher budgetary allocation,
merely to maintain the operation of our two functions and the services
ancillary to them up to par with present standards. If we were to
substantially upgrade our quality of services, we would need even greater
budgetary allocations. The department's present financial crisis is also
the product of requests for adequate budgetary allocations having been
declined for several years, compounding over the years our need for
additional resources and capacity.

Consequently, many of our officials work in offices which are grossly
inadequate, lacking basic supplies and infrastructure, such as computers.
Moreover, our distribution of offices across the national territory of
South Africa is grossly inadequate to meet the needs and demands of our
service recipients. Therefore, we must accept the conclusion that, within
the present framework characterised by financial limitations, constraints
and inadequate resources, the department would not be able to meet the
challenge of providing the quality of services which our people rightly
deserve and expect from us.

We have, therefore, begun a process of lateral thinking to see to what
extent the present imbalances can be corrected through a paradigm change.
In the short term, future joint ventures with local government structures
are in the process of being established. This partnership may apply in
respect of civic services, as local government has a primary interest in
interfacing with the population register, and could assist in the
registration of and data upkeep in respect of births, marriages and deaths.
Over time, local government could be involved in the issuance of identity
cards and other civic affairs functions, as happens in many countries
around the world.

Looking at the long term, my Ministry has pursued ways and means to
restructure our department, so that we can do more and better, with
increasingly less. The line functions of civic affairs and migration
control present distinct and somehow different challenges. After the three-
year process of policy formulation, on 5 February, the department published
a draft migration Bill for comments. This Bill will restructure our
migration function, addressing many of the problems and difficulties we
have encoutered within the present legislative and administrative
framework. The significance of this Bill is that it intends not only to
bring about legislative reform, but also to restructure the administrative
machinery which is tasked to carry out the responsibility of migration.

Our country can take pride in having been the first to develop a new
migration system in the 21st century and for the 21st century. In fact,
across the world, most migration systems have not been the object of
dedicated and all-comprehensive policy attention. Many existing migration
systems have developed through incremental steps and adjustments out of the
original moulds cast in the 19th century or the earlier part of the 20th
century, and, in the opinion of those who administer them, will need to be
overhauled to meet the needs, challenges and aspirations of a rapidly
globalising society with intense social and cultural exchanges, as well as
the phenomena of organised crime.

In the interim, pending the restructuring and transformation of our
migration function, the Ministry has taken several initiatives to bridge-
gap solutions aimed at addressing present difficulties. I have given
repeated instructions that a hot line be maintained with Investment South
Africa, to ensure that applications for temporary and permanent residence
permits associated with foreign investment may be expedited and, if needed,
facilitated. Last year, there was that hiccup which was brought about by an
official in my department, who, without informing the director-general or
me, disrupted that hot line.

The Ministry itself has dealt with a large number of individual cases and
submissions of all types. In the past 12 months alone I have taken action
in respect of over 1 200 submissions and applications. Much has been
written in the media about the department's backlog in dealing with
applications for permanent and temporary residence permits. I directed a
number of processes aimed at alleviating this backlog.

Countrywide, I have empowered officials of the rank of deputy director and
higher to exempt from having to have immigration permits, first-time
permanent residence applicants who could clearly qualify in terms of
completeness of their application forms, compliance with our policy and the
provisions of the Act; as well as first-time applicants who, at the time of
their application, have been married to a South Africa citizen or a
permanent resident for two years or longer and whose applications are duly
completed. This process was made applicable to all applications in the
offices of the department at the time, as well as to those received up to
31 January 2000.

Furthermore, I requested that all applications for temporary residence
permits that were evidently complete, acceptable and qualified in all
respects, as required by legislation and regulations, received up to and
including 31 January 2000, be fast-tracked to finalisation. The fast-
tracking was designed for a wider group of officials than is normally the
case. Moreover, I directed that in the case of temporary residence permits,
where recommendations from bodies outside the department are required, such
applications be accompanied by such recommendation when presented to our
department.

Lastly, officials with experience in migration work were seconded on a
temporary basis from regional and district offices to the department's
temporary residence subdirectorate at head office to assist with working
off the backlogs that existed at the time. These measures proved to have
the desired effect, and the backlog of permanent and temporary residence
applications has since been substantially diminished.

Many of the difficulties in processing applications for permanent and
temporary residence permits are the product of the inadequate legislation,
which we found in place on our Statute Book, under which we are operating
and which we are in the process of completely reforming. In order to
supplement legislative deficiencies, the department has operated over the
past year on the basis of policy directives contained in the consular code.
However, the lack of public access to such policy directives compounded
problems. For this reason, following the adoption of the Promotion of
Access to Information Act, I gave instructions that the consular code be
made available to the public, which would facilitate the interaction
between the public and our structures.

The efficiency of the department is also being impaired by not having had a
director-general for five months last year. The chief director of
migration, Dr Patrick Matlou, has been transferred out of the department by
Cabinet decision to the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. In
order to obviate the vacuum left by his departure, on 19 April I gave
instructions that Mr Ivan Lambinon, the department's deputy director-
general, and the only one we have, be moved back to the department with
immediate effect. Hon members will remember that Dr Umbatla had to leave
last year. Mr Lambinon was serving as the head of the Government Printing
Office, while having a wealth of experience and knowledge of migration. I
trust that his positive contribution towards the solution of some of the
migration problems has already been felt.

On 2 December 1999 the Constitutional Court ruled that foreigners involved
in lifelong permanent relationships with same-sex South African partners,
izinkonkoni, should, when applying for immigration permits, be treated on
the same footing as heterosexual couples. Convincing arguments had been put
forward that heterosexual life partners could also not be discriminated
against and treated differently from spouses because of their marital
status. Accordingly, I have issued regulations to provide that the benefits
extended to spouses of South African citizens also be made available to
life partners, with certain qualifications and controls.

At present the department runs 19 foreign offices. In locations where the
department has no representation, the function is performed on an agency
basis by the Department of Foreign Affairs. In December, I signed a
submission presented to me by the director-general at the time, which
actually decreed that certain officials should be sent to some of our
foreign offices. I have enquired from the department whether that was
implemented, but as of now, I do not know. Consequently, our services are
provided at 185 locations abroad. During 1999,   507 246 visas were issued
both abroad and in South Africa. From April visas can only be obtained from
our foreign missions to obviate the possibility of fraud.

The department is running its foreign operations on a shoestring budget and
the shortfall on this item for the current financial year amounts to R7
million. It will not be possible to upgrade services at current offices or
to establish a presence at newly identified priority locations to deal with
an annual increase of 1 million visitors. Serious dysfunctionalities
pertaining to operational facilities and systems exist, especially at high-
volume offices such as London, for instance, where 400 000 South Africans
requiring civic services reside and 500 000 Britons visiting South Africa
per annum are in need of consular services.

Moreover, following the Cabinet decision that our visa policy should be
based on the principle of reciprocity, the resultant addition of nationals
of 22 countries to the nonexempted visitor category, has far-reaching
implications for our international capacity requirements. The total number
of visitors from those countries having been 958 488 during 1998, a
preliminary costing has shown that an additional R20 million will be
required yearly on top of the current R7 million deficit on the
department's foreign budget.

The electronic infrastructure with regard to information dissemination and
application lodging would substantially alleviate costs with regard to
exorbitantly high expenditure on personnel and facilities abroad. However,
the incapacity to incur the initially sizeable installation inputs has
impeded the department from even fully exploring this option. Despite this,
an electronic visa processing system has already been implemented at 26
South African missions abroad and a further 20 missions are scheduled to be
on line by the end of this month. This project will continue for two more
years, after which all visa application centres will be electronically
linked to our head office.

The utilisation of the Internet for the transfer of visa data was piloted
at the Maputo mission during the past year. Once security requirements have
been ironed out, this cost-effective procedure will be rolled out to other
offices. Apart from enhancing service delivery, the major advantage of this
system relates to substantially limiting opportunities for fraud with
regard to visa applications.

In the past years, the major focus of the department has been on processing
permanent and temporary residence applications, and migration control was
sought to be achieved mainly in this fashion. The main focus of our law
enforcement has been on ensuring that aliens respect their conditions of
stay in our country, and can be apprehended, dealt with and, when
necessary, deported if they breach them. Such an approach placed emphasis
on those who had become part of the system. However, there is empirical
evidence that large numbers of illegal aliens never become part of the
system, nor apply for any permit. Therefore the migration service envisaged
in our draft legislation will focus greater emphasis on the enforcement in
respect of people who are not within the system.

The draft immigration Bill facilitates aliens to become part of the system
and be registered as such, which will increase our capacity for enforcing
and applying our laws in respect to them. It also simplifies our
procedures, reducing the capacity required to administer them, so that our
migration line function may be able to move capacity resources and
personnel into properly structured activities of control at community
level.

In October 1997 the Cabinet took the decision that only certain airports
will retain their international status as ports of entry into South Africa.
The 10 airports identified for this purpose were Bloemfontein, Cape Town,
Johannesburg, Durban, Port Elizabeth, Upington, Nelspruit, Gateway in
Pietersburg, Lanseria and Mafikeng, formerly Mmabatho. These airports would
be finally designated as ports of entry on compliance with set criteria
pertaining to safety and security. Furthermore, Rand airport would operate
as an international airport only within the purview of international
agreements that South Africa may have with other countries.

During 1998 immigration services were withdrawn from a further five
airports which were previously international airports, namely Alexander
Bay, Grand Central, Rand Airport, Springbok and Wonderboom. Currently only
the representation for international status filed by the owners of Richards
Bay airport is still under consideration. The Cabinet further approved in
1999 that immigration services be transferred from Mmabatho airport to
Pilanesberg airport. This decision has not yet been implemented due to
structural changes that need to be made to the airport facilities by the
Airports Company of South Africa to accommodate Government departments.

The magnitude of the surge in international travel to and from South Africa
is indicated in the fact that a total of about 7 million visitors arrived
in South Africa during 1999. This constitutes a 22,71% increase since 1995.
This number is expected to grow around 9% per annum in the foreseeable
future. The advantages for the country of this tendency are commonplace,
for tourism is becoming a major industry and job creator. Some visit, of
course, for investment and other business purposes. Consequently, the
official formalities pertaining to entry and exit should be as efficient
and as pleasant as possible. The new vision for migration control will try
to achieve this goal.

We also need to have a new vision if we are to address the problems arising
out of the administration of our civic affairs. The main problem of this
line function relates to the inadequacy of our structures to respond to the
demands of our service recipients and the unequal distribution of our
service outlets. We do not have enough offices to meet the demand, and the
distribution of our offices still reflect the spatial inequalities
inherited from apartheid. Consequently, there are less offices where there
are more people to serve, who often have the most intense need for civic
affairs documentation such as IDs.

There are no simple solutions to this issue. Some commentators have
suggested that we should close some of our offices located in affluent
segments of our territory and move them to rural areas. This approach is
self-defeating, because we must continue to serve the commercial hearts of
our country. Furthermore, transferring an office from an urban to a rural
area or from any one given place to another is often more costly than
opening a new office. The limiting factor remains unavailable financial
resources to either transfer offices or open new ones. Therefore, if we
wish to solve the problem confronting us, we need to seek new approaches.

In June last year I submitted to Cabinet a document putting forward the
idea that consideration be given to delegating the delivery aspects of
civic affairs to municipalities. Municipalities will be more equally
distributed throughout our territory and their distribution is more closely
related to population density. Municipalities have a direct interest in
keeping track of life records such as births, deaths and marriages. They
will be equally qualified to enter such information into a centralised
system and to issue birth, death and marriage certificates, along with
identity documents.

The central level of Government could maintain the mainframe, and carry the
responsibility of providing additional administrative capacity and training
to municipalities where and when required. In smaller municipalities this
function could be coupled with other central Government functions equally
delegated to them, along the lines of the often-voiced notion of one-stop
service delivery points.

Implementation of this vision will be facilitated by the development of the
Home Affairs National Identification System, the acronym of which is Hanis,
which will create the backbone for identification, provide secure protocols
and built-in procedures to verify the accuracy of information and integrity
of records. Hanis was launched this year. The project, consisting of the
automation of the department's manual fingerprint system and the issuing of
a new identity card, was prodded by a continuing situation of mistrust. The
present identity document has limited security features and is easily
forged, resulting in persons fraudulently obtaining benefits, with a
negative impact on key services delivery such as housing subsidies, health
services and welfare grants.

It was resolved that an Automated Fingerprint Identification System, Afis,
would be implemented to replace the manual identification and verification
system. For this purpose, the Government did not have the necessary
technology, and a need arose for external procurement. A comprehensive
tender was published on 6 December 1996 for Hanis. After a protracted
tender process - which endured scepticism and attacks from various
quarters, for various reasons - the tender was eventually awarded to the
Marpless Telecommunications Technologies consortium. On 8 November 1999 the
department and the contractor signed a detailed supply contract drafted by
the two parties.

Whereas it was initially intended to issue a two-dimensional barcoded
identity card for the exclusive use of Home Affairs, it later emerged that
a multi-application smart card that would serve purposes other than just
identification and verification, would be a wiser option. But then, the
tender won by Marpless had not addressed this need. Consequently, the
department is preparing a new tender for the procurement of the smart card
technology. Concurrently, the department is preparing the site to house
Hanis for occupation from August this year. It is hoped that the first
Hanis smart card will be issued during the last quarter of the year 2001.

The smart card that we are introducing is not confined to the limited
identification and verification realms of the Home Affairs strategic
engagement only. Rather, it is a multi-application Government identity
smart card with extensive capacities, contained in a chip that boasts
enough intelligence to allow other departments - and perhaps even other
forms of industry, like banks - permission to utilise the card technology.
The Hanis card will serve several Government departments and, among others,
the following are co-operating with Home Affairs on the project: Welfare,
Health, Labour, Transport, Housing and Communications.

I have instructed my department that as soon as the new cards are
available, an adequate communication strategy be implemented to explain
their advantages. However, I do not wish to force our people to substitute
their current barcoded documents with the new cards, and I have instructed
the department that the introduction of the new cards be phased in on the
basis of the needs of our population and in response to their requests. The
new cards will be smart cards in so far as they will be able to be
automatically read by a machine. From a technical viewpoint, they will not
be dissimilar to the cards that members of Parliament utilise to access
their offices in the parliamentary precincts and those which are employed
for building access control. However, their security features will be
greatly enhanced on the basis of state-of-the-art technology.

I have requested my department to investigate worldwide technology in this
regard to ensure that the investment we are making in this project not only
purchases for our country the best available technology, but also enables
us to develop an improved product, which we may, in turn, be in a position
to offer to other countries which in the future may wish to transform their
national identification systems by basing them on smart cards. For this
reason, I have instructed our director-general and senior officials to
visit several foreign countries, including Malaysia, Australia and Finland,
to familiarise themselves with the systems employed there, and possibly
produce for our country something not only equally efficient and effective,
but possibly with more advanced features which those countries would adopt
if they were to develop their systems today.

For instance, I have requested the department to investigate the
possibility of tying the smart cards to our electronic fingerprinting
system, so that the identity of the bearer of the card can be directly
determined by an access-control device or other equipment without the need
for a machine operator having to compare the face of the holder with the
picture on the card. This will, obviously, facilitate functions across the
board, including the payment of pensions. However, the new vision we hold
may be wrecked by the present budgetary constraints. Despite the dramatic
increase in foreign visitors, the personnel situation with regard to
immigration officers has reached critical proportions.

Due to the existing moratorium on the filling of vacant posts, the
department had to resort to crisis arrangements at key ports of entry where
service delivery was on the verge of collapsing. This includes already
overburdened staff having to work overtime, as well as the employment of
casual workers. Both have significant disadvantages, of course. In relation
to overtime, long hours impact negatively on alertness, as all of us know,
and customer care, and the option of giving officers time off for the
overtime worked cannot be followed due to financial constraints. The
practice has also contributed to high levels of absenteeism due to fatigue.

Some major ports of entry are practically dependent on casual workers for
continued operation, such as Johannesburg International Airport with
68,57%, Cape Town International Airport with 44,74% and the Lebombo border
post with 89,47%. In the case of Cape Town International Airport, the
Airports Company has even for some time funded the appointment of
additional casual employees, just to ensure acceptable passenger flow at
the airport. Of course, the utilisation of temporary staff poses inherent
problems, such as training standards, motivation and reliability.

To alleviate this problem, on 1 April I decided to employ and casual staff
contingent on a full-time basis, which remains an ad hoc measure forced
upon us, rather than the result of a personnel needs assessment. The
consequence of these personnel shortfalls, as well as the incapacity to
equip ports of entry with adequate facilities, has limited the department's
contribution to important Southern African regional development initiatives
such as the Trans-Kalahari highway, where traffic at the Kopfontein border
post has increased by 113,03% since 1995, and the Maputo Corridor project
where traffic at the Lebombo border post has increased by 131,3% during the
same period.

During the past six years the department was undaunted by the enormous task
that it faced in respect of the influx of illegal aliens into the country,
despite the fact that it was severely hampered by a lack of resources. In
this period the number of illegal aliens removed annually increased from
approximately 70 000 to more than 180 000. Illegal aliens, in many cases
with syndicate connections and sufficient resources, utilise the legal
process to remain in the country, in contravention of the Aliens Control
Act. The previous financial year's budgetary allocation was not sufficient
to defray legal costs. In the current financial year the entire amount
allocated was spent in the first three months. Legal costs and the
administrative demands of litigation are bound to increase as we transform
our functions in compliance with the Constitution and a human-rights-based
culture. In the long term, a solution to this problem will be found in the
new immigration courts and specialised immigration officials interfacing
with them, as well as by applying simpler and more objective laws and
regulations, which would be the case under our new immigration service
system.

A great challenge that lies ahead for my department in this field in the
year 2000 is the finalisation of the process which commenced with the
drafting of a Green Paper on International Migration in 1998, followed by a
White Paper in February 1999, that led to the publishing of a draft
immigration Bill on February 12 last for public comment. Throughout, we
have endeavoured to keep this process open to public scrutiny and
participation. Both the Green and White Papers were published for public
comment. Provincial public hearings were held in all provinces for comment
on the Green Paper. The 80-day period provided for public comment on the
draft immigration Bill, will be followed by a conference bringing together
role-players and stakeholders.

The finalised Bill resulting from this process will be submitted to
Cabinet, as soon as possible, to be considered by the National Assembly. I
anticipate tabling this Bill in Parliament by the end of August. In the
meantime, the Aliens Control Act of 1991 is still in force and certain
amendments to this Act may be required. We need to expand the definition of
``passport'', simplify the visa requirement procedure in respect of aliens
entering the country and the issuing of immigration permits to dependants,
and regulate the extension of permits and the removal of certain persons
from the Republic of South Africa. A draft Aliens Control Amendment Bill is
currently being drafted for my consideration before being submitted to the
parliamentary process.

The regulations of the Refugees Act of 1998 were drafted during 1999 and
submitted to stakeholders for comment in November 1999. The Act, which has
far-reaching implications for the handling of refugees in South Africa,
came into effect on 1 April 2000. In accordance with section 8 of the Act,
five refugees-reception centres were established, namely in Braamfontein,
Cape Town, Durban, Port Elizabeth and Pretoria. This will bring to an end
the system of lodging claims for asylum at any Home Affairs office, which
created enormous problems, as there was no systematic and co-ordinated
control of claimants.

Status determination officers were transferred from my department's head
office to these offices in March 2000 to effect the smooth implementation
of this Act. The Cabinet will be approached regarding the financial
requirements for implementing the envisaged staffing structure. Whereas the
cost hereof for the ensuing financial year has been estimated at
R15 106 000, only R5 175 000 has been allocated.

The department, in collaboration with the Independent Electoral Commission
and other role-players, is currently in the process of preparing for the
local government elections that will take place during November 2000. The
department will again do everything in its power to ensure that the demand
for barcoded identity documents is met. Amendments to the Identification
Act of 1997 will be made during the present parliamentary session to make
provision for the abolition of all forms of identity documents except the
barcoded identity document.

Incidentally, I know that many people were surprised yesterday, when it
appeared that I had made a statement that the date for elections might not
be met. All I said was that I received information from the Department for
Provincial Affairs and Local Government to the effect that if, in fact, we
do not fast-track the Bill, that might be the result. That was just
speculation. But, on television, members may have seen that my colleague
was baited into saying that the date would not be changed. This morning, in
the Cabinet committee, we talked about this, and clearly he did not even
know that I had made a statement. A mischievous journalist actually asked
him to do that. Even this morning, the President said that he was not sure
of the date and that the Minister would give the date. Even that was used
by the electronic media this morning and it was presented as if the
President was not sure of this. Of course, many members are quite used to
my being made the dunce of Cabinet and being presented as the ultimate fool
in this Cabinet.

In June 1999 provincial elections were successfully delivered by our
Independent Electoral Commission and this made it possible for hon members
of this House to be here today, thanks to the IEC. The Independent
Electoral Commission and its chairperson, the chief electoral officer, the
staff and all those men and women who contributed to the success of the
elections deserve credit for their dedication and commitment to the
development of democracy in our country.

In planning the preparation for local government elections, the commission
is working in close co-operation with Government departments and role-
players involved. It also has to closely follow and support the demarcation
and delimitation of wards for new municipalities. Once the delimitation
process has been concluded, the commission will have to ensure that voters
who are already on the voters' roll, as well as those who will still be
applying for registration, are placed in the correct segments of the
voters' roll.

The new municipal order introduces a more complicated electoral system than
the one that pertained in last year's national and provincial elections.
So, as representatives of the people, we have a very great responsibility
in understanding this. I remember that last weekend someone explained it,
and asked me whether I had understood it. I said that we understood the
English that was being used, but not what was being said. [Laughter.]

Thus, this calls for a timely and intensive voter education effort. The
resources of the commission will, once again, have to be supported by
nongovernmental and community-based organisations, the printed media,
national broadcasting and community radio stations, as well as traditional
structures in rural areas. Political parties have a special responsibility
to provide voter education.

The Electoral Act of 1998 was passed at a time when the new municipal
dispensation was still being developed and was not meant to apply to
municipal elections in the post interim period. The Independent Electoral
Commission, charged with the regular review of electoral legislation, has
submitted to Government a draft municipal electoral Bill, to provide the
necessary statutory framework for the management of local government
elections which is now before the Home Affairs portfolio committee.

I wish to mention a small but important improvement in our quality of life.
In terms of existing legislation, a woman, upon her marriage, may retain
her maiden surname, may assume the surname of her husband, or join her
surname with that of her husband as a double-barrelled surname, as an
option of her own volition, as a matter of choice. As women in the past
generally assumed the surnames of their husbands as a consequence of
marriage, their husbands' surnames were automatically allocated to them
upon registration of their marriages in the population register. Should a
woman, however, wish to retain her maiden surname, a written notice to that
effect to the department was required, upon receipt of which her surname
was amended accordingly. Such amendments could only be effected by the
department's head office in Pretoria.

In the recent past, women objected to the system of automatic registration
in the population register under their husbands' surnames, as if we own
them. So we must be careful even of using endearing names such as ``my
darling'', as if we own them. [Laughter.] Women do not want us to own them.
[Laughter.] To accommodate the needs of women in this regard in a more
equitable and user-friendly way, the computer systems of the department
have been amended to allow our domestic offices to do the amendments
locally - in other words, on the spot - which will largely eliminate the
delays and inconveniences of the past.

Furthermore, the marriage register has now been amended to include a
question regarding this issue of the surnames, ie to ask the woman which of
the surnames she wants to be known by after her marriage. She will then be
recorded under such surname when the marriage is registered, and not
automatically under that of her husband, as was the case in the past.
Madoda bhasobhani. [Men beware.] [Laughter.]

The re-incorporation of the erstwhile independent and self-governing states
into a unified RSA after the 1994 general election, brought about the
necessity to re-organise and rationalise government printing. In pursuit of
this objective, the Government Printing Works has been tasked with the
responsibility of establishing the national Government Printing Works, with
decentralised offices and stores in the provinces wherever necessary. This
is a responsibility that I put in the hands of the Deputy Minister, Dr
Sisulu. She has had discussions with provincial governments on this issue,
and discussions are ongoing. Progress that has been made so far, is
satisfactory.

I will be informing the Cabinet in the second half of this year on the
progress in detail. The downside of this, however, is the number of
superfluous staff having to be taken over from the various printing
establishments. The investigation relating to alternatives to
privatisation, which the Cabinet must consider in the final instance, has
progressed well. A report is expected within the next month and will be
presented to Cabinet after consideration by the department. With regard to
this issue in particular, and the Government Printing Works as a whole, I
must express my particular appreciation to the hon Deputy Minister, Dr
Lindiwe Sisulu, for her dedicated attention to the printing works. I regret
that owing to her family bereavement, she is not with me today. I feel as
if I am naked if she is not in the House. [Laughter.]

The primary function of the Film and Publication Board, which also falls
under her, is the classification of all films and interactive computer
games intended for distribution and/or exhibition in the Republic. The
film, video and computer games industry is a rapidly expanding one and
imposes increasing demands on the board. The introduction of films in DVD
and CD-Rom format has added markedly to the workload of the board.

In addition, the board is required to monitor the Internet for child
pornography, which presents unique problems. Given the international
character of the Internet, the problem of protecting our children from
sexual predators requires close liaison and co-operation with law-
enforcement agencies in other countries, which has cost implications. One
must appreciate the self-regulation of the industry which provides basic
computer programmes which bar any pornography from any given computer,
thereby reducing the risk of unsolicited exposure or the exposure of
minors.

Nevertheless, the board not only maintains close and collaborative contact
with law-enforcement agencies in other countries, but also attends
workshops and conferences to discuss common problems and strategies for
better and more effective co-operation. To give effect to Deputy Minister
Sisulu's call for more protection of children from sexual exploitation and
abuse, the board is organising, in collaboration with the Office of the
Deputy Minister, a national workshop on combating child pornography through
effective law enforcement. [Laughter.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M R SIKAKANE: Mr Chairperson, Deputy President, I am sure that before
the Minister gets back to KwaZulu-Natal he will already be in trouble here
at Parliament. I have six sons. Is he telling me that when they get married
in my kraal I will have oButhelezi in my kraal, because one of my sons is
married to MaButhelezi? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: [Inaudible.]

Mr M R SIKAKANE: If hon members go out this evening and pick up the Cape
Argus the headline will read ``Mbeki pulls the rand back''. When I finish
this speech I am sure the morning newspaper headline will read ``Sikakane
pulls the rand back further''. [Laughter.] I say this because I am going to
speak on a very sensitive issue in this country, namely immigration. I will
confine myself to that for reasons members are going to hear.

On the subject of immigration, please allow me from the onset to say that I
am not talking here about illegal aliens, refugees or people seeking
political asylum, but about people who willingly decide to settle in South
Africa and make it their home. I know that to some of us inside this House
and out there this is a sensitive issue, considering our past. Let me
hasten to say that nowhere in the world where democracy prevails would one
find people barred from settling in a country permanently or otherwise. The
only difference is that legislation has been put in place which regulates
immigration policy and other requirements.

The unfortunate part is that in this country we have never had a
legislation on immigration. That is our biggest problem. That is why people
are up in arms all over the country. We have never had legislation in this
country that regulates how people should come in and go out. It is
heartening to know that the Department of Home Affairs has began this
process in a form of a White Paper.

Out of desperation and driven by need, the Department of Health went out of
its way to recruit foreign doctors to work mainly in rural areas which most
of our doctors are not impressed about doing. They work with dedication.
The previous Minister of Health, Dr Nkosazana Zuma, had lots of praise for
doctors who had been sent to rural areas. But what is upsetting is that we
seem not to be appreciating and saying thank you to those people who have
been working in rural areas.

I say this because I want to cite an example that took place in my
constituency at Ngwelezane Hospital in Empangeni. Here, a doctor working in
the intensive care unit - which is a very crucial component of a hospital,
as one has very sick people there - was jailed simply because he altered
some dates on the application form, because he felt he was late in
applying. He was locked up. People were left dying in the hospital's ICU.

I happened to get involved, thanks to the Department of Home Affairs' new
director-general, Mr Billy Masetlha, who intervened. The doctor was
released from jail. After having been refused permission to work, they
assisted in getting him back to work. I am pleased that the new director-
general has shown his worth by quickly getting to grips with what is
happening in the department.

I would like to conclude with a big request of the Department of Health and
members of the Portfolio Committee on Health. I see Dr Nkomo, the
chairperson of the committee, is here. It is a pity the Minister of Health
is not here, because this is not the baby of Home Affairs. Home Affairs
says: ``Go back to the Department of Health. They are the ones who brought
you here.'' I say that this is un-African. We bring people out from
overseas, who work here for five years or whatever period, but we do not
take care of them. The Department of Health is the one which is not
approaching the Government and the Department of Home Affairs to say: ``Let
us give these doctors blanket permanent residency if they have worked in
this country for five years.''

Let me remind hon members, in 1993 the previous government, just before the
elections, granted European doctors who had been here for merely one or two
years blanket permanent residency. Why can we not do that with people who
have rescued us over the past five years? What is the difficulty? We must
give permanent residency to these people who apply. I am challenging and
requesting the Department of Health to do so. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Mr Chairman, the hon Sikakane said that he hoped the headlines
tomorrow would read: ``Sikakane pulls back the rand''. Well, if the ANC had
listened to the DP in the first place, the rand would not have fallen. The
hon the Minister also said that he feels naked without his Deputy Minister
here. I say to the Minister: ``As long as you are not naked when the Deputy
Minister is around, hon Minister.''

The DP has three fundamental problems with Home Affairs which are the root
causes of the overall inefficiency and lack of capacity. These are: one,
underfunding; two, bad management; and, three, serious allegations of
irregularities. As I have only eight minutes to speak, I will identify only
the most serious issues which have been dramatically affected by either
gross underfunding in this budget or bad management, and which impact
directly on the public.

Some of the department's financial woes are self-inflicted, with many
sectors starved of finances, while others spend freely on skewed priorities
as if there were no tomorrow. On my recent visits to Home Affairs offices
throughout the country, I was moved by the dedication of many of the people
employed by Home Affairs, some of whom are here today. But even these
committed loyal people can only do so much and no more.

The underfunding of the Department of Home Affairs is reaching critical
proportions in the following areas. The sum of R15 million was required to
set up refugee reception offices, as stipulated in the Refugees Act of
1998, yet only R5 million has been awarded. This means the Act and its
stated objectives have been placed in jeopardy at conception. At least 1
200 officers are required to police the presence of the estimated 8 million
illegal immigrants in this country, but we only have 325 of them doing the
job of repatriating roughly 180 000 illegals a year. If the current level
of illegal aliens does not increase, which is very unlikely, it will take
the 325 officers 44 years to deal with all 8 million illegals.

The department was forced to resort to crisis management in immigration
when services at entry ports were on the verge of collapse. Overburdened
staff were forced to work overtime, and casual workers had to be employed.
The situation deteriorated to such an extent that 68% of staff at
Johannesburg International Airport and 89% at the Lebombo border post were
casual workers. At Cape Town International Airport the situation became so
severe, that the Airports Company was forced to find 15 casuals at the cost
of R40 000 a month. The crisis has undoubtedly led to criminals and drugs
slipping into the country, because too few personnel are able to scrutinise
and inspect incomers' documentation and their luggage the way they should.
The DP urges the Minister of Finance to plough back revenue collected from
departure tax into tourist-related services such as immigration.
[Interjections.]

Then we come to the IEC, which requested R998 million in order to run the
elections properly in November, but was only given R450 million, a
difference of R540 million. In other words, the IEC will be underfunded by
a staggering 54,9%. The department has also suffered the consequences of
bad management decisions, some of which I will outline.

One sector which seems to have an abundance of financial resources, is the
legal department, which has a humiliating record of court cases and appeals
it has lost in recent months. Notable cases were those of the National
Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality, as well as Ayesha Danyal, who
appeared in the Sunday Times recently. They both took on the department in
separate court cases and won. If the amount of taxpayers' money spent on
defending the department was not so serious, I would be laughing with a lot
of other people, but the blatant stupidity of the Ministry, which obviously
does not believe that ordinary citizens can and will take on the
Government, is unbelievable. I would like to give the Minister a word of
advice ...

Adv J H DE LANGE: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it correct that the
member refers to the ``blatant stupidity'' of the department? I would like
to ask him to please withdraw that.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, will you please withdraw
that?

Mr M WATERS: I withdraw that, Chairperson. [Interjections.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Chairperson, on a point of order: The member is not using
any language reflecting on the honour ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Mr Andrew, the member has already
withdrawn. Please continue, hon member.

Mr K M ANDREW: Yes, Chairperson, but I think that it is an incorrect ruling
and I would like to address you on it, because it sets a precedent.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Andrew, I have ruled on the
matter and the member has withdrawn his statement. Please let us continue
with the debate. Continue, hon member. [Interjections.]

Mr M WATERS: The next time the ANC Cabinet takes a decision to oppose a
court case, as it did in the case of the Coalition for Gay and Lesbian
Equality, they must be reminded to read the Constitution and their own
policy, which protect people against discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation. They need to be reminded of that. They also need to be
reminded that the Constitution no longer allows officials of the state to
literally kidnap, detain and deport miners who have not transgressed the
law, as stipulated in this judgement.

I would like to advise the hon the Minister to drop his next round of
appeals against Ayesha, because she will win and the hon the Minister will
lose the court case. The hon the Minister needs to get a grip on his legal
department, because the DP will not allow him to continue to plead poverty
while pouring money down the legal drain.

Criticism is heaped on the department daily with regard to the processing
of permanent residency applications and work visas. This is besides the
ongoing hassles of obtaining ID books and passports.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon
member is very conscious of money that we throw down the drain. What about
the crisis in the bar codes in which the DP was involved? What double
standards are those?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Minister, could you please
respond to that when you are given the chance to respond? Let us give the
member time to debate. Please continue, hon member.

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Currently, the time taken to process
permanent residency applications is 18 months. That is about 15 months too
long. The Minister needs to set targets and to stop using the immigration
selection boards as an excuse for the delays. Yes, the immigration boards
are independent of the Ministry, but he, as the Minister, is accountable
for their actions, or lack of action as the case may be. The Minister
appoints the boards and pays their salaries, and if they are not
effectively eradicating backlogs, it is up to the Minister to replace them
with people who will. That is the Minister's responsibility.

Another problem is that the department keeps on issuing new internal
regulations which continuously move the goalposts. One example of how this
affects our economy is the advertising obligations by companies wishing to
employ foreigners. When the department changed the rules about where an
advertisement should appear, the information was only circulated internally
and not to those affected by these regulations. This has led to companies
taking certain steps in good faith and then having their applications for
work permits rejected. This has forced the restart of the whole process
costing the companies and the economy thousands of rands.

I want to say to the Minister that we are not playing a cat-and-mouse game
where the department changes the rules and the participants have to guess
which rules have been changed and to what. I appeal to the Minister to cut
the red tape and to launch a vigorous immigration campaign worldwide to
attract skills that we need in this country.

In conclusion, the most urgent task facing the Minister is to insist upon
the review of the drastic decision to slash the IEC funding. If this
Government were truly committed to free and fair elections, the Minister
would not give his support to cutting the very funds meant to register and
to educate the voters of this country. He must consider whether or not the
ANC might well prefer an uneducated electorate in November.
[Interjections.] It is not a coincidence that the most complicated voting
systems are in district councils where the overwhelming majority of poor
and illiterate people live. We could be one slashed budget away from
Zimbabwe. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr M WATERS: I shudder to think what amount the ANC will allocate to the
IEC in 2004, especially if they are threatened for power. Unlike
ministerial cars, ministerial security and planes for the President, no
corner should or dare be cut when funding the IEC. For every cent the
Minister cuts from the IEC budget, he is slowly but surely suffocating the
participation of our people in the election.

This Government has given the Minister's department an impossible task of
delivering services to people without the necessary funds. When people have
to stand in queues for hours on end owing to a lack of staff, it is not the
ANC that will shoulder the blame. It is he and his party, the IFP.
[Interjections.] One might wonder if the ANC is not deliberately setting
him up for failure. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, the central role of the department
is the maintenance of the integrity of our borders, keeping track of who
the genuine South African citizens are and the maintenance of the voters'
roll. This function is a multidimensional responsibility. It impacts on our
economy, public health, employment levels and crime rate.

Our ability to hold to trade agreements which we have signed also lies at
the door of this department. We have to protect ourselves as a credible
player in global trade through stability in the country. But when, through
ineffective border control, we have become a malaria risk, an Aids risk, a
crime risk and a drug risk, our status as a credible trade partner suffers.

When the Department of Home Affairs and other departments fail to control
our national frontiers, we lose the respect of our international trading
partners. We have no objection to giving refuge to bona fide immigrants.
These are, however, a small percentage when compared to the large number of
illegal immigrants. Whilst we do have an understanding of budgetary
constraints, we believe that Home Affairs has done a disservice to our
economy through ineffective border control, together with contributions by
other departments in this area. It would appear that we are exporters of
stolen vehicles and importers of illegal firearms, and our good
infrastructure is undermined hereby.

The USA is a nation of champions because they lure other countries'
champions. They do so in all spheres of life, from scientists to sportsmen.
Do we have similar programmes? Do we have a policy on such issues? The hon
Sikakane referred to the White Paper and various issues in this regard.
Yet, illegal immigrants appear to enter our country with impunity. All our
Government departments are experiencing a chronic shortage of skilled
personnel. We need to train the necessary people in the shortest possible
time. [Time expired.]

Debate suspended.

The House adjourned at 18:00.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Report of the Department of Home Affairs for 1999 [RP 98-2000].

2.    The Minister of Correctional Services:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial Inspectorate for the
     period 1 June 1998 to 1 February 2000.

3.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    Protocol on Health in the Southern African Development
         Community, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
         1996.
     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol.


