---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 June 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-06-21
---

WEDNESDAY, 21 JUNE 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                 DECISION ON POSSIBLE STANBIC-NEDCOR MERGER

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, firstly I would like
to express my appreciation for the opportunity to address Parliament. It is
indeed an indulgence. It is also a line-function responsibility I have over
which I have exercised an executive decision, but one which I would like to
share with this House and the people of our country. I thought that, in
keeping with the status of Parliament, I should choose this podium to make
this announcement, rather than to do it on the outside.

It relates to the application by Nedcor for my consent to acquire 49% of
the shares in Standard Bank Investment Corporation. This matter has
dominated the discourse on the financial pages, certainly since November
last year when the application was first made. This matter has been to the
High Court and the Supreme Court of Appeal for a decision on who shall
decide. It has been examined by the Competition Commission and by the
Registrar of Banks and, finally, it landed on my desk for decision.

I met delegations from both Nedcor and Stanbic earlier this month, as well
as a delegation from Sasbo, a trade union active in the banking sector.
Although I indicated to them that I would not examine these issues anew,
because I would accept, to some extent, what had gone before from the
Competition Commission and the Registrar of Banks, I also needed to be
informed of their views about this matter. Earlier today I met with Mr
Chris Liebenberg of Nedcor and Dr Conrad Strauss and Mr Jaco Maree of
Stanbic to share with them what my decision is. I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to the respective chairpersons,  to the chief
executives of these banks and also to their teams for their professional
conduct in engaging with us on this matter, and accepting the decision in
the spirit that they have.

The Banks Act requires that the Minister of Finance only grants permission
for an acquisition if such acquisition will not be contrary to the public
interest, to the bank concerned, or to the interests of depositors in such
institutions. Our examination covered a series of public interest issues.
Firstly, regarding the impact of such a proposed acquisition on
competition, we examined the existing concentration of banks in this
country and recognised that South Africa belongs to a group of countries
with a high concentration of banks. Concern about this issue has been
expressed by both the registrar and the Competition Commission. Against
this, we evaluated the technology and efficiency gains that might derive
from a merger, and we arrived at the view that these gains do not outweigh
the anticompetitive effects if the merger were allowed to proceed.

Furthermore, the resultant overconcentration is likely to result in smaller
banks having difficulty in attracting deposits. Some concerns were also
expressed in other jurisdictions under similar circumstances. For instance,
my colleague Paul Martin, the Finance Minister in Canada, said, that ``such
mergers would lead to an unacceptable concentration of our economic power
in the hands of fewer large banks'', about a similar issue in Canada.

We also looked at consumer impact. We first looked at access to banking
services. Nedcor was of the view that the overall accessibility for
customers to branches and ATMs would be much improved by the merger of
itself and Stanbic. They further submitted that such a merger would not
affect the retention of branches in rural areas as there would be about 670
ATMs relocated to enhance services to the underbanked. It needs to be noted
that Stanbic has also invested heavily in ATM access. It has about 2 400
ATMs - two and a half as many as Nedcor has. I am of the view that the
proposed relocation of 670 ATMs is likely to result in a shrinking of
access in existing areas which may not necessarily be in the public
interest. Of particular concern is the possible impact on banking services
to the underbanked and rural areas.

We also looked at product lines and service delivery. Generally, whilst
economies of scales might arise from mergers such as this in which unit
costs can be reduced and such cost reductions passed on to the consumer,
these circumstances would be regarded as a public-interest benefit. The
pursuit of efficiencies may also result in the rationalisation of the
product lines of both Nedcor and Stanbic, with some cost benefit for
consumers. There may, however, be instances in which the rationalisation of
product lines in pursuit of efficiencies and profitability may work against
the public interest. An example would be the case in which a product that
is less profitable is discontinued, even if it serves a public need.

The second aspect we looked at was nonbanking issues - the concentration in
respect of the Liberty Group and Old Mutual. In this regard, we are also
concerned about the risk of value to the Liberty Group and the impact that
this could have in impairing the growth of Liberty and the possible
prejudice to shareholders. We looked at the cost structure of Liberty. It
is likely to remain the same, but we recognised that the income stream
could possibly diminish until alternative channels are identified and put
into place.
The third aspect we looked at was the peremptory requirement of the
legislation, an examination of whether the proposed acquisition would be
contrary to the interests of the bank concerned. Here we took account of,
amongst other things, the fact that the Standard Bank brand is highly
recognised in South Africa, and that its profitability has not been in
question anywhere, certainly not within Nedcor either.

Amongst the four big banks in this country, Nedcor has the lowest cost-to-
income ratio. Stanbic has suggested that this is because Nedcor has, in
part, limited its risk through focusing on the middle to upper-middle
income market. This is in line with its corporate identity too. On the
other hand, Stanbic has focused its vision on the mass market. There is a
marked difference, therefore, between the corporate outlook and culture of
the banks concerned, which may lead to operational difficulties in a merged
entity, with the possible loss of focus.

Further, the systemic risk which could result in the event of a failure,
would arise in circumstances in which Stanbic and the Standard Bank felt
that they were being dragged into something that they were not willingly a
party to. We examined the proposed acquisition in the context of the
interests of depositors. Again, there is the great concern about the size
of the entity that would arise from such a merger and the possibility of a
medium to high adverse impact on the ability of the authorities to stem a
systemic crisis, should it arise.

Against this backdrop, we need to recognise that South Africa's banking
system, though undoubtedly in need of improvement in certain areas if it is
to effectively meet the challenges posed by globalisation and the resultant
need for more efficient banks, is, in my view, still considerably healthy.
Nedcor's achievements as a bank are not a source of pride only for itself,
its depositors and shareholders, but also for the country as a whole. The
Registrar of Banks is therefore correct in saying that Nedcor's track
record constitutes a strong argument for ``regulators not to impede the
ability of the market to decide on the ownership of a bank, provided that
the owners meet the criteria set out in legislation''.

Section 37(4) of the Banks Act is peremptory in its requirement that
permission for the proposed acquisition be granted only if the Minister of
Finance is satisfied that it will not be contrary to the factors set out in
the legislation. A further sensitive issue related to the proposed merger
is that of its likely impact on employment in the banks concerned. The
estimates of the number of job losses resulting from the merger ranged
between 10 000 and 15 000. It has been pointed out that natural staff
attrition or average turnover of staff in the banking sector is between 12%
and 13% per year. This would translate into about 18 000 for both banks
over a three-year period.

The Competition Commission has ruled against the proposed merger. It has
expressed itself in this regard as follows:


  In conclusion, therefore, the commission is of the view that the proposed
  transaction should be prohibited on the grounds that it will have
  significant social costs (primarily) potential abuse of market power in
  the retail banking market and potential job losses, which represent a net
  loss to society, which cannot be offset by any potential efficiency gains
  or public interest considerations.

I have considered the commission's report and have noted its conclusion.

The recommendation of the Registrar of Banks may be summarised, and I
quote, as follows:


  I am of the opinion that the risks of the application outweigh the
  merits. Accordingly, I recommend that the application by Nedcor to
  acquire more than 49% of the shares of Stanbic not be approved.

The Registrar has advised that:


  Nedcor has not provided conclusive evidence that the potential efficiency
  gains and public interest considerations would exceed the social costs of
  potential market abuse and job losses.

Having carefully considered the recommendations of the registrar and the
commisssion, as well as the submissions of Nedcor, Stanbic and Sasbo, I
would reiterate that I am not satisfied that the potential efficiency gains
would exceed the public interest concerns of diminished competition,
potential market concentration and job losses, the attendant risks if the
merged entity were to fail.
That the proposed acquisition is considered by Stanbic to be hostile is
merely one of the factors taken into account in my decision. Given the
factors outlined regarding the concentration of economic power that would
arise from the merger and the attendant risks, I would remain extremely
concerned, even if there was a friendly interaction between Stanbic and
Nedcor.

Accordingly, I decline to grant permission for Nedcor to acquire over 49%
of the total nominal value ... [Applause] ... of the shares as set out in
the application in terms of section 37 of the Banks Act, and I trust that
all parties in this House will support us in our decision. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! I thank you, hon Minister, for your statement. I
understand you have an appointment, and we will excuse you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I have the honour to inform you that
Mr Bonginkosi Wesley Dhlamini is waiting outside to be sworn in.

The SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Van der Merwe, but I think you ought to wait
till I announce a vacancy. [Laughter.] Unless you were proposing that he
was taking over from the Minister of Finance. [Laughter.]

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy caused by the death of Mr T S Khoza
on 28 May 2000 had been filled by Mr B W Dhlamini with effect from 21 June
2000.

                                    OATH

Mr B W Dhlamini, accompanied by Mr J H van der Merwe and Mr V B Ndlovu,
made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.

                        MEETING OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! I wish to announce that the National Assembly will meet
at 09:00 tomorrow morning, when His Excellency the Deputy President will be
making a statement to us on the events in KwaZulu-Natal.
QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms H I BOGOPANE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today heads of investment promotion from 40 African states
       meet in Durban at the 10th Southern African economic summit where a
       joint plan of action will be devised on how to attract foreign
       investment to the continent;

  (2) believes that the summit is a critical step in furthering the
       economic rebirth of our continent, a fundamental aspect of the ideal
       of the African renaissance, as articulated by President Thabo Mbeki;
       and

  (3) welcomes the delegates to the summit and wishes them every success in
       their formulation of a joint plan of action to attract foreign
       investment to our continent.

Mev P W CUPIDO: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem dat -


       (a)  algemene anargie, wanorde en chaos heers by die uitbetaling van
           pensioene, ongeskiktheidstoelae en kindertoelae, omdat hierdie
           toelae op dieselfde dag by dieselfde betaalpunte uitbetaal word
           ...

Mnr D V BLOEM: Abe, Abe, Abe! (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that -


       (a)  total anarchy, disorder and chaos prevail when pensions,
           disability grants and children's grants are paid out, because
           these grants are all paid out on the same day at the same pay
           points ...

Mr D V BLOEM: Abe, Abe, Abe!]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Forget about a, b or c and pay
attention to the member. [Laughter.] Please continue, hon member.

Mev P W CUPIDO: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gaan voort:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem dat -


       (b)  die DP voorstel dat -


           (i)   die nuwe uitbetaalstelsel en kontrakvoorwaardes van die
                  konsultante as 'n saak van dringendheid hersien word; en
           (ii)  die verskillende toelae op verskillende dae uitbetaal
                  word;


  (2) van mening is dat ons aan die hulpbehoewendes, veral die oues van
       dae, beter ondersteuning en 'n goeie en gesonde administrasie
       verskuldig is; en

  (3) die Minister versoek om toe te sien dat amptenare die publiek met
       meer empatie en respek behandel.

[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chairperson, I continue:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (b)  the DP proposes that -


           (i)   the new system of payment and the contractual conditions
                  of the consultants be reviewed as a matter of urgency;
                  and
           (ii)  the various grants be paid out on different days;


  (2) is of the opinion that we owe the needy, in particular the aged,
       better support and a proper and sound administration; and

  (3) requests the Minister to ensure that officials treat the public with
       more empathy and respect.

[Interjections.]]

Chief M W HLENGWA: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) acknowledges the President's comments on the vexed issue of the
       demarcation of municipal boundaries in his speech during the debate
       on his Vote;

  (2) welcomes his proposed meeting with traditional leaders in July to
       discuss their concerns regarding this matter and his willingness, on
       previous occasions, to enter into such dialogue;

  (3) regrets the comments made in the National Assembly by the Minister
       for Provincial and Local Government when he described Rev K M Zondi,
       MP, as a prophet of doom for reporting the view of traditional
       leaders that great trouble lies ahead if the Government presses on
       with its current policy on demarcation before reaching consensus with
       the amakhosi;

  (4) calls on the Minister for Provincial and Local Government to
       reconsider his comments which imply that traditional leaders are also
       ``prophets of doom'' when they are simply expressing the grave
       concerns of those they represent ...

[Time expired.]

Mr T R MOFOKENG: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the people of Zimbabwe will be going to the polls on 24 and 25
           June 2000 to determine the future of their country; and

       (b)  the presence of international observer missions in Zimbabwe has
           contributed to a significant decrease in violent incidents;


  (2) acknowledges that there are isolated incidents of violence and
       intimidation; and

  (3) calls on the people of Zimbabwe to go to the polls on the election
       days and to vote and ensure that the general elections proceed
       without incidents of violence and intimidation.

[Applause.]

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) sy volle steun verleen aan grondhervorming wat daartoe sal lei dat
       binne afsienbare tyd, afgesien van 'n groot aantal bestaansboere, ook
       'n lewenskragtige en welvarende swart kommersiële boeregemeenskap in
       Suid-Afrika tot stand sal kom;

  (2) van mening is dat so 'n program te alle tye die wese van suksesvolle,
       markgedrewe ekonomiese stelsels oor die wêreld heen sal eerbiedig en
       beskerm, naamlik sekerheid van private eiendomsbesit, wat onder meer
       markwaarde as grondslag vir grondtransaksies insluit; en

     3) verder van mening is dat daar, wanneer die kwotas grond bereken word
        wat deur boere van die verskillende bevolkingsgemeenskappe besit of
        benut word, rekening gehou moet word daarmee dat die
        produksiepotensiaal van die landbougrond in die oostelike derde van
        Suid-Afrika ruweg dubbel dié is van dié van die twee-derdes in die
        westelike woestyn- en halfwoestynstreke van ons land.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)
[Dr W A ODENDAAL: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) gives its full support to land reform which, in the foreseeable
       future, will lead to the establishment not only of a large number of
       subsistence farmers, but also of a vigorous and prosperous black
       commercial farming community in South Africa;

  (2) is of the opinion that such a programme will at all times honour and
       protect the essence of successful, market-driven economic systems
       throughout the world, namely security of tenure, which includes,
       inter alia, market value as a basis for land transactions; and

  (3) is further of the opinion that, when the land quotas to be owned or
       utilised by farmers from the various population groups are being
       calculated, account should be taken of the fact that the production
       potential of agricultural land in the eastern one third of South
       Africa is roughly double that of the two thirds in the western desert
       and semi-desert regions of our country.]

Mr S ABRAM: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the House
I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the pending general elections in Zimbabwe on 24 and 25 June
           2000;

       (b)  that statements in the media quote claims by various sources
           that the elections are not expected to be free and fair; and

       (c)  the reported unacceptable levels of intimidation and violence
           which have marred the election campaign; and


  (2) wishes -


       (a)  the voters of Zimbabwe a democratic and successful election,
           hopefully free of violence and intimidation; and

       (b)  the various remaining observer missions godspeed in their task
           and a safe return to their home countries, and looks forward to
           their objective assessment of the election process.

Ms P K MOTHOAGAE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with serious concern the recent assault of a black traffic
       officer on duty by two white males in Christiana in the North West;

  (2) notes that the traffic officer, Mr Junior Mabilo, was allegedly
       treated in the most degrading manner by these two white motorists
       because of the colour of his skin;

  (3) believes that racism is alive and kicking in South Africa and is rife
       in Christiana and many other towns in the rural areas;

  (4) calls on the MECs for safety and security to ensure that such racist
       attacks are acted upon swiftly and judiciously wherever they take
       place; and

  (5) calls on the DP and the New NP to teach their members and supporters
       to desist from racism and to treat all human beings with respect and
       dignity.

[Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem daarvan dat die jeugligas van die Afrikanerbond en die
       ANC gedurende die afgelope naweek saam vergader het en dat die
       President van Suid-Afrika, mnr Mbeki, by hierdie vergadering
       teenwoordig was;
  (2) die ANC en mnr Mbeki daaraan herinner dat hoewel die Afrikanerbond 'n
       belangrike organisasie is, is dit glad nie die enigste organisasie
       buite die partypolitiek waarmee die President en die ANC-regering
       samesprekings behoort te hou nie;

  (3) 'n beroep op die President doen om 'n ope brief te beantwoord wat hy
       maande gelede van die groep van 24 akademici ontvang het; en

     4) 'n verdere beroep op die President doen om in gesprek te tree met
        ander Afrikaanse en Afrikaner-groepe en -organisasies, soos die
        Groep van 63, Praag en die FAK.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the youth leagues of the Afrikanerbond and the ANC met
       last week-end and that the President of South Africa, Mr Mbeki, was
       present at this meeting;
  (2) reminds the ANC and Mr Mbeki that although the Afrikanerbond is an
       important organisation, it is certainly not the only organisation
       outside party politics with which the President and the ANC
       Government should hold discussions;

  (3) appeals to the President to reply to an open letter which he received
       months ago from the group of 24 academics; and

  (4) further appeals to the President to hold discussions with other
       Afrikaans and Afrikaner groups and organisations, such as the Group
       of 63, Praag and the FAK.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Next on the list is the New
... ANC. [Laughter.] Please continue, sir, despite the laughter.

Mr M H FAZZIE: Thank you for calling me a member of the new ANC, Mr Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: You look new to me, sir! Please
continue.
Mnu M H FAZZIE: Mhlali ngamphambili, ndenza isaziso sokuba xa iphinda
ihlala le Ndlu ndiza kwenza isiphakamiso egameni le-ANC:


  Sokuba le Ndlu -


  (1) iqaphele ngemincili iphulo likaRhulumente wentando yesininzi
       lokuphucula iimeko zabasebenzi basemakhitshini;

  (2) iqaphele ukuba ngoku sithethayo iphulo logayo-zimvo
       zabachaphazelekayo liqhuba ngesantya esincomekayo eMpuma Koloni;

  (3) iqaphele ukuba abasebenzi basemakhitshini nabasezifama baphantsi
       kwengcinezelo noxhaphazo olukhulu;

  (4) iwancome amanyathelo ...

[Laphela ixesha.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa notice of motion
follows.)

[Mr M H FAZZIE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with appreciation the campaign by this democratic Government to
       improve the working conditions of domestic workers;

  (2) notes that, as we speak, consultation with relevant stakeholders is
       taking place at a commendable rate in the Eastern Cape;

  (3) notes that domestic workers and farmworkers work under oppressive and
       exploitative conditions;

  (4) commends the steps ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Dr J T DELPORT: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -
  (1) kennis neem -


       (a)  van die oproep deur Cosas dat Afrikaans geskrap moet word as 'n
           onderrigmedium in staatskole;

       (b)  dat die Grondwet, in artikel 29, bepaal dat iedereen die reg het
           om aan openbare onderwysinrigtings onderrig te ontvang in die
           amptelike taal wat hy of sy verkies, waar sodanige onderwys
           redelikerwys prakties moontlik is; en

       (c)  Afrikaans een van die amptelike tale is;


  (2) die oproep deur Cosas as rassisties, onverdraagsaam en te kwader trou
       veroordeel; en

  (3) die Regering oproep om te verseker dat onderwys in staatskole
       aangebied word in die taal wat die leerders verkies.

[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr J T DELPORT: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the call by Cosas that Afrikaans be scrapped as a medium of
           instruction in state schools;

       (b)  that section 29 of the Constitution provides that everyone has
           the right to receive education in public educational
           institutions in the official language of his or her choice,
           where such education is reasonably practicable; and

       (c)  that Afrikaans is one of the official languages;


  (2) condemns the call by Cosas as racist, intolerant and in bad faith;
       and

  (3) calls on the Government to ensure that education in state schools is
       offered in the language which the learners prefer.
[Interjections.]]

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move:


  That the House expresses its concurrence with and support for the
  announcement by the Minister of Finance that he will not agree to
  Nedbank's attempted take-over of Standard Bank.

Mr T M GONIWE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses serious misgivings about the racist poster campaign of the
       DP in the traditionally white, conservative areas of Cape Town;

  (2) believes that the intention of this campaign is to demonise the ANC
       and black people in general in the eyes and minds of the conservative
       white electorate;

  (3) further believes that to liken the ANC to Zimbabwe is  cleverly
       crafted hate speech designed to sharpen racial fears ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: I believe that the entire
statement that the hon member has read so far deals with racism, referring
to the DP members as racist, and I believe that that is absolutely
unparliamentary.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, a precedent has
been set in the House by the Speaker. That was not a reference to a
particular party member. It has been allowed in this House in the past and
I will follow the precedent in this regard.

Mr T M GONIWE: Chairperson, I repeat:


  That the House -


  (2) believes that the intention of this campaign is to demonise the ANC
       and black people in general ...

Mr M J ELLIS: You are demons!

Mr T M GONIWE:

  ... in the eyes and minds of the conservative white electorate;


  (3) further believes that to liken the ANC to Zimbabwe is cleverly
       crafted hate speech designed to sharpen racial fears;

  (4) condemns the DP ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnr A S VAN DER MERWE: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op
die volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met kommer kennis neem van die jongste bespiegelinge dat die Appèlhof
       van Bloemfontein na Johannesburg kan verskuif;

  (2) kennis neem dat Bloemfontein sedert 1910 die trotse en waardige
       regterlike hoofstad van Suid-Afrika is en die verskuiwing van die
       Appèlhof onder meer ekonomiese en kultuur-historiese gevolge gaan
       inhou;

  (3) die Regering herinner aan die versekering wat die Adjunkminister vir
       Justisie en Staatkundige Ontwikkeling, me Gillwald, op 20 Augustus
       1999 gegee het dat die Appèlhof nie verskuif gaan word nie; en

     5) kennis neem dat die Nuwe NP die Minister vir Justisie en
        Staatkundige Ontwikkeling versoek om dit te bevestig.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A S VAN DER MERWE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the most recent rumours that the Appeal Court may
       be moved from Bloemfontein to Johannesburg;

  (2) notes that since 1910 Bloemfontein has been the proud and dignified
       judicial capital of South Africa and that the relocation of the
       Appeal Court will, inter alia, have economic and cultural-historic
       consequences;

  (3) reminds the Government of the assurance given by the Deputy Minister
       for Justice and Constitutional Development, Ms Gillwald, on 20 August
       1999, that the Appeal Court would not be relocated; and

  (4) notes that the New NP requests the Minister for Justice and
       Constitutional Development to confirm this.]

Mr B MTHEMBU: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes reports of a secret meeting between the Angolan government and
       Unita over the weekend in Mozambique;

  (2) believes that this meeting could mark a major breakthrough between
       the two sides, thus paving the way for the peaceful resolution of the
       conflict in Angola;


  (3) commends both parties for holding exploratory talks; and

  (4) calls on these parties to work tirelessly for a peaceful solution to
       the conflict in Angola.

[Applause.]

Ms C C MAHLALELA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  economic wealth in rural areas and former homelands is set to
           receive a major boost if the Government succeeds in getting a
           range of private sector joint ventures; and

       (b)  the people in rural areas need joint venture equity partners to
           meet their needs and create jobs;


  (2) believes that -


       (a)  projects of this nature can offer partnership opportunities to
           investors, communities and farmworkers; and

       (b)  such projects can also empower people in rural areas and improve
           the quality of life of the rural poor; and


  (3) calls on the private sector to make resources available for rural
       development.

                 CONDOLENCES ON THE DEATH OF PRESIDENT ASSAD

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with regret the death of President Hafez el Assad of Syria;

  (2) wishes to send its sincere condolences to his family and to the
       people of Syria;

  (3) further notes the firm and constructive role he has played in finding
       a just solution to the problems encountered in the Middle East; and

  (4) expresses the hope that his successor will continue and take further
       President Assad's efforts to conclude an enduring peace in the Middle
       East.

Agreed to.

                          2006 SOCCER WORLD CUP BID

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr J J DOWRY: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) desires that Fifa should give favourable consideration to South
       Africa's bid to host the 2006 Soccer World Cup in our country; and
  (2) expresses the hope, as this decision will finally be taken on 6 July
       2000 whilst the House will be in recess, that this decision will be
       in favour of the Republic of South Africa.

Agreed to.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDERS OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:


  That draft resolution No 1 on today's Order Paper stand over until all
  the other items on the Order Paper have been dealt with.

Agreed to.

          EXTENSION OF TRIAL-RUN PERIOD OF QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I hereby move the draft resolution printed on
the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, as
follows:


  That -


  (a) notwithstanding the resolution adopted by the House on 16 March 2000,
       the period for the trial run of questions for oral reply be extended
       until 31 October 2000; and

  (b) the revised guidelines for the extended trial period, as amended by
       the Chief Whip's Forum, be published in the Announcements, Tablings
       and Committee Reports.

Chairperson, when the ANC came into Government for the first time in 1994,
we knew that we had to transform Parliament as an institution. Not only did
we have to change the nature of Parliament from being an institute of
oppression, repression and depression with its portraits of dour, dead
white men, its barrier to public participation and its mystique which made
it impossible for the wider public to comprehend the complexity of its
procedures, but there was also a great temptation to pull apart all the
procedures and ways in which Parliament functioned. However, the ANC took a
step back. We said: Before we tear everything apart, let us understand this
very complex and often undemocratic dinosaur, so that we can take out what
does not work and replace it with what does work to best enable us to carry
out our mandate.

One area that has occupied a great deal of our attention over the past two
years has been the reform of questions. We looked at international
practice, and we looked at what was good in the old system and what was
not. On this basis, we proposed reforms. The new system of questions is
working. Yes, there are problems and it needs fine-tuning, but the reality
is that question time is livelier. The supplementaries are challenging, our
Ministers and members have to think on their feet, and the response that
we, the ANC, are getting from the voters tells us that we are on the right
track.

This system is the result of extensive discussion and consultation between
parties. It was not imposed unilaterally. That is not the ANC's style or
principle for reform and transformation. The discussion between parties
continues. The ANC knows the concerns of the opposition parties. The DP
believes that the majority party gets too many bites at the cherry, and
that its questions are sweetheart questions. They believe that the new
system gives the ANC an advantage, but it is the voters of South Africa who
have given us the advantage that we enjoy in this House. [Applause.]

Before going further, let us look at the facts. The fact is that under the
new system, in a complete cycle, the ANC gets less than half of the
questions. We have never asked for the full proportion due to us for
questions, although we comprise 66% of the total number of members of this
House. [Interjections.]

Of course, we must listen to the concerns of the small parties, parties
that have so little electoral support that they have only one or two
members in the House. They represent important voices in the community, and
our electoral system is designed to give a chance for those voices to be
heard. But those voices cannot be heard at the expense of the voters who
elected the ANC. It is the ANC that they entrusted with their concerns.
The opposition, as a whole, is already getting more than half of the
questions. I say to Mr Ellis that I am not even talking about supplementary
questions. He does not even know how to add up his sums. [Interjections.]
The opposition must sit together and work out how best to share their time.
They cannot expect us to be a sugar daddy who dispenses largesse.

I do not wish this debate to become a political battle, but the fact is
that, while the leader of the DP is officially known as the Leader of the
Opposition, he is, in fact, only the leader of his own party. The
opposition must co-operate with each other. They must share out their time
between themselves. The hon Leon must earn his title of Leader of the
Opposition by leading all the opposition parties to reach a position of co-
operation with regard to questions.

The opposition parties must lay a proposal upon the Table that addresses
the concerns of all the parties. Perhaps they should come to us to learn
how to achieve consensus and co-operation, because consensus is the
hallmark of the ANC. [Interjections.] In the same way that the opposition
parties seem unable to reach agreement in the political terrain, they are
unable to reach agreement on institutional arrangements. We, the ANC, are
always ready to accommmodate the needs of others. We give away 25% of our
speaking time to the small parties. I want to tell Mrs Camerer that we have
reached an agreement on notices of motion which is to our disadvantage, but
we do this because we understand the needs of small parties. However, we
cannot further disadvantage our own individual members in favour of small
parties. [Interjections.]

We cannot help getting annoyed when a small party reneges on an agreement.
Here I refer specifically to what happened when the ACDP called for a
division last Wednesday night. We know that ``thou shalt not lie'' is not
one of the ten commandments, but an agreement is a matter of honour.
[Applause.] When these things happen, hard-won trust goes out the door.

Now it is up to the opposition parties to sit together and work out how
best they can manage their more-than-fair share of question time. The
majority party will be only too happy to assist in implementing an
agreement that gives all opposition parties their fair share. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before Mr Mike Ellis goes to
the podium, members must remember that, ``Thou shalt not ever lie in
Parliament'' is unparliamentary. Please continue, sir. [Interjections.]
[Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, thank you very much indeed. I want to say that
that was certainly quite a fighting speech from the hon Geoff Doidge and,
as he well knows, the DP thoroughly enjoys a fight.

One of the things he said was very interesting. For example, he said that
what the ANC has done is to replace things that did not work with things
that do work. I want to say to him that although I have been told that I
cannot say ``you lie'' to hon Geoff Doidge and I will not say it, it
certainly is not quite the truth.

Quite frankly, the old system of questions worked infinitely better than
the new system of questions. [Interjections.] I also want to say that the
tone of the hon Mr Doidge's speech makes it quite clear that the new system
of questions suits his party, and he does not really give a damn whether it
suits other parties or not. [Interjections.]
A week or two ago, I attended a meeting of the Whips of the parties to
review the present setup with regard to oral questions. It was quite a good
meeting. Even the hon John Jeffery behaved himself to some extent. I
believe that some constructive discussion took place as to the strengths
and weaknesses of the current process. [Interjections.] I also believe that
some consensus was reached with regard to improvements in the process. As
the motion reads, these improvements or amendments will be published in the
Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of this Parliament.

However, all this does not mean that the DP can support this motion,
because at the end of the day, we do not believe that this new questions
procedure is in the best interests of Parliament. It certainly is not in
the best in interests of opposition parties.

I want to say that we are being asked this afternoon to vote on revised
guidelines, despite the fact that these have not yet been printed. Our
Chief Whips have had the advantage of discussing these revisions, but they
have not yet been made available to party members, so we cannot ask them to
vote on something they have not yet seen. I do not understand where the ANC
comes from or how they can seriously believe that we can ask our members to
do this.

Now, they might behave in this way; they might be the party that blindfolds
their members and leads them down the garden path, over the cliff or
wherever. But that is not the way the DP treats its members. We also have
to trust that the ANC have not further revised the amendments that we
agreed to, in order to suit their own agenda. I am sure, knowing the hon
Geoff Doidge the way I do, that he would not have dreamt of doing such a
disgusting thing, but, quite frankly, with the ANC one never quite knows.

However, the point is that the DP cannot accept this behaviour; we cannot
accept this motion. Well, I suppose I should really be pointing fingers at
the hon John Jeffery, because he really is the serious culprit in this
whole matter. [Laughter.] There are a host of other matters relating to
this whole new system of questions that need to be addressed as well.
Firstly, it is unbelievably overbureaucratic and confusing. I challenge any
party here to say that that is not the case. It takes an enormous amount of
administration, not only for the parliamentary staff, but also for parties,
and one cannot say that the outcome is worth it at the end of the day.
Secondly, with questions being asked in three weekly cycles in clusters,
this severely limits the rights of MPs to constantly hold the Cabinet to
account, and it is something that the opposition parties desperately want
to do. Furthermore, the cluster system itself has serious flaws and the
debacle today - with so many Ministers away from the cluster, albeit for
good reasons - is an example of how this cluster system just does not work.
The point is, if a Minister cannot or refuses to attend the House on a date
when his or her cluster is meeting, the questions addressed to him or her
are often not replied to, but stand over, and the opportunity to put
supplementary questions to the Minister is removed.

The hon the Minister of Foreign Affairs is a classic example of this. I do
not believe that she has been in the House once when her cluster has been
questioned. [Interjections.] Yes, believe me, that is the finest excuse
that I have ever heard - she is working! My word, she also has to work in
this House and become answerable to Parliament, because that is really and
truly what her job is all about. Mr Momberg knows that as well as I do.

Furthermore, no provision is made to deal with these questions prior to the
next time they are clustered. At best, despite the three-week cycle, the
proof is that clusters come up on an average only every five or six weeks.
This is absolutely ridiculous. We just do not get the opportunity to put
questions to Ministers. There can be no doubt that the cluster system needs
to be revised. It is just not working.

But there are a whole lot of problems we have with this new system of
questions, as well. Written questions to the President are neglected,
because they cannot be transferred to oral, and the President, therefore,
cannot be held to account on those issues. Oral question time itself, quite
frankly, is often dull and this afternoon was a classic example. It is
often dull and overregulated, as answers to supplementary questions cannot
be challenged by the questioner. Hopefully, the new system might look at
that a little bit.

Fewer, rather than more, questions are dealt with during the two-hour
period than was the case in the 30 minutes under the old rules. That is a
fact that even Mr John Jeffery does concede. The ANC questions are
sometimes withdrawn at the last minute and, therefore, act merely as a
blocking mechanism to reduce further the number of opposition questions.
The hon John Jeffery tried to talk about the fact that we had complained
that they were nice, little, simple questions to Ministers. Quite frankly,
the questions that the Ministers are asked by the ANC are appalling. Its
members look the same, sound the same and talk with the same tongue, and it
makes no difference. It makes no difference whether it is John Jeffery,
Geoff Doidge or John Doidge - it really does not! [Laughter.] They speak
with the same tongue, and that is all that matters to us.

This whole system is appalling. We have already asked - and the hon Geoff
Doidge knows this - for a trial period where interpellations are brought
back in a revised system. We sincerely hope that the ANC will be prepared
to grant such a system a trial run in the future. [Interjections.] I wish
to tell Mr De Lange that the point is that we cannot and will not vote for
this particular motion today. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I have listened carefully to Mr Mike
Ellis, and what he wants is to ask a lot of questions. [Interjections.] I
just want to tell him what the wise man once said. He said: ``A fool can
ask more questions than any wise man can ever answer.'' [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

We support the draft resolution. The experiment has been going on for about
three months. The question is: Which system of questions is best?
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: You are asking too many questions, Koos!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I am the wise man and that hon member is a fool.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

With the old system, a member did not have the opportunity ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Koos Van der Merwe, please
resume your seat. Hon member, on what point are you rising?

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. I certainly know
that it is not parliamentary for any member to call another member a fool.
[Laughter.] The speaker himself is a fool. [Interjections.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, on a further point of order: Is it in order
that a fool be insulted? [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order.
Please sit down! [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I withdraw the statement that Mr Mike
Ellis is a fool. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, just withdraw the
words without repeating them. [Laughter.] Just say: ``I withdraw.''
[Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I withdraw and if necessary, I
apologise. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: He says he is going to get me.

The point is: Which system works the best? With the old system, one asked a
question and could follow it up, but one was limited to asking a question.
One could not make a political statement. One could not express an opinion,
which one can now do. I can now stand up, and in the 60 seconds at my
disposal, have a go at the Minister, make political statements, express an
opinion and then ask my question. So, it is a great improvement on the old
system. [Interjections.]

It is much more exciting now to have questions in this way. Therefore, it
has almost become a sort of a mini-interpellation system. [Interjections.]
Previously, we had to listen to monotonous prepared speeches by members,
especially during interpellations. I once saw a Minister here reading
something for two or three minute. A member got up here and read out his
prepared speech of the previous night for two minutes. The Minister got up,
and went on with her speech. Then the gentleman also went on with his
prepared speech of the previous night. That was very boring!
[Interjections.]

Now we can have people who can really be creative and do things on the spur
of the moment. I can understand that the DP does not like it, because they
conform to the old style. They do not understand these things. [Laughter.]
[Applause.] They are, as we say in Afrikaans, ``uit die oude doos'' [old-
fashioned].

We support the draft resolution. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mnr J J DOWRY: Mnr die Voorsitter, die Nuwe NP steun die verlenging van
hierdie proeflopie, omdat ons van mening is dat die nuwe stelsel vir die
beantwoording van mondelinge vrae baie voordele inhou en verder ontwikkel
behoort te word. Ons is veral verheug oor die wyse waarop opposisiepartye
se voorstelle geakkommodeer is ten einde konsensus te bereik. Die swepery
het op 'n deurlopende grondslag die nuwe stelsel gemoniteer, en ná 'n
dringende gesprek oor die aangeleentheid is besluit om sekere wysigings aan
die riglyne vir vrae aan te bring. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Mr J J DOWRY: Mr Chairman, the New NP supports the extension of this trial
run, because we are of the view that the new system to reply to oral
questions has many advantages and should be developed further. We are
particularly pleased about the manner in which the suggestions of
opposition parties have been accommodated in order to reach consensus. The
Whippery monitored the new system on an ongoing basis, and after urgent
discussions on the matter it was decided to effect certain amendments to
the guidelines for questions.]

Some of these amendments contain very positive aspects. In a bid to
increase the number of questions that could be answered, it was decided to
reduce the number of supplementary questions from five to four in order to
save some time and to limit supplementary questions to only one question at
a time. It was also decided that Ministers who had missed their cluster
should not be given the opportunity to answer questions on the following
question day in another cluster. The basis for this decision is that
Ministers from one cluster should not take up the time of Ministers from
another cluster.

The previous guidelines provided that the time for replying to a
supplementary question would be limited to two minutes unless the presiding
officer was of the opinion that the answer was sufficiently important to
necessitate more time. In practice this discretion led to a situation where
Ministers very often replied to supplementary questions for more than two
minutes. The revised guidelines do not allow for discretion in this regard
any longer and this will mean that Ministers and Deputy Ministers answering
questions will be limited to two minutes for replying to a supplementary
question. This will save a tremendous amount of time and will allow for
more questions to be answered.

At the suggestion of the New NP it was agreed that the Deputy President
would answer questions only every second week, thus ensuring that he was
not in the same Ministerial cluster for two consecutive slots. This will
also ensure that more questions will be answered in the specific slot.

Daar is egter nog enkele aangeleenthede wat behoorlik geëvalueer moet word
en moontlike aanpassings tot gevolg kan hê. Daar moet veral gekyk word na
'n manier hoe Ministers wat min vrae ontvang en beantwoord ook beter
beoordeel kan word, en meer betrek kan word by die vraetyd. Die Nuwe NP sou
ook graag wou hê dat daar voorsiening gemaak word vir enkele vrae waarvoor
daar geen vooraf kennisgewing nodig is nie, sodat dringende aangeleenthede
op 'n spoedeisende basis gehanteer kan word.

Die mate van sukses van hierdie nuwe stelsel hang grootliks af van
Ministers se teenwoordigheid om vrae te beantwoord wanneer hul vrae aan die
beurt kom. Om hierdie rede is dit totaal onaanvaarbaar vir 'n Minister om
op kort kennisgewing aan te dui dat hy of sy nie beskikbaar sal wees nie,
want dit beïnvloed ook die prioritisering deur politieke partye van hul
vrae aan Ministers. Die teenwoordigheid van Ministers behoort verpligtend
gemaak te word.

'n Ander kommerwekkende aspek bly steeds die beantwoording van skriftelike
vrae wat volgens die bestaande reëls binne 'n vasgestelde tyd beantwoord
moet word. Ons ervaar in 'n toenemende mate dat Ministers nie aan hierdie
reël gehoor gee nie en dat ons dan gedwing word om skriftelike vrae te laat
oorplaas op die Ordelys vir mondelinge beantwoording. Met die voorbehoud
dat die stelsel verder gemoniteer en geëvalueer moet word, en die nodige
regstellings aangebring moet word, steun die Nuwe NP hierdie voorstel.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[However, there are still a few matters that should be evaluated properly
and could result in possible adjustments. Specific consideration should be
given to a way in which Ministers who receive and answer few questions can
also be assessed better,  and involved to a greater degree in question
time. The New NP would also like provision to be made for a few questions
for which no prior notification is required, so that urgent matters could
be dealt with expeditiously.

The degree of success of this new system depends largely on the presence of
Ministers to answer questions when their questions come around. For this
reason it is totally unacceptable for a Minister to indicate at short
notice that he or she will not be available, because this also influences
prioritising of their questions to Ministers by political parties. The
presence of Ministers should be made compulsory.

Another alarming aspect still remains the replies to written questions
that, according to the existing rules, must be replied to within an
appointed time. We are experiencing to an increasing extent that Ministers
are not complying with this rule and that we are then forced to have
written questions transferred to the Order Paper for oral reply. On
condition that the system should be further monitored and evaluated, and
that the necessary rectifications must be made, the New NP supports this
motion.]
Mr T ABRAHAMS: Chairperson, a very important principle has been adopted
here and it is something that we hope will become established practice in
the future. Rules of procedure are not cast in stone. Certainly, they
became outdated as circumstances in Parliament changed, and needed to be
modified. The proposal came that we should have a trial run to test out a
set of guidelines which would bring changes to the procedure of questions.
The UDM came out in full support of that principle of having a trial run.

Today, after the Whippery have considered certain amendments to those
guidelines, the motion that is on the table, again receives the full
support the UDM. We believe that a further extension to the trial run is
fitting, because even the modifications that have been arrived at need to
be tested first before we start tampering with the rules of procedure and
making these changes more permanent.

We have no real interest in whether the Minister of Foreign Affairs escapes
answering questions more easily now than in the past, because she is never
around to answer questions anyway. However, it is difficult to answer
questions in Parliament when one is not in the country anyway. So that
problem has to be addressed in another way.
We are pleased that this principle has been established. We would have
preferred to see the Deputy Minister who, we know, is quite happy to answer
most of the questions that are flung at him on a weekly basis. We know that
his shoulders are broad enough to carry that load, but we do not think that
it is fair that he should have so many questions. We would have preferred
to see a special cluster set aside once a month for the Deputy President,
to match the three clusters that exist at the moment. However, after
compromise consensus was reached, we were convinced that the New NP
argument that the hon Deputy President should answer questions only every
second week should be accepted. We are comfortable with having accepted
that compromise.

One of the weaknesses of the previous system was that because, I suppose,
there were so few parties in Parliament, it was easy for any one party to
swamp the questions office with questions, to the detriment of other
parties. Now, for the first time, the smaller opposition parties, the one-
man parties as well, have a better chance at having questions answered. We
fully support this motion. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy President, it is actually
very heartening and encouraging to see the Deputy President in the House,
and I am looking for our Ministers. None of them are here, sir. So, thank
you. [Interjections.]

Seeing that we are dealing with questions, the ACDP provisionally supports
the extension of the period for the trial run of questions. However, we do
appeal to the Speaker to ensure that all parties are given an equal
opportunity to put follow-up questions.

The new system has many advantages and should be further improved. The
system has the potential to afford minority parties in the opposition an
opportunity to engage the executive in meaningful debate, and also debates
are not dominated, Mr Ellis, by the bigger opposition parties.

We are concerned, however, that the relevant Ministers are not at times
available to answer questions. And some Ministers are unwilling to debate
issues but rather respond with short replies and I think that needs to be
worked on. It is actually very discouraging to see the replies that one
gets from some Ministers.

I would encourage the Whips, at the end of this trial period, to assess the
question times again. As I said, we provisionally support the extension.

Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairperson, the fact of the matter is that the motion
before the House today only asks us to give an extension with regard to the
trial period. It does not ask Parliament to amend the rules. So,
technically, one could ask: How can anyone be against the idea of just
extending the trial period?

However, the facts are a bit different. There are certainly a lot of
improvements with regard to question time. The point that Mr Van der Merwe
made is a very valid one. One can now make a political statement, which is
quite valid. However, the problem is that because, under normal
circumstances, one is entitled to only one follow-up question, one cannot
really enter into a debate with the hon Minister in respect of his initial
reply.

The other problem is that, what we now need, in terms of the rules, is a
different allocation of time. Sometime during the week an hour should be
set aside, separate from the new improved question time, for
interpellations as well, and if those debates are not the way they should
be, they should be improved. Furthermore, the fact is that although this is
an improvement, there are numerous problems with regard to the present
question time.

When I came to the House this afternoon I had a look at the motion and I
intended to support it, because how can one be against the extension of the
trial run. But I must say that after the performance of the executive today
- I am not reflecting on the hon the Deputy President, who answered his
questions - I am sorry, I cannot support this motion, because the system
does not work. One cannot expect an hon Minister to answer questions that
do not pertain to his own portfolio. He can come here, which happened
today, and read out a prepared statement, but he is not in a position to
answer any follow-up questions in a meaningful manner. It does not make
sense.

So, in technical terms, one could support the system - and there are very
positive aspects in it - but what happened in practice today tells us that
we need to stop this system immediately and overhaul it before we continue
one moment longer. [Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, hon members, the majority party conceived of
a question system that was meant to replace what in their opinion was
archaic and dull, because interpellants brought with them prepared notes
which they read out after the response of the Minister. The new system of
questions has, unfortunately, not lived up to expectations either because,
in one way or another, it has also degenerated to a point where members
present lengthy monologues as supplementary questions.

We maintain that if supplementary questions were questions, more time could
be saved and more questions could be answered. As such, that would give the
parties lower down the rungs of the ladder a chance to have their questions
answered and not be put off from week to week.

While we appreciate the tight schedule of Ministers, we would like them to
do their utmost not to miss their clusters, so that there will be no need
for questions to stand over or for Ministers to say: ``I did not get the
brief on that one. It is not part of the answer, because I am standing in
for some other Minister.''

However, we commend the presiding officers for their forbearance under
trying circumstances, because they have to make a decision on how long a
member has in which to speak. It has been very difficult, but they have
acquitted themselves admirably under the circumstances and, as such, we are
hard put to support the continuation of this whole exercise.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Piet Mathebe, please
resume your seat.

An HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Could you wait before you
proceed with your speech, hon member. Thank you, sir. [Interjections.]
Please proceed, hon member.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, Deputy President, I want to support the
motion. But what I would like to raise is a completely new angle today. I
think that what sometimes makes question time boring is that political
parties ask the same questions. We need a sifting mechanism whereby if a
person has asked a certain question and the same question is asked by
another political party, the person asking the question must be told that
that question has already asked, so that people can become more creative
and ask more new questions. We are getting boring questions over and over
again. I think we need that kind of sifting mechanism somewhere in our
system.

The other matter is that I still believe that we need to look at how we can
transform interpellations. But interpellations must come back even if it is
just for an hour, together with questions. So if we see that there are
weaknesses there and we decide to go back to interpellations later on, we
will also have transformed them. And I think that will make a big
difference to the whole system of questions. But, in general, we support
the motion, because there are advantages for the smaller parties. It is the
only time in this House that we are equal with the big parties and that we
can ask the same questions for the same amount of time, and we appreciate
that.

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, I think I am going to make history in this House
today because it does not often happen that somebody changes his mind in
this House on a matter of any kind. Whereas on 16 March I opposed the new
system, today I am supporting it. [Applause.] Let us hope that in due
course the ANC will also be open enough to change its mind on more crucial
matters, matters so often stated eloquently by the AEB in this House.

Die rede waarom ek hierdie voorstel wil steun, is dat daar eerstens groter
soepelheid is. Die interpellasies het dinge in 'n keurslyf gedruk.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Soos mnr Koos van der Merwe dit gestel het, vooraf
uitgewerkte vrae en antwoorde het mekaar eentonig afgewissel.

Ek het bedenkings gehad oor die ``sweetheart questions'' - ek noem dit
siembamba-vragies - van ANC-lede. Dié vrae is nog daar, maar nou kry die
opposisie die geleentheid - en dit is my tweede rede - om met opvolgvrae
die volume 'n bietjie oop te draai, en dan is die ``sweetie pie'' daarmee
heen.

Derdens is daar meer geleentheid vir kleiner partye. Die AEB het in nege
maande onder die ou stelsel net een geleentheid vir 'n interpellasie gehad.
Onder die nuwe stelsel het die AEB alreeds vier vrae gestel, en ek dink dit
was almal ``jolly'' goeie vrae!  Vierdens is daar groter interaksie en die
hele debat is lewendiger.

Daar is nog probleme, maar ek dink dit is eie aan al twee stelsels. Dit is
nie die ratverandering wat die probleme veroorsaak het nie. Ministers sal
altyd afwesig wees, of dit nou vir vrae of interpellasies is.

Ek wil voorstel dat die opposisie toegelaat word om 'n opvolgantwoord ná
die Minister te gee. Ons kan gerus 'n slag die lid die laaste sê gee en nie
altyd die Minister nie. Laastens het ek net gewonder of ons nie dalk
hierdie verdelingsknoppies op 'n manier kan gebruik om spreekbeurte by die
Speaker aan te vra nie. Die eerste vyf wat registreer, kan dan die vyf
opvolgvrae stel. Dan hoef sy nie so rond te kyk om te sien wie is eerste
nie.

Die tweede deel van die voorstel kan ek ongelukkig nie steun nie, want ek
weet nie wat die voorstelle is nie. As ek dit kry, sal ons dit dadelik
oorweeg. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The reason why I want to support this motion is, firstly, that there is
greater flexibility. The interpellations forced matters into a
straitjacket. [Interjections.] As Mr Koos van der Merwe put it, previously
worked out questions and answers followed on one another monotonously.

I had my doubts about the ``sweetheart questions'' - I call them
``siembamba questions'' - of members of the ANC. These questions are still
in evidence, but now the opposition is getting the opportunity - and this
is my second reason - to turn up the volume somewhat by means of follow-up
questions, and then the ``sweetheart'' has had it.

Thirdly, there are more opportunities for smaller parties. The AEB, during
nine months under the old system, had only one opportunity for an
interpellation. Under the new system the AEB has already put four
questions, and I think that they were all jolly good questions! Fourthly,
there is more interaction and the entire debate is more lively.

There are still problems, but I think that is the case in respect of both
systems. It is not the change of gear that caused the problems. Ministers
will always be absent, whether questions or interpellations are being
posed.

I want to suggest that the opposition should be allowed to respond with a
follow-up answer after the Minister has spoken. We may as well give the
member, and not the Minister, the last word for a change. Finally, I have
been wonderking whether we could perhaps use these division buttons to
request that the Speaker give us a turn to speak. The first five that
register may then ask the five follow-up questions. Then she need not look
around to see who was first.

Unfortunately I cannot support the second part of the motion, because I do
not know what the proposals are. The moment I get it, we shall consider it.
[Time expired.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Hon Chairperson, the new Question Time is better, but a few
areas still need scrutiny. Firstly, not as many questions as was hoped get
answered orally every week. Secondly, many parties are not able to ask
their own questions and they are therefore forced to tag on to the
questions of others. Well, that is fine, but it is not as satisfying as
asking one's own questions. Thirdly, Ministers are not always able to make
themselves available to answer questions when their clusters are due,
leaving very uncomfortable gaps. This needs to be looked at and could be
refined in the process of reassessing this system.

An extension of the period of experimentation is therefore a very good
idea. It will allow all of us to observe the system and refine it further
and make it better. Azapo will support the motion. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to (Democratic Party and Freedom Front dissenting).

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATION - ICASA
                                   COUNCIL

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! In terms of the decision just
taken, the National Assembly has recommended to the President the names of
seven persons for appointment to the first council of the Independent
Communications Authority - Icasa. In terms of the relevant Act, once the
President has appointed the seven councillors, he must appoint one of them
as chairperson.
Three of the other councillors of the first council will hold office for
four years, and the other three for two years as determined by lot by the
National Assembly. The procedure to be followed by the National Assembly in
determining by lot the terms of office of the councillors is fully set out
in the Act.

This procedure will commence once the President has appointed the
councillors and their chairperson. The procedure is to be carried out by
the National Assembly.

 PROTECTED DISCLOSURES BILL CONSIDERATION AND REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE
              ON JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT THEREON

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted and Bill, as amended, agreed to.

     ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF ROAD TRAFFIC OFFENCES AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time (New National Party dissenting).

             ROAD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT CORPORATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time (New National Party dissenting).

   CONSIDERATION OF FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND
                     ADMINISTRATION - PROVINCIAL VISITS

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND
  ADMINISTRATION - IMPLEMENTATION OF BASIC CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT ACT IN
                               PUBLIC SERVICE

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PRIVATE MEMBERS'
     LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS AND SPECIAL PETITIONS - PETITION OF P L YOUNG

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.
    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND
                ADMINISTRATION - SITA'S 2000-01 BUSINESS PLAN

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND
  ADMINISTRATION - PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT AND WHITE PAPER ON PUBLIC SERVICE
                           TRAINING AND EDUCATION

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY -
                             UNIDO CONSTITUTION

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT - COSPAS/SARSAT
                             NOTIFICATION LETTER
Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

                 APPOINTMENT OF DR K RAJOO AS CONSUL GENERAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I move the draft resolution printed in
my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that the Deputy Chairperson of Committees, Dr K Rajoo, has been
           appointed Consul General for South Africa in Illinois, USA; and

       (b)  his outstanding service as Member of Parliament and as Deputy
           Chairperson of Committees; and


  (2) congratulates Dr Rajoo on his appointment and wishes him the very
       best in his new office.

Mr M J MAHLANGU: Madam Speaker, every man or woman is an architect of his
or her own fortune. In any sphere of work, one either works oneself up, or
one one works oneself down. In the time I have known Dr Rajoo, he has shown
great interest in his work as a politician. He is a very dedicated, devoted
and determined politician. He is indeed an industrious man.

I want to give him a little advice. It is no use growing older if one only
learns new ways of misbehaving oneself. Dr Rajoo has behaved himself very
well as a politician in this House from the time I have known him. We can
learn a lot from Dr Rajoo's good character as a leader. We will remember
his charisma when he chaired this august House. He kept good order in the
House, giving the business of this House the first priority.

Mark Twain once said:


  Noise proves nothing. Often a hen that has merely laid an egg cackles as
  if she laid an asteroid.

Dr Rajoo did not make a noise when he was given some work to do. He worked.
Great works are not performed by strength, but by perseverance.

Dr Rajoo has made friends in this Parliament because he was also friendly.
He is now going to represent our country in the state of Illinois. I have
no doubt that, as a teacher, a politician, a businessman, he will represent
us well. His contribution in this Parliament is admired.

However, let me also remind him of what William Shakespeare said one day.
He said:


  Some are born great ... Some achieve greatness ... And some have
  greatness thrust upon them.

From the time I have known Dr Rajoo, this greatness has not been thrust
upon him. He has achieved it! He has worked hard! As the Deputy Chairperson
of Committees, he worked very closely with me, and at times I enjoyed it
when I gave him instructions, and he marched in line. [Laughter.] There is
nothing as pleasing as when a person is given a job and he or she does that
job.

I congratulate Dr Rajoo on his new appointment, and I wish him well in his
new career. As I know him, I know that he will prosper.

Hamba kahle. Ungahambeli futhi kodwa ubuye ekhaya. Siyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
[Go well. Do not go for good, but you should return home. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, it would be very difficult for me to
surpass that wonderful tribute paid by the Chairperson of Committees. I
listened to that, and I thought that it was most eloquent, and most
deserved as well.

The DP feels a real sense of loss at the fact that we are about to lose the
Deputy Chairperson of Committees of this House. The one thing I want to
predict is that Chicago will never be the same again once Kisten Rajoo hits
town, because the one thing I know in this House, and the one thing that I
suspect about the other presiding officers, is that when the House was
inclined to be on the unruly side, and when there was a bit too much
disorder, they thought that they would send in the heavy artillery. He came
in, and, in a matter of minutes, he was able to assert discipline and
restore order and decorum to the House. Because of that, he, of course,
enjoys our very special respect and our very special affection.

A while ago he was quite seriously ill, and we thought he might not come
back to Parliament, and we said nice things about him, just in case, you
know! [Laughter.] I am delighted that the nice things I can say today are
on what is for him a happy occasion. I would like to wish Dr Rajoo and his
family all the best there. It is an interesting appointment that he has,
and, I am sure, it is one which he will enjoy. I have not yet been to
Chicago, Illinois, and I would love to visit him there sometime.

All the best to him from the DP, and I hope he will make a great success of
it and enjoy his term, however long it is. [Applause.]

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Madam Speaker, I feel greatly honoured to have an
opportunity to say some words about our colleague and friend, Dr Kisten
Rajoo, who is sadly leaving this Parliament after many years of dedicated
service. It is a time of sadness for his colleagues but also a time of joy,
for Dr Rajoo is not retiring to put his feet up, but he is going on to meet
another challenge in the service of South Africa as our consul general in
Chicago.

I have had the privilege of working alongside him for many years in the
service of our country. Dr Rajoo is a highly principled man of deep
integrity and of independent mind. All of us who have served in this
Assembly when he has been in the Chair know that, whilst he is a strict
enforcer of discipline in our debates, he is also a fair-minded man who has
shown great dedication in his role as Deputy Chairperson of Committees. For
that the whole House thanks him.

Dr Rajoo has described himself as ``a man who does not suffer fools
gladly''. We know that to be true, but we also know that he is a man who is
always ready to listen to another person's views and to judge each
individual fairly. He is a man of innate courtesy and kindness, and there
are few that have known him who have not been touched by his kindness.

During his time in the IFP, Dr Kisten Rajoo has contributed greatly as a
disciplined and constructive member of the party. His contributions to our
party will be greatly missed by all my colleagues and myself. Nevertheless,
we know that in his new role as our consul general, Dr Rajoo will make many
new friends for South Africa.

We know that his dedication to his work will assist our country in
improving our links with business in the United States, and that all
Americans with whom he comes in contact will appreciate his warmth and
wisdom. I am sure the whole House will join me in wishing Dr Rajoo a
fruitful time in his challenging new job. We extend our thanks to him for
all the work he has done for us and the work that he will be doing for this
country. We thank Dr Rajoo and I salute him. [Applause.]

Mr J J DOWRY: Madam Speaker, the New NP would like to associate itself with
the sentiments expressed here by the previous speakers and we would also
like to take this opportunity to congratulate Dr Rajoo on his appointment
as Consul General of South Africa in Illinois.

Judging by his performance as a member of Parliament and Deputy Chairperson
of Committees, Dr Rajoo acted not only in a professional manner but was
also extremely competent in executing his duties. He is fondly referred to
in our party as rather strict but always fair. His position as Deputy
Chairperson of Committees allowed all members of Parliament to witness his
leadership skills.

We know that it is certainly no easy task to sit in the Speaker's Chair and
to conduct the proceedings of Parliament, especially when the behaviour of
some of our members gets out of hand at times. It was at those times that
Dr Rajoo always showed us that he was in control. He served Parliament and
his fellow MPs well. His replacement will certainly have his or her work
cut out because Dr Rajoo made sure that he set a very high standard.

The New NP is therefore convinced that Dr Rajoo will perform exceptionally
well in his new post. It will be a great challenge, but we do not doubt his
ability to live up to that challenge and to make not only himself, but also
South Africa, proud. It was a pleasure to work with him, and the New NP
wishes him all the best. [Applause.]

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure for the UDM to associate
itself with the remarks made thus far and to wish Dr Rajoo well in his new
appointment. As a strict disciplinarian from the Chair of this House going
to Al Capone country, I trust that he will be able to sort out all the Al
Capones in the trading world in his new appointment.

We understand that there will be 14 states that this particular consulate
will be responsible for, and that he goes there as a trade consul.

Hy moet vir ons land baie besigheid bring. [He must bring a lot of business
for our country.]

That is our wish. One would like to refer to Dr Rajoo's previous service
here in Parliament and, generally, in South Africa. He became a PRO to the
then Ministers Council of the tricameral parliament in 1984. In 1989 he
became a member of parliament for Merebank. [Interjections.] Yes, people in
the tricameral parliament also did some good work. [Interjections.]

In 1989 to 1993 he became Minister of education in the tricameral
parliament, and in that particular capacity, he banned corporal punishment
in school. [Interjections.] He introduced other languages. He opened the
way for over 64 000 historically disadvantaged pupils to attend schools
under his control. He saw to it that 6 000 underqualified teachers in rural
KwaZulu-Natal were trained, under the auspices of his department.

We say here today that Dr Rajoo is now leaving us. We also want to pay
tribute to Mrs Rajoo and to Dr Rajoo's daughters who so ably stood by him
all these years in his endeavours to serve the South African society. Hamba
kahle, Dr Rajoo. [Goodbye, Dr Rajoo.] [Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, the ACDP congratulates Dr Rajoo on his
prominent appointment as the South African Consul General to the state of
Illinois, in the USA. His outstanding track record of the past years has
proved Dr Rajoo to be a man of sterling character, with strong leadership
qualities that are both firm and fair. For this he has our greatest
respect. Together with his wonderful sense of humour, he has kept this
House in order without fear of intimidation or reprisal.

While we are sad to lose such a fine gentleman, we know that he will make
South Africa proud in his new position and we wish him every success and
God's richest blessings. [Applause.]
Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, dr Rajoo was vir my 'n besondere
persoon, en ek wil graag my party vereenselwig met die beste wense en
voorspoed wat tot dusver aan hom toegewens is. As debatteerder het hy my
reg van die begin af beïndruk. Hy was 'n skerp debatteerder en hy kon sy
saak duidelik en met oortuiging stel, veral as hy oor sy eie mense se
onderwys gepraat het.

As Adjunkvoorsitter was hy 'n man so na my hart; ooglopend wakker - hy het
nooit aan die slaap gelyk nie. Hy was amper dreigend streng ten opsigte van
ons in die Huis se swak dissipline, en die meeste kere baie skerp en vinnig
met sy beslissings. En tog was hy altyd so ordentlik, altyd so beleefd. Ons
het dit vanmiddag weer gesien: nadat hy iemand in die Huis tereggewys het,
het hy dit beëindig met: ``Thank you, sir''! (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, in my view Dr Rajoo is an exceptional
person, and I take pleasure in associating my party with the best wishes
and success that have thus far been conveyed to him. As a debater he
impressed me right from the outset. He was a sharp debater and he could
state his case clearly and with conviction, particularly when he spoke
about the education of his own people.

As Deputy Chairperson he was a man after my own heart; obviously wide awake
- he never looked sleepy. He was almost threateningly strict with regard to
the poor discipline of those of us in the House, and he was often very
sharp and quick with his rulings. And yet he was always so decent, always
so polite. We saw that again this afternoon: After reprimanding someone in
the House, he concluded with: ``Thank you, sir''!]

So I would like, on behalf of the FF, to say to Dr Rajoo that it has been
good to know him. Go well, and thank you, sir!  [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and honourable House, I wish to congratulate
Dr Rajoo on his appointment as Consul General for South Africa in Illinois,
United States of America. He is such a deserving candidate for the
position, as he is masterly in what he does.

This House will miss his dry humour while presiding. He is a typical
diplomat who has the ability to tell one to go to hell and then one looks
forward to the journey. He exudes passion of great proportions for his
office. We accept that our loss in this House is a gain to the nation, as
he will be serving us from across the Atlantic. On behalf of the UCDP, I
say:

Ndlela ntle, nto kaRajoo. [Go well, son of Rajoo.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I also want to support the motion. I have
been listening to all the tributes to Dr Rajoo and it is as if he is dead.
But he is not dying, he is only leaving us.

Dr Rajoo, I must say that I have enjoyed the way you chaired the sessions.
You have always behaved like a school principal. [Laughter.] Although you
were a politician, you could never get the teacher out of you. I wish you
and your family well. It is a long journey. Please, we have confidence that
you will serve your country the way you have served us in Parliament. We
wish you well. Goodbye. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, I wish to say to hon Dr Kisten Rajoo, you
are a politician of integrity who passionately pursued your convictions.
You serve South Africa because you always believe that our people deserve
the best. You have made a historical contribution to democracy. Thank you
for being a patriotic South African.

May I take this opportunity, on behalf of the MF, to wish you well in your
new venture. Remember that now you will have to call for order in 14
states. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, ``The noise level in this House is too high''
and ``Hon members, will you please lower the tone of your voices''.
[Laughter.] That is how I will remember Dr Rajoo. That was his favourite
saying in this House. [Laughter.] When he said that, we had to keep to our
seats and keep our mouths shut. [Laughter.]

Often, one has to pay tribute in this House to somebody one has never met
or never knew, like Julius Nyerere or Mr Alfred Nzo. [Interjections.]
Today, it is much easier to do that for somebody one knows personally and
misses. [Interjections.] In this case, I can speak at first hand.

Mr Rajoo - their laughing is taking my time - your friendliness I will
always remember. I will always remember the way in which you communicated
with everyone and even with the rookies in this House. The few times that
you took part in the debates in this House, I found you to be a competent
debater and somebody that could do his work. I think you are going to do a
good job for our country. I wish you everything of the best there in
America. May you come back with good results as regards the task that has
been delegated to you. [Applause.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, Azapo associates itself with this motion and
adds its voice in congratulating the hon Rajoo on his appointment as our
country's consul general in Illinois. We wish him luck and every success in
his new role as a servant of our country. This House will definitely miss
him.

A combination of wit, humour and a schoolmaster's disposition makes the hon
Rajoo a rather colourful and interesting presiding officer. Off the Chair,
in the corridors of Parliament and elsewhere, he is always a pleasant
person to meet and interact with. We believe that he will brighten the
lives of others where he is going and that he will make a perfect diplomat
for our country. Once more, good luck Dr Rajoo. [Applause.]

Dr K RAJOO: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President ...

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I was not quite sure
whether it was in order for the Consul General in Illinois to address
Parliament. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Actually, it would not be, but he is not the consul
general quite yet. He remains a member. In case we decide to call him back
next week, he will have to be here. [Laughter.]

Dr K RAJOO: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President and hon members, I am moved
today. When I first came here as a rookie many years ago, I never thought
that I would say goodbye so soon. I thought I would stay much longer in the
service of our country.

I wish to thank the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Chairperson of
Committees, because we worked well together, and I gained by their
intelligence, their wisdom and their experience. For this, my everlasting
thanks.

I wish to thank all members who said such nice things to me, and that, too,
whilst I am still living. [Laughter.] I wish to thank today our hon
President, the Deputy President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Director-General of Foreign
Affairs for supporting my appointment. The confidence that they have shown
in me is truly appreciated by me and my family.

I wish to thank my leader, Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi, and my party for their
support and assistance when they knew that I had personal problems and
wanted to leave this Parliament. I made many friends during my time in
Parliament and I am proud to state that every one of the members is
personally my friend. No matter how I chastised Piet Mathebe sometimes and
asked for his respect and co-operation for the House - not for me, but for
our Parliament - it is important to set forth the parameters of what we are
doing in this country today. [Laughter.] We have come from a history of
terrible strife and we have done well.

I want to state that every member is the most important person in this
country. As members of Parliament, our decisions here make weighty matters
move in the annals of the history of our country. We are here serving our
nation. We are not here just sitting and laughing and having a good time,
because our constituencies are watching us, and that is why I am strict
with every member and tell them that the order of the business of
Parliament must carry on. Therefore, please forgive me if I have been too
hard on members in that particular respect.

Members have gained great maturity - even Jannie Momberg. [Laughter.] We
have gained great camaraderie. We have had our good times and our bad times
in this House, and I am mindful of hon Johnny de Lange, who helped me
tremendously, and members may not all know of this. Thanks to Johnny, I
appreciate what he has done for me. [Laughter.]

Whilst in nostalgia I look past a number of faces that I have seen in
Parliament, they remind me, like the ghosts of yesteryear, of what might
have been, because we lost opportunities that could have made people great.
Members must not lose that opportunity. Members have the time in Parliament
to do great things. Members should place great importance on that at times.
All members have greatness within them. Our development lies within
ourselves. We are the architects of our own destiny. If we do not seize the
opportunity to rise to the top, we never will get there. It is the deep
motivation that our country demands from us and the service to this nation
that is ever important, and some people, who are very dedicated to the
cause, have come here and now think that they can rest. Now lies the
greatest test. They have to prove their worth to the people they have left
outside and show how well they can do things in our Parliament.

I say to hon members today that there is no chaos in this country. We do
not have great blood baths such as those happening in other parts of the
world. We should be grateful and give thanks to our leaders, the President,
the Deputy President and my leader, because without these people coming
together, we could have had great strife. Their wisdom has brought about a
calmness and a sense of purpose which we must bear in mind on the road that
lies ahead of us. That is important for this country. Even the DP and New
NP contribute in their own way. [Interjections.] They all serve. Even those
who stand, wait and sit in their places do so in the service of our
country.

Therefore we must engage everybody, as we are doing now. When we first came
here to Parliament, people did not talk to one another because we belonged
to different parties. There was great suspicion and great animosity, but
all that has been quelled and calmed. Today, you are all talking to one
another, engaging with one another and using the intellectual wisdom of
different people to make great matters in this country come to fruition.
That is how it should be.

I see great hope for our country. I see a great future for our country. We
must be the engine room, the rule of Africa. We have the potential. We have
the people. We must harness those talents, and in that way, we will work
with our leaders to do the best we can for ourselves.

I go to the United States as consul general with your blessings and kind
thoughts. There is no doubt that a number of you will visit me, and to the
others, I say that you must please come and visit, and let us share with
one another the great joy and camaraderie that we developed here.

I sincerely thank you for your co-operation and friendship in chairing this
noble House. You have all made it easy for me. I thank you most sincerely.
I thank all the staff at the Table, Mr Hahndiek, Mr Mansura, the service
officers, the restaurant staff and the security people here, because,
without them, our Parliament would not run well. [Applause.]

God bless all of you. You must keep well in the fight for our country.
Great things are expected of you. Do not let that expectation go to waste.
My vanakum to you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, that concludes the debate on this motion.
I heard no objections. The motion is therefore adopted. [Interjections.]

I wish briefly to join in the tribute that this House has paid to Dr Rajoo,
the Deputy Chairperson of Committees and one of your presiding officers. I
want to publicly express my regret that the Speaker does not have the power
to reject resignations, because I would have very much wanted to use that
power on your behalf, on this particular occasion.

The House will miss a valued colleague who has contributed much to the
development of the democratic South African Parliament, both as a member
and as an official of Parliament. I have been particularly appreciative of
the way in which he has presided over this Assembly. I will not comment on
Mr Gibson's view that Dr Rajoo was called in as the ``heavy'' when you were
particularly unruly, but I do know that when he was presiding, I could get
on with my work, assured that the business of the House was being conducted
efficiently, that it would be completed, that there would be no major
uproar or points of order, and that there would be no queue of members
outside my office complaining about the rulings that had been given in the
House.

As a teacher in principle, of course, Dr Rajoo is used to instilling
discipline in children. Notwithstanding the comments that have just been
made about the maturity of a particular member, this House is still useful,
and I trust that the lessons he has instilled will remain even while he is
in Chicago. [Laughter.] As has been demonstrated by the hon Aucamp, we can,
at least, call up on the tapes, the sound of Rr Rajoo calling you to order,
and I will keep a collection of those tapes in my office.

Dr Rajoo, we do wish you great success in your new job. Our good wishes and
appreciation go with you. You will be difficult to replace. You certainly
are a hard act to follow. Go well, dear colleague. Hon members, that
concludes the business for the day. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

The House adjourned at 18:52.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:

    On 20 June 2000 the National Council of Provinces agreed to the
     Protected Disclosures Bill [B 30 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     subject to proposed amendments. (See also Announcements, Tablings and
     Committee Reports, p 566.) The Bill and proposed amendments were
     thereupon, in terms of Rule 270 of the National Assembly, referred to
     the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development for
     consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on Icasa Council,
     dated 21 June 2000:


     The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered and
     examined the matter of the appointment of councillors on the Council of
     the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa, referred to
     it, reports as follows:


     1.     Advertisements were placed in the printed media from 17 May to
         21 May 2000, and 72 nominations were received. On 6 June 2000 the
         Committee shortlisted the following 26 candidates for interviews:


              Bhengu, H; Bulbulia, N; Bussé, A C; Canca, M P; Carrim, Y T;
              Chakela, L P; Currie, W; Gillwald, A; Gouws, E; Herold, K;
              Hope, J; Langa, M; Lloyd, L; Maepa, H N L; Makua, L; Masiza,
              Z; Mbere, A; Mnguni-Radebe, F; Mohan, K; Motshidisi, D K;
              Mtimde, L; Ncetezo, L M S; Ramatsui, N C; Ramusi, M G; Smuts,
              N; Theart, J E.

              Due to other commitments, one of the above candidates
              withdrew.


     2.     The Committee spent 32 hours interviewing the remaining 25
         candidates from 12 June to 20 June 2000. The principles pertaining
         to the constitution of the Council and the appointment of
         councillors were duly taken into account during the entire
         process.


     3.     The Committee accordingly recommends that the House, in
         accordance with section 5(1) of the Independent Communications
         Authority of South Africa Act, 2000 (Act No. 13 of 2000), make a
         recommendation to the President that the following seven persons
         be appointed as councillors:
         Yasmin Carrim; Willie Currie; Julia Hope; Mandla Langa; Libby
         Lloyd; Langa Ncetezo; Neël Smuts.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Protected Disclosures Bill [B 30 - 2000] (National
     Assembly - sec 75), dated 21 June 2000:
      
     The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
     having considered the Protected Disclosures Bill [B 30 - 2000]
     (National Assembly - sec 75) and proposed amendments of the National
     Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p
     566), referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B
     30A - 2000], as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 4


     1.     On page 6, from line 47, to omit subsection (1) and to
         substitute:
        (1)      Any employee who has been subjected, is subject or may be
             subjected, to an occupational detriment in breach of section 3,
             may-
             (a)  approach any court having jurisdiction, including the
                 Labour Court established by section 151 of the Labour
                 Relations Act, 1995 (Act No. 66 of 1995), for appropriate
                 relief; or
             (b)  pursue any other process allowed or prescribed by any law.


        (2)      For the purposes of the Labour Relations Act, 1995,
             including the consideration of any matter emanating from this
             Act by the Labour Court-


             (a)  any dismissal in breach of section 3 is deemed to be an
                 automatically unfair dismissal as contemplated in section
                 187 of that Act, and the dispute about such a dismissal
                 must follow the procedure set out in Chapter VIII of that
                 Act; and


             (b)  any other occupational detriment in breach of section 3 is
                 deemed to be an unfair labour practice as contemplated in
                 Part B of Schedule 7 to that Act, and the dispute about
                 such an unfair labour practice must follow the procedure
                 set out in that Part: Provided that if the matter fails to
                 be resolved through conciliation, it may be referred to the
                 Labour Court for adjudication.

                                  CLAUSE 10


     1.     On page 12, in line 10, to omit "subsection (1)" and to
         substitute "paragraph (a)".


     Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on North West,
     Mpumalanga and Northern Province Study Tours, dated 24 May 2000:


     The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having undertaken study tours
     to the North West, Mpumalanga and the Northern Province from 17 to 19
     March 2000, reports as follows:


     A.     Introduction
         The Committee embarked on a visit to North West to assess and
         evaluate the progress made and problems experienced by communities
         in respect of the Community-Based Public Works Programme (the
         programme). The Committee met with the deputy chairperson of the
         eastern district council, members of the district council,
         officials of the provincial public works departments, the
         provincial social task team, members of the steering committee (1
         & 10) and the steering committee in Kgabalatsane.

         In Mpumalanga the Committee met with the Chief Director of the
         programme, the Director: Public Works, officials from the Lowveld
         Escarpment District Council and the provincial management team.


     B.     Purpose of Report


         The purpose of this Report is to present the findings of the
         Committee on the progress made with, and problems experienced by,
         all interested parties in the programme.
     C.     North West (eastern district council)


         1. Overview of programme


              The programme is a poverty-alleviation programme targeted at
              poor rural communities. It was introduced in 1994, and is
              community-managed, implemented through programme unity in each
              provincial public works department. Funds are allocated to
              public works departments responsible for identifying projects
              from applications received from communities.

              Funds are transferred from the public works department to
              community bank accounts for the planning and implementation of
              projects. Communities are in turn responsible for appointing
              designers and trainers in order for projects to be designed
              and implemented by the community workforce. A disadvantage of
              this approach is that communities with little or no capacity,
              who were excluded from the process because they were not able
              to complete applications or were unable to manage the process,
              are not covered.


         2. Realignment of programme


              During 1997, on the basis of experience gained with the
              programme and an evaluation report by the ILO, the programme
              was realigned. This realignment included emphasis on projects
              creating productive assets in order to create ongoing job
              opportunities. The results of an evaluation done on the
              programme indicated that there is an inequitable geographic
              spread of projects as well as an imbalance in project type.

              Key aspects of realignment include the following:


              (1) The programme is now implemented by local government.

              (2) Clustering of projects - identification of projects is no
                  longer a reactive process of responding to applications,
                  but rather a proactive process:


                  (a)  Integrated development planning results in the
                       identification of targeted poverty pockets.

                  (b)  Identification of projects in close proximity to one
                       another to form a cluster of projects within the
                       targeted poverty pocket.


              (3) Appointment of support services.


                  (a)  Appointment of a cluster project manager by the
                       council to prepare a project business plan for each
                       project in the cluster and oversee planning and
                       implementation.

                  (b)  Appointment of a social facilitator and technical
                       designer by the cluster manager.

                  (c)  Appointment of a trainer to each project within a
                       cluster by the council, with the provision that the
                       trainer is accountable to the cluster manager.


              (4) Contract award - awarding of the construction of the
                  project to a contractor is based on a targeted
                  procurement tender process.

              (5) Payment by the council, not the community.


         3. Programme objectives


              (1) The creation of short-term employment opportunities. This
                  short-term employment is realised primarily during the
                  construction of assets in the communities.

              (2) Creation of useful public assets.

              (3) Creation of sustainable employment opportunities. This is
                  realised through the employment of operators of directly
                  productive assets such as vegetable gardens.


         4. Targets of programme


              The programme requires that the facilities to be implemented,
              should be designed for labour-intensive methods of
              construction. This will help to ensure that human labour is
              used to achieve the short-term job creation objective. The
              following labour targets have been set by the public works
              department and must be met by constructors in the construction
              of projects:


              (1) At least 30% of construction cost must comprise labour
                  costs sourced from the local community.

              (2) At least 50% of labour cost should go to women.


              (3) At least 1,5% of labour cost should go to disabled
                  persons.


              (4) At least 15% of labour cost should go to youth.


              (5) Every project should meet the environmental targets of
                  planting at least five indigenous trees at appropriate
                  locations.


         5. Past and future projects


              The lists of past projects, as well as projects to be
              implemented with 1999-2000 funding, are set out below, in
              terms of clusters:

              Cluster 1 (Dipetloane)

              Projects Project estimates

              Bakery (Ngobi)
              Brick manufacturing (Walman)
              Poultry farm (Voyentee)   R 200 000
              Community Hall (Swartboom)      R 500 000
              Community garden & irrigation
              (Dipetloane)   R 460 000
              Community garden & irrigation
              (Mmukubyane)   R 460 000
              Rehabilitation of community
              facilities (Swartboom)    R 120 000
              Market (Walman)      R 290 000
              ----------
              Total    R2 030 000
              ----------

              Cluster 2 (Thulwe)

              Projects Project estimates

              Multi-purpose centre (1 & 10)   R 550 000
              Sport facility (1 & 10)   R 300 000
              Market (1 & 10)      R 304 000
              Community gardens (Potoane)     R 66 665
              Community gardens (Pries) R 66 665
              Community gardens (Thulwe)      R 66 665
              Community gardens (Opperman)    R 66 665
              Community gardens (1 & 10)      R 66 665
              Community gardens (Dan House)   R 66 665
              Fencing of proposed hall, market & sport facility     R 246
              000


              Total    R1 799 990
              ----------

              Cluster 3 (Fafung)

              Projects Project estimates

              Multi-purpose centre (Fafung)   R 200 000
              Multi-purpose centre (Sephai)   R 200 000
              Multi-purpose centre (Ga-Rasia) R 200 000
              Multi-purpose centre
              (Klipvoorstad) R 200 000
              Community garden (Klipvoorstad) R 183 000
              Community garden (Ga-Rasai)     R 183 000
              Community garden (Sephai) R 183 000
              Community garden (Ga-Rasia)     R 183 000
              Bridge rehabilitation
              (Klipvoorstad) R 300 000
              Bore-hole rehabilitation
              (Ga-Rasai)     R 150 000
              ----------
              Total    R1 982 000
              ----------

              Cluster 4 (Rabokala)

              Projects Project estimates

              Access road (Oskraal)     R 750 000
              Market (Rabokala)    R 400 000
              Multi-purpose centre
              (Kgabalatsane) R 550 000
              Water supply (Rankotea)   R 600 000
              ----------
              Total    R2 300 000
              ----------

              The following process had to be followed before the project
              could be implemented:


              (1) Agreement/contract between public works department and
                  district council.

              (2) Council business plan to confirm capacity to manage
                  projects.

              (3) Development planning to identify clusters.

              (4) Appointment of support services (cluster manager and
                  provincial social facilitator).

              (5) Community facilitation to ensure identification of
                  possible projects.

              (6) Application for approval at provincial level.

              (7) Project business plan to ensure project viability and
                  sustainability.

              (8) Project design stage.

              (9) Tendering and contracts award.

              (10)Project implementation.


              The Committee visited the clusters to assess the areas. All
              the projects were still in the initiation stage and in the
              process of being approved. Tenders were to be issued,
              construction was to commence at the beginning of April 2000,
              and it was expected that these projects would commence during
              June/July.

              The Committee met some members of the cluster steering
              committee. They indicated that they were not experiencing any
              problems, since the projects had not been implemented yet.
              They also indicated that they had a good relationship with the
              Chiefs in their areas. In Maubane, for example, the Chief
              released land for construction of a leisure resort and
              vegetable and irrigation projects. Other activities that will
              be rendered in this resort, will be funded by the Carousel
              Entertainment Resort and other organisations. They said they
              were happy with the progress to date.


     D. Mpumalanga


         1. 17 March 2000


              The Director: Public Works welcomed and introduced us to
              officials. He indicated that the main idea of the visit was
              for us to see for ourselves disasters created by the recent
              rain and flooding.

              During a presentation by the public works department, the
              national public works programmes were cited. These included
              community-based programmes (e.g. Mbuzini Access Road, phase 1
              - expenditure R15,2 million).

              In both phases 1 and 2, the delay seems to have been caused
              mainly by rains. Approximately 32 days lost (excluding week-
              ends) contributed to construction work not having been carried
              out. Markets and pre-schools were also under construction, and
              it was hoped that before the end of April they would have been
              completed. The implementing agent is "Community PSC-Bosele PM
              CC" and related constructors.

              A question was raised about the percentage of variation, and
              the response was that so far the project is well managed and
              that there was no ceiling. The project status was said to be
              at 75%, with a 100% local labour force. There were also delays
              due to heavy rainfalls. There was a 20-day rainfall setback -
              the project had to be extended, and there was additional costs
              in respect of workers.

              When asked if there were any problems with payment, the
              response was that workers had to report for work despite the
              rain, and could only be sent home after reporting.

              The Leandre storm water drainage should have started in
              September 1999, to be completed by the end of the financial
              year. R2,5 million was funded, especially to community-based
              engineers, although there was no specific contractor. The
              project status was at 68%, and the indication was that the
              next week the subcontractor would instruct the workers on
              site. The project, which was 100% community-based, experienced
              a 52-day delay due to heavy rainfall. This led to the digging
              of an extra trench to drain water, in order for it to dry. A
              lot of extra cash had to be used as well.

              The Moloto selfhelp project deals with welding, arts, crafts
              and carpentry. It was started in November 1999 and was to be
              completed in March 2000. It was funded to the tune of R1 606
              000. The implementing agent was the Moloto provincial steering
              committee, and the project manager was Bosele. Four
              subcontractors from the local community were appointed. The
              project status was at 85% in respect of progress, and the
              labour was 100% community-based. The steering committee was
              elected for appointment. There was a 14-day delay because of
              rising of the underground water table. As a result, there was
              a lot of plastering to be done on the septic tank, and the
              target date could not be met.

              Projects earmarked for 2000-01 were listed: Southern Highveld
              Region; Perdekop community garden; multi-purpose centre; sport
              facility upgrading; and Morgenzon community hall. These
              followed many cluster programmes. Mdutjane and Mbimbanee
              transitional local councils were also mentioned.
              As phase 2 projects were heavily funded despite the heavy
              rain, they were mostly still in good condition; there were few
              potholes, side draining, etc. A portion of Mbuzini's existing
              project was already completed when the new projects were
              started on 11 January, but at the time of drafting this Report
              the rain had caused a 32-day delay, and not much work could be
              done.

              On a question about who the workers were, the Committee was
              informed that the policy of the public works department was
              that youths and women had to be employed, and that 30% of the
              funding went to local people. Furthermore, Mbuzini road was a
              high quality road, Public Works almost having reached the
              target.

              The Committee wanted to know what kind of help the public
              works department wanted from it, because it had not just
              visited the area, but wanted to see service delivery as well.
              In view of the public works Budget Vote debate taking place on
              10 May, a response had to take that into consideration as
              well.

              The public works department indicated that R26 million had
              already been spent on a memorial for Samora Machel, where Mr
              Nelson Mandela and the previous Public Works Minister played a
              major role. Therefore, not to compromise the quality more, and
              seeing that there were construction costs and other related
              fees in respect of the project, at least an extra R6 million
              would cover the project.

              The Committee also requested a report on the proposal to be
              sent to its chairperson. As to delays in respect of other
              projects, additional funding would also be required.

              The Committee learnt that 82 bridges were washed away; some
              villages were not accessible - there were 42 temporary
              accesses the previous week. About R6 million was spent on
              reconstruction. Certain projects (schools) were not community-
              based, so they were also affected.
              The floods exposed incompetence in respect of the maintainance
              of roads, hospitals and other facilities in a state of
              disrepair.

              On the question of how well the public works department was
              geared for the future, the Committee learnt that since the
              province had not recovered yet, it was difficult to estimate
              even the reconstruction costs. However, R28 million was
              required to maintain facilities in Mpumalanga. Phase 1 aimed
              to put temporary structures there before rebuilding.

              When asked whether the public works department, whose task it
              was to keep records on which building was to be maintained and
              how, had an assets register, the Committee learnt that it was
              still busy looking into that. Shongweni, Barberton and Themba
              Hospitals were in a state of disrepair, and therefore a
              management system process was considered.

              It was indicated that the R7 million Minister Mufamadi gave to
              the province, was meant for immediate assistance regarding
              roads. The Committee indicated that, as an oversight
              committee, it could not access these funds, but that it could
              assist the public works department on how to access other
              funds.

              After the briefing, the Committee left for Mbuzini, where the
              constructors were already waiting.

              The Committee learnt that construction of the road was already
              six weeks behind schedule, that further extention would cost
              another R3,4 million and that subsurface drainage would cost
              approximately R3 million. Problems experienced included the
              setting up of a temporary camp and poor facilities (the
              project itself was 12 km long). A stretch of 1,5 km from the
              main road to the Samora Machel monument was dedicated to the
              emerging constructor, and subcontractors made up 30%. It was
              labor-intensive, and 33% local and emerging constructors was
              envisaged. R5 million was spent on hand labour.

              Asked whether the constructor would keep to the timeframes,
              the Committee was told that that would be the case if it did
              not continue to rain. Furthermore, R160 000 was spent on
              training managerial, site and other skills through those who
              had previous training and experience. Also, they had to have
              their own grading machines (however, they did not have all the
              equipment).

              In responding as to why suppliers went for big tenders, why
              there was replanning, whether there were low water bridges,
              which group was employed and what the community's reaction
              was, the main constructor said that, depending on where he
              was, he would assist them all the way. Replanning was
              necessary because a number of things had changed and were new.
              Women were mainly employed for bush-clearing (a steering
              committee saw to that). Initially the reaction was fine, but
              it changed because of the tender system, etc.

              The Committee stressed that its task was to oversee the
              activities of the public works department; finances were run
              by the Minister of Public Works.

              The Committee learnt that this was a community-based project
              for various learning activities. There was proper supervision,
              and inspectors visited the site while building was in
              progress. The MEC for public works had already handed the
              project to the community.


         2. 18 March 2000 - Lowveld district council


              The Committee wanted to know whether the council was a rural
              council. In response, the presenter said the Demarcation Board
              was responsible, and these two projects would be combined if
              the council wanted it to be so.

              The Committee wanted to know the level of education of people
              who were taken on board, how outsourcing and tendering were
              done, whether women were involved and why the Butterfly
              Entrepeneurial Development Centre (an NGO with internal
              problems) was replaced by the consultant company ICB & C. The
              provincial management team said that projects had not yet
              started (they were still in the tendering stage). Community
              participation was done at district level (the same with
              tendering), and the purchase price was high and had to be
              lowered. Some facilitators withdrew, and a steering committee
              identified skilled people and informed them about the tenders.

              Private companies followed the same procedure - Mpumalanga was
              not rich in human resource capacity. There were several other
              problems with the reconstruction development committee. With
              regard to what was done to ensure that insiders were preferred
              for skills development, the provincial management team said
              training was dependent on funds available, and that it was
              difficult to know who was going to run a project, because
              training was very difficult. Graduates did not have work, they
              could not do the job, and there were no funds.

              The Committee questioned the issue of local languages on
              community radios. It was suggested that because of tight
              timeframes, untrained people were going to be briefed by
              making use of translations. Radio awareness programmes have
              not been conducted yet.

              The public works department wanted to know from the provincial
              management team what measures it had taken to ensure that the
              issues reported in local newspapers regarding tenders would be
              tackled. The provincial management team said that difficulties
              were still anticipated regarding the recommendations of tender
              reports - local and emerging contractors did not want to be
              exploited. Projects had to remain in the poorest communities,
              and could be shifted to other communities when the poorest
              ones had been adequately covered. The Committee learnt that
              the Lowveld was the poorest area.

              The Committee visited council members on its way to sites
              where bridges had been swept away. There was concern about a
              lack of women participating in council matters. It was
              resolved that Ms Segobela, a local MP representing Mpumalanga
              in Parliament, would deal with that matter.

              The following points were highlighted:


              (1) Critical challenges.


              (2) Allegations and commissions.


              (3) Allocations of funds.


              (4) Delays in implementation.


              (5) Council discussions.


              (6) Effects of the flood and reporting thereon.


     E.     Northern Province


         1. Heavy rains and floods, which began in the first week of
              February 2000, caused widespread damage to roads and bridges.
              There was also extensive damage to streets and drainage
              systems (the responsibility of local government). Road
              infrastructure in all regions was affected by the floods.


              The area worst affected was the northern region, where most of
              the bridges were either washed away or badly damaged. The
              Lowveld and Bushbuckridge regions were also affected badly.
              There was severe damage to road infrastructure in the western,
              central and Bushveld regions, although to a lesser extent than
              in the eastern regions. There was damage to roads and bridges
              in the south.

              Approximately 15O bridges and other types of drainage
              structures were either washed away or severely damaged;
              approximately 1 OOO km of the 6 OOO km of tarred roads and
              approximately 4 OOO km of the 15 OOO km of gravel roads were
              damaged to the extent that they needed to be rebuilt. There
              have also been mud slides on roads in several areas.


         2. Types of damage


              Given the lack of preventative maintenance, the road
              infrastructure was in fair condition before the floods - the
              provincial government was able to keep roads and bridges in a
              fairly good condition. The floods greatly accelerated
              deterioration of the roads, to the extent that it was no
              longer possible for the provincial government to keep certain
              roads in good condition.

              The floods damaged sections of tarred roads through a
              combination of a high water table and ingress of water into
              the strength-bearing layers of the roads through cracks in the
              surface and through road shoulders. The strength-bearing
              layers became saturated and weakened because of vehicle-
              loading, and in some places this resulted in the forming of
              potholes, which could not be repaired by filling and patching,
              but by rebuilding.


         3. Areas affected
              (1) Northern region


                  The areas most affected were Thohoyandou, Slim, Louis
                  Trichardt, Mutable and Nzhelele, with many bridges washed
                  away or severely damaged. There were massive mud slides
                  onto the main road in the Tatevondo Pass (in the
                  mountains between Thohoyandou and Wyliespoort). The Louis
                  Trichardt-Thohoyandou road was badly damaged at two
                  points and was at times impassable.


              (2) Lowveld region


                  There were heavy mud slides onto main roads in
                  Magoebaskloof, Soekmekaar, Tzaneen and Letsitele. The
                  road through Magoebaskloof was particularly badly
                  affected by landslides, portions of the road slipping
                  down the mountain. The roads (with heavy traffic) between
                  Duiwelskloof and Mooketsi and between Tzaneen and
                  Nkowankowa were in very bad condition. The Duiwelskloof-
                  Mooketsi road carried numerous heavy trucks, and since
                  the rains it had become increasingly dangerous to use.
                  Many bridges were washed away or severely damaged along
                  the Letaba and Selati Rivers.


              (3) Bushbuckridge region


                  Many bridges were washed away or severely damaged along
                  the Sand and Sabie Rivers. In addition, there were
                  landslides along the road between Acornhoek and
                  Bushbuckridge.


              (4) Central region


                  Bridges along the Brak, Dwars and Sand Rivers were
                  damaged. The Pietersburg-Munnick-Mooketsi and Pietersburg-
                  Boyne-Soekmekaar roads all carried heavy traffic. Large
                  parts of these roads were either washed away or had
                  collapsed. These routes are presently used as alternative
                  routes between Louis Trichardt and Pietersburg because
                  the N1 had to be closed when the bridge over the Dwars
                  River was badly damaged.


              (5) Bushveld region


                  Most of the bridges along the Crocodile River were eroded
                  and severely damaged. The main road between Nylstroom and
                  Vaalwater was in poor condition. Similarly, the roads
                  between Brits and Thabazimbi and between Settlers and
                  Marble Hall were in bad condition, due to recent heavy
                  rains and floods.


              (6) Western region


                  Many bridges were washed away along the
                  Mogalakwena/Phalala Rivers. The tar road between Roedtan
                  and Naboomspruit needed to be rebuilt. There were
                  rockslides in the Kloof Pass on the Potgietersrus-Marken
                  Road, and this road also needed to be rebuilt.


              (7) Southern region
                  The Mofefe area was cut off, and bridges along the
                  Mohapitsi River were washed away or extensively damaged.
                  The road between Lebowakgomo and Groothoek needed to be
                  rebuilt.


         4. Action taken by public works department


              The public works department had been working tirelessly to
              open routes cut off. Teams have been working until the early
              hours of the morning to clear mud slides on the Tatevondo
              Pass, the Magoebaskloof Pass and George's Valley areas.
              Private contractors, particularly Ikageng Construction and
              Hillary Construction, were assisting with this work without
              demanding payment.

              The maintenance teams had been using their limited resources
              to fill potholes and dongas in order to facilitate basic
              accessibility. The public works department managed to provide
              access to 60 communities that had been cut off. Some road
              maintenance machinery were moved from the least affected to
              the badly affected areas. The public works department also
              hired additional machinery for repair work.

              The public works department did not have the financial
              resources or the necessary skills and equipment to build new
              bridges. It also did not have resources to reconstruct failed
              and washed-away infrastructure. This type of work was
              outsourced and will be carried out by private contractors. The
              public works department's in-house maintenance teams are
              focussing on providing the very basic level of accessibility
              as an urgent temporary measure.

              Assistance was given by some private contractors: Phalaborwa
              Mining Company helped with repairing the bridge on the road
              between Phalaborwa and Gravelotte; the SANDF assisted in
              repairing two bridges over the Sand River in the northern
              region; and PPC and Iscor assisted in repairing a bridge over
              the Crocodile River near Thabazimbi. The SANDF and the SAPS
              assisted in clearing rockslides at the Strijdom Tunnel on the
              Ohrigstad/Hoedspruit Road; ZZ2 assisted in the maintenance of
              roads in its area; and farmers in the Tshipise and Levubu
              areas assisted with building bridges and repairing roads in
              their areas.

              Construction of 10 to 12 temporary pedestrian bridges over
              rivers was under way to create access on a temporary basis.
              The SANDF in particular was supplying soldiers from the
              Engineering Corps to assist with erecting these bridges.

              The SANDF was erecting a temporary light vehicle bridge over
              the Nzhelele River to provide accessibility to cut-off
              communities in some areas. The SANDF also provided assistance
              to the public works department with the construction of ARMCO
              pipe culvert bridges in at least three affected areas in order
              to provide accessibility to cut-off communities.


         5. Cost estimate of damage


              The estimates below were based on preliminary visual
              inspections of the damage. The figures could change after
              detailed investigations and after contractors have submitted
              tenders for repair work.

              Tar road rehabilitation   R  696 000 000
              Bridges and culverts R  129 000 000
              Repair of gravel roads    R  400 000 000
              Repair of landslides R   51 000 000
              --------------
              Total    R1 276 000 000
             --------------


         6. Conclusion


              The Northern Province experienced its worst floods in living
              memory. These floods had a devastating effect on the road
              infrastructure, and the damage had negative social and
              economic implications. In many rural areas, particularly in
              the northern region, school children could not get to school
              and communities did not have access to health services,
              emergency services and shops. Many workers could not go to
              work and often had to travel longer distances than usual (in
              some instances 12 km instead of two). Agriculture, mining and
              tourism were all disrupted by the inaccessibility of so many
              roads.

              The provincial government was working hard to alleviate the
              situation within the constraints of its limited resources. It
              had requested financial assistance from the government to
              carry out the required repairs. Reports on damage to road
              infrastructure were submitted to the government.


     F.     Recommendations


         The Committee recommends as follows:


         1. A follow-up visit is needed to assess completed projects in the
              North West.


         2. A follow-up visit could be necessary to address major concerns
              in Mpumalanga.
         3. During a follow-up visit, a video recording should be used to
              give a clear picture to those who have to further monitor the
              extent of the damage.


         4. The Department of Public Works should access the reports that
              were compiled by its counterpart in the Northern Province as a
              matter of urgency, so that steps can be taken to alleviate the
              situation there.


         5. Committee members should raise these issues during the budget
              review process so that severely affected provinces such as the
              Northern Province could be given due priority.

