---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 12 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-10-12
---

THURSDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
Council, I shall move:


  That the Council notes that -


  (1) eight provinces in the RSA received funds from the contingency relief
       fund for the disasters caused by heavy rain and storms in their
       respective areas;


  (2) the Western Cape experienced a similar disaster during March this
       year in which roads and bridges were swept away, causing heavy damage
       to communities and farms;


  (3) the Government blatantly ignored the Western Cape's application for
       assistance to the province from the contingency relief fund to
       rebuild roads and bridges and to restore damages,


  (4) and therefore calls on the Government to honour its commitment to
       disaster-struck communities in the Western Cape such as the Little
       Karoo, Central Karoo and the Southern Cape and to fulfil its
       obligations.

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek by die volgende
sitting van die Raad sal voorstel:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem van ons dankbaarheid dat 'n verkiesingsdatum aangekondig
       is, maar besorgd is oor die feit dat 5 Desember 2000 in die middel
       van Ramadan is, dat universiteitstudente dan reeds weg is van die
       plekke waar hulle geregistreer is, dat dit reeds in vakansietyd van
       baie ander mense is en dat dit gedurende oestyd van talle landbouers
       en seisoenwerkers is; en


  (2) 'n beroep doen op alle kiesers dat hulle die belangrikheid van
       hierdie gemeenskapsverkiesings vir al ons mense sal besef en hulle
       daarby sal aanpas en na die stembusse sal gaan en vir die DA sal
       stem.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the Council I shall move:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes our thankfulness that an election date has been announced, but
       that we are concerned about the fact that 5 December 2000 is in the
       middle of Ramadan, that university students will then already have
       left the places where they are registered, that it falls in the
       holiday time of many other people, and that it falls in the harvest
       time of many agriculturalists and seasonal workers; and
  (2) calls on all voters to recognise the importance of these community
       elections for all our people and to reconcile themselves thereto, to
       go to the polls and to vote for the DA.]

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) wishes to take this opportunity to welcome the unveiling of the ANC
       Election Manifesto by the President last weekend in Beaufort West;


  (2) endorses the manifesto which is easily understandable and carries
       fundamental promises on the needs of the people such as job creation,
       the fight against poverty and the building of safe and secure
       communities;


  (3) supports the programme of providing basic minimum services of water
       and electricity to the poor who are unable to pay for such services;


  (4) recognises that this does not absolve those who are able to afford
       services to pay for them in terms of the Masakhane campaign;


  (5) endorses the message of honest and caring councillors who interact
       with their communities;


  (6) congratulates the President for his dedication to speeding up change
       in South Africa and the rest of the Continent; and


  (7) reaffirms that together we will speed up change.

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note that the annual number of notified malaria cases and
       deaths has risen dramatically in the past decade from 4 693 cases and
       19 deaths in 1991, to 10 289 cases and 12 deaths in 1994 and to 51
       535 cases and 402 deaths in 1999; and


  (2) therefore requests the Minister of Health to take urgent note and to
       institute an inquiry with a view to taking decisive action.

Ms E C GOUWS: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with concern the fact that health facilities in the Eastern
       Cape ran out of condom supplies three weeks ago and that new supplies
       were only received yesterday;


  (2) recognises that -


       (a)  condoms are an important weapon in the fight against the spread
           of HIV/Aids; and


       (b)  the Government's own ABC campaign, launched last week, is
           dependent on the availability of condoms; and


  (3) expresses its dissatisfaction with the ANC government nationally and
       in the Eastern Cape for its ineffectual handling of the fight against
       HIV/Aids.

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of the Council:


  That, in the light of the reply of the Minister for Justice and
  Constitutional Development, Mr Penuell Maduna, to a question put by Mr P
  A Matthee on 3 October 2000 in the Council to the effect that he has
  decided to advise the President to put the new section 49 of the Criminal
  Procedure Act, 1977, into operation with effect from 1 December 2000, and
  whereas -


  (1) this new section basically limits the use of force in effecting an
       arrest that may result in the death or serious injury of the person
       who is to be arrested, to those circumstances where such force is
       used in self-defence or in defence of another person;


  (2) South Africa has the highest level of violent crimes in developing
       countries and more South African Police Service officials are killed
       in the line of duty than in any other so-called stable country; and


  (3) the putting into operation of this new section will seriously hamper
       the South African Police Service in the execution of their duties and
       further endanger the lives of our police officials,


  the Council now therefore urges the President not to put the said section
  into operation, but to refer it back to Parliament and more specifically
  to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development of the
  Council for further deliberation and possible further amendments thereto.

                    OUTRAGE AT RACIALLY MOTIVATED ATTACK

                             (Draft Resolution)

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with shock and outrage the barbaric behaviour of a group of
       whites who allegedly painted the face of a 17-year old person with
       faeces and forced him to eat his own excrement;


  (2) further notes that this overtly racist incident follows shortly after
       a number of racially motivated attacks on blacks over the past year;


  (3) believes that deeds such as this show a blatant disregard for the
       integrity and dignity of fellow human beings and for the laws of our
       country;


  (4) further believes that this deed debunks the notion that racism
       disappeared with the demise of apartheid;


  (5) urges our courts to take cognisance of the serious nature of such
       crimes when they impose sentences; and


  (6) calls on all South Africans to join forces in ridding our society of
       this scourge once and for all.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
            GOOD WISHES TO THOSE INVOLVED IN SCHOOL EXAMINATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mev J WITBOOI: Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) met die oog op die aanvang van die eindeksamens al die leerders,
       opvoeders en ouers wat betrokke is, sterkte toewens;


  (2) se beste wense in besonder ons matrikulante vergesel in die
       belangrike tyd waarin hulle moet rekenskap gee; en


  (3) die uitdaging aan die Wes-Kaap rig om soos in die verlede weer die
       toon aan te gee met puik matriekuitslae en dat ons die hoop uitspreek
       dat die ander provinsies die Wes-Kaap se voorbeeld sal volg.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mrs J WITBOOI: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) with a view to the commencement of the final examinations  wishes all
       the learners, educators and parents involved all the best;


  (2) extends its best wishes to our matriculants in particular in this
       important time during which they will have to give account; and


  (3) addresses the challenge to the Western Cape to set the tone once
       again with excellent matric results, as they have done in the past,
       and expresses the hope that the other provinces will follow the
       example of the Western Cape.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                               HIV CAUSES AIDS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms C S BOTHA: Madam Chair, I move without notice:
  That the Council accepts that HIV causes Aids.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Yes, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is an objection. The motion will
therefore become notice of a motion.

          LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ISSUES AFFECTING TRADITIONAL LEADERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Comrade Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) commends the Minister for Provincial and Local Government and his
       technical team for their commitment in achieving consensus in
       relation to issues affecting traditional leaders;


  (2) expresses its gratitude to the President for his sensitivity and his
       will to address the concerns of traditional leaders; and


  (3) recognises the need to strengthen and further promote democratic
       local government.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                     INITIATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, you do not need to move
your eyes at me. I have noted your names and I will come to you. Continue,
Ms Lubidla.

Ms E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) welcomes the Department of Health's initiative to establish research
       sites in all nine provinces, two sites per province, one rural, and
       one urban;


  (2) notes that the Department has produced comprehensive guidelines on
       the management of pregnant HIV positive women with emphasis on
       effective obstetric interventions, the treatment of opportunistic
       infections, and the monitoring of the foetus during labour;


  (3) notes that the Department has spent R40 million to support easy
       access to condoms by the public;


  (4) welcomes the R60 million expenditure on life skills programmes aimed
       at learners and educators;


  (5) calls on the South African National Aids Council and the respective
       provincial Aids councils to strengthen the partnerships against
       HIV/Aids; and


  (6) encourages all South Africans to support the ABC message, Abstain
       from sex for as long as possible, Be Faithful to your sexual partner,
       if you cannot do any one of the two use a  Condom.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

       ``KALAHARI KUIERFEES'' AN EXAMPLE TO SOUTH AFRICA'S COMMUNITIES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, op 'n heel ander noot stel ek sonder
kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem dat -


       (a)  die gemeenskap van Upington in die Noord-Kaap hierdie week 'n
           groot Kalahari Kuierfees aanbied en die dorp daarmee gelukwens;


       (b)  dit 'n groot groep kunstenaars insluit wat die geleentheid kry
           om voor die Noord-Kapenaars van al die gemeenskappe op te tree;


       (c)  die fees ook 'n wêreldpremière aanbied van 'n film waarin die
           tradisionele inwoners, die Boesmans, die hoofrol speel; en


       (d)  dié fees werkgeleenthede skep en uniek is met 36 donkiekarre wat
           feesgangers vervoer - ons eie taxi's;


  (2) van mening is dié spoggeleentheid moet 'n voorbeeld wees vir ander
       plattelandse dorpe en taalgemeenskappe om deur kulturele bedrywighede
       en die gebruik van ons inheemse tale die gom daar te stel om
       gemeenskappe saam te snoer en te fokus op hulle eie uniekheid maar
       ook met respek en sensitiwiteit vir ons verskille te vul - op dié
       manier word al ons mense gedien; en


  (3) voorts kennis neem dat -


       (a)  'n geskenk vandag per hand aan die President van Suid-Afrika
           oorhandig word en dat hy dit nie hoef te verklaar nie; en


       (b)  dit 'n pakkie rosyntjies is van ons wêreld en 'n pakkie Kalahari
           sand wat hy in sy skoene kan strooi en wat hom dan volgens 'n
           ``tribal legend'' sal teruglei na die Kalahari, waar hy die
           mense se gasvryheid kan geniet.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, in a completely different vein I move
without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the community of Upington in the Northern Cape is presenting a
           big "Kalahari Kuierfees" this week and congratulates the town on
           the festival;


       (b)  it includes a large group of artists who will have the
           opportunity of performing for the people of all communities of
           the Northern Cape;


       (c)  the festival will also present a world premiere of a film in
           which the traditional inhabitants, the Bushmen, play the leading
           role; and


       (d)  this festival creates job opportunities and is unique with 36
           donkey carts to transport festivalgoers - our own taxis;


  (2) is of the opinion that this prestigious occasion should be an example
       to other rural towns and language communities to provide the cement
       to unite our communities through cultural activities and the use of
       our indigenous languages and to focus on their own uniqueness, but
       also to fill them with respect for and sensitivity to our differences
       - in this way all our people are served; and


  (3) further notes that -


       (a)  today a gift is being handed to the President of South Africa
           and that he does not need to declare it; and


       (b)  it is a packet of raisins from our part of the world and a
           packet of Kalahari sand which he can sprinkle in his shoes and
           which, according to tribal legend, will then lead him back to
           the Kalahari where he can enjoy the hospitality of the people.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to this motion
and to the President receiving such gift?

Mr P G MARAIS: No, Chairperson, but we would like the hon member to
distinguish between a speech and a motion. This was motivation. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I think, hon Marais, the member was motivated.
We will make sure the present gets to you, Mr President.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
         CONGRATULATIONS TO PROTEAS CRICKET TEAM ON BEATING ENGLAND

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr J L THERON: Voorsitter, ek het ook 'n voorstel oor 'n gelukkige
geleentheid. Ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) die Proteas gelukwens met die skitterende oorwinning oor Engeland in
       die Internasionale Krieketraad se uitklopbeker;


  (2) met groot genoegdoening daarvan kennis neem dat ons 'n tradisioneel
       groot krieketland soos Engeland getroef het; en


  (3) sy blydskap uitspreek daaroor dat jong spelers soos Boeta Dippenaar
       so vinnig verbeter en uitstekend presteer.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr J L THERON: Chairperson, I also have a motion about a joyous occasion.
I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates the Proteas on their magnificent victory over England
       in the International Cricket Council's knock-out cup;


  (2) notes with great satisfaction that we have trumped a traditionally
       strong cricketing nation like England; and


  (3) expresses its pleasure about the fact that young players like Boeta
       Dippenaar are improving so quickly and are performing excellently.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                             PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson, hon Premiers, Deputy President,
hon members of the House, Ministers, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen, let me start by thanking you, Chairperson, and the National
Council of Provinces for giving me the opportunity, once more, to spend
time in this important House of our national legislature. Perhaps I should
apologise, because the programme says that I should speak for 45 minutes. I
hope you do not mind if I speak for less.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I would be very happy. [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: When we spoke at the National Assembly in
June, on the occasion of the discussion of the Budget Vote of the
Presidency, we addressed the issue of the challenge of the transformation
of our system of governance. We did this because of the critical importance
of this matter in our continuing struggle to build our democratic,
nonracial and nonsexist society.

Precisely because of this importance, we are of the view that all of us
must participate in the process of the execution of the national task of
the conceptualisation and the construction of this system of governance. I
believe, therefore, that it would be fundamentally wrong for us to leave
this matter solely in the hands of the executive.

It is true that, as it should be, our legislatures, including this Council,
do indeed participate in this process, as they consider legislation
directed at the establishment or the transformation of the institutions of
government. Beyond the adoption of such legislation lies the task of
creating the institutions and establishing the processes the law
visualises.

I believe that hon members, as lawmakers, should have a continuing interest
in the achievement of the objectives contained in such legislation as they
would have approved. Today, for these reasons, and in continuation of the
remarks I made in June at the National Assembly, I would like to address
the critically important issue of local government.

As the Council knows, the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, the
hon Sydney Mufamadi, has now announced the date on which the local
government elections will be held. I would like to take this opportunity to
convey our Government's understanding of the frustration that all political
parties, and the electorate as whole, might have felt at the delay in the
announcement of this date. Nevertheless, I would like to plead that this
delay was necessary in the context of the search for inclusive processes as
we pursue the reconstruction and development of our country.

It is clear that some voters will be inconvenienced by the fact of our
holding the elections on the particular date announced by the Minister. I
would like to apologise to all of these, and assure them that we tried our
best to avoid this inconvenience. Nevertheless, I hope that all those
affected will make the necessary effort to exercise their right to vote for
candidates and parties of their choice. This is of the greatest importance
to the continuing national effort further to entrench democracy in our
country.

I am certain that the Independent Electoral Commission will do everything
in its power to ensure that all registered voters have the possibility to
exercise their democratic right freely to help constitute our local
legislatures.

As the hon members are aware, the majority of our voting stations will be
based on school premises. As has happened in previous elections, we will
continue to count on our principals and teachers to assist the IEC and the
nation to conduct successful elections. I therefore appeal to this
important sector of our society once more to demonstrate its patriotism and
selflessness by helping to man these voting stations, displaying the same
dedication that inspired all of us during the last general election.

Once again, I would like to call on all our parties and all the candidates
to do everything they can to ensure that the forthcoming elections are free
of all violence and intimidation. Given the levels of violence in our
society, which continue to be a matter of serious concern, all of us have a
continuing responsibility to entrench the practice and culture of the
resolution of all conflicts in our society by peaceful means. This includes
the conflict inherent in the competition among parties and individual
candidates for the necessarily limited elective positions in our
legislatures.

I believe that we have to implant the understanding, among all of us, that
any seat won through the coercion and intimidation of the electorate is a
seat acquired by fraudulent and criminal means.

Anybody who holds a seat by virtue of resort to these antidemocratic means
should be left in no doubt that he or she sits in any of our legislatures
as a pariah, with no legitimacy and no right to the honoured title of a
people's tribune.

Again, as this House knows, the holding of the forthcoming municipal
elections has brought into sharp relief the need for us as a country to
address the issue of the role and place of the institution of traditional
African government in our democracy. Many of our country's traditional
leaders have taken the view that the installation of the new
municipalities, with elected councils, will result in the complete
obliteration of their powers. They fear that they will therefore be
transformed into nothing more than a ceremonial institution.

Correctly, they raised this matter with our Government, requesting that it
should be addressed. We have agreed with them that, indeed, the issue
should be addressed, taking into account all relevant factors, including
the further consolidation of our nonracial and nonsexist democracy.

As a result of the interaction between the Government and the traditional
leaders, agreement has been reached that our constitutional and legal order
has, in fact, diminished the powers that traditional authorities exercised
prior to the transition to democracy. We have agreed that we will attend to
this issue. Apart from anything else, this should ensure that we give real
content to the objective contained in our Constitution to respect the
institution of traditional leadership.

Accordingly, we have agreed with the representative structures of
traditional leaders that this matter will be addressed in two phases. The
first of these refers to the interim period immediately after the election
and installation of the new municipal authorities. The question that must
be addressed is what powers, roles and functions should be attributed to
the traditional authorities in the context of the existence in the communal
areas of elected municipal councils. This will be done before these
elections take place.

The second phase is the longer term, during which a comprehensive
determination must be arrived at relating to the same questions of the
powers, role and function of the system of traditional government. A
satisfactory response to this important challenge, in both phases, may
require that we make such changes to our legal order as may be necessary to
ensure that we give legal expression to the agreed powers, role and
function of the system of traditional government.

I trust that hon members will understand the importance of these processes
and thus be willing to convene, as part of the national legislature, to
consider such statutory measures as may be required.

I am pleased to inform hon members that our Government is firmly committed
to taking all necessary steps to ensure that the concerns of the
traditional leaders are addressed with regard to both phases. This will be
based on the common agreement that the institution of traditional
government must play a meaningful role as part of our system of co-
operative democratic government.

I would like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to our
traditional leaders for their readiness to support and encourage the
process of democratisation and to work side by side and in harmony with the
elected democratic institutions. It was for this reason, given our
assurance that their concerns would be attended to, that they supported the
speedy announcement of the date on which municipal elections would be held.

In this context, I would like to believe that the traditional leaders will
play their role in ensuring that these elections take place in conditions
of peace, with everybody in the communal areas and elsewhere in our country
enjoying the right freely to choose such candidate or party as they may
wish to. I must also call on our state security organs once more to make
another sterling contribution to the common objective of achieving free and
fair elections.

The hon Sydney Mufamadi has addressed the Council on the revolutionary
process in which we are engaged to create an entirely new system of local
government. Hon members have also discussed this important matter as they
considered the White Paper and the legislation that gave legal force to our
intentions to establish a system of local government that is democratic,
people-centred, meaningful and effective.

Accordingly, it is not necessary for me to cover the detailed ground
already traversed by this House. Nevertheless, as I have already indicated,
I would like to make some comments to the Council relevant to the process
in which we have been engaged, of the construction of a new system of local
government.

The National Council of Provinces occupies a unique position in our
constitutional order, as a consequence of which it must play a special role
in ensuring that we succeed in the creation of the new system of local
government. Among their ranks, hon members have members of the SA Local
Government Association, directly representing in this national legislative
Chamber the local government sphere of government.

As hon members know, this places this Council in the select and therefore
difficult position of being the only legislature in our country that
directly spans all three spheres of government. The Council has various
statutory responsibilities with regard to local government. At the same
time it is directly linked to our provincial legislatures and executives,
which in turn also have statutory responsibilities towards local
government. It is therefore both necessary and appropriate that the Council
reflect deeply and seriously on the strategically important issue of
everything that has to do with the establishment of the new system of local
government.

I can report to the Council that in the last six years we have, as a
country, made great strides in the transformation of our country's
institutions of national Government. We would not hesitate to make a
similar statement about the state system at the provincial level.

Needless to say, we are not suggesting that we have realised all the
objectives we set ourselves or the goals that are a necessary consequence
of our common pursuit of the objective of creating a democratic, nonracial,
nonsexist and people-centred society. The reality is that we still have to
travel a long road before we can be satisfied, as a nation, that we have
the kind of state machinery that we would be happy with. But still, there
is no gainsaying the fact that, most remarkably, we have managed to
establish the new, replacing the old, at a speed and in a manner that even
we never thought was possible.

I am convinced that we cannot make the claims with regard to local
government that we can make, quite legitimately, with regard to national
and provincial government. This is not to deny the positive results
achieved by the elected local government representatives, the municipal
public servants and the ordinary people in all localities during the last
few years in bringing about change at the base and foundation of the new
South Africa we are struggling to create.

The unequivocal recognition of this reality must, however, be qualified by
a similarly honest admission of the fact that of our three spheres of
government, we have made the least progress at the level of the local
system of governance.

I am convinced that we have now elaborated and legislated into force the
necessary policy, institutions and processes that will enable us to ensure
that we achieve balanced transformation among all of the spheres of
government.

The forthcoming elections give all of us an opportunity to make an
important advance in our common struggle to bring into being the new system
of local government.
All this vividly illustrates the point that the fundamental social
transformation of our country continues to occupy pride of place on our
national agenda for the construction and development of our new society.
The social transformation requires, among other things, that we create a
truly developmental state system that serves the interests of the people,
that is truly representative of all of these people and that is efficient
and cost-effective.

Our system of local government must also be built on the basis of these
principles. We are convinced that the local government legislation that
members have approved gives us the possibility to achieve these objectives
and, thus, creates a radically new system of local government. I believe
that it is in the interest of all of us, regardless of party affiliation,
to ensure that we actually succeed in building this new system focused on
enabling the people to participate in government and ensuring that the
Government and the state play their proper role in the struggle to achieve
the objective of a better life for all.

I am certain that the matter is clear to all of us that we can never
realise these objectives unless we have local governments that are strong
enough to bring development where it must occur - in each and every one of
our localities. It was for this reason that we all thought it necessary
that we should consolidate our municipalities into larger and more rational
entities, rather than continue with institutions that are too small,
fragmented and weak. Needless to say, the mere creation of these larger
entities, by itself, will not solve the problems that confront us. Together
we will have to do more work to ensure that these larger and fewer
municipalities actually have the capacity to meet the challenges of social
transformation at the local level.

I would like to discuss a few of these challenges to indicate to the
Council some of the matters which I believe the Council should concern
itself with as it makes its own contribution to the construction of an
effective and efficient system of local government. One of the biggest
challenges is going to be how we use the new structures as vehicles to
deracialise our communities. In doing that, there may be tension
occasioned, among other things, by the effort to ensure a more equitable
distribution of resources between affluent and poor areas in order to
address the serious disparities in service delivery.
We do, indeed, need to deracialise the settlement patterns in our country.
The establishment of integrated residential areas will give us the
possibility to unite our people so that together they can create conditions
of peace and stability where they can live side by side as good neighbours,
friends and compatriots.

As we all know, rural areas pose a specific developmental challenge in our
country. Black rural areas were in the past completely neglected in terms
of governance, infrastructure and the infusion of resources. We will need
to put in place measures effectively to end poverty and underdevelopment in
these areas. The manner in which we have redefined the structures by
integrating some of the more advanced municipalities with rural ones seeks
to address this challenge. The new local government structures will ensure
that rural areas enjoy better access to resources, both human and material,
flowing from a broader base.

The new structures will also play a key role in the implementation of the
Government's integrated rural development strategy, which seeks to defeat
poverty and ensure sustainable development in the rural areas. They will
also consolidate the work done in implementing the projects approved in
terms of the Local Economic Development Fund. In order to meet all of these
objectives, we need to build the capacity of these structures in a manner
which will ensure that we effectively meet the challenge of reconstruction
and development. We need to ensure that we put some of the difficulties we
have experienced in the past behind us. In this regard, we will insist on
better monitoring and the establishment of early-warning systems.

Government will make resources available to enhance the capacity of these
structures properly to manage their finances and ensure effective delivery
of services. This will involve the training of elected representatives in
strategic management and of the relevant staff in financial management. For
local government to succeed, national and provincial government will have
to play a significant role in providing support and participating fully in
the resolution of all of the challenges thrown up by the introduction of
these new structures. This House, occupying the unique position to which we
have referred, will have to make a contribution of its own to the success
of these structures.
As we all know, local government is a primary sphere of interaction between
the citizens and their government. It must succeed, lest democracy becomes
devoid of any meaning to the greater majority of our people. I wish all the
political parties in our country well in the forthcoming elections, bearing
in mind the critical importance of these elections to the continuing
consolidation of democracy in our country. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr N J Mahlangu): Chairperson, we in Mpumalanga
would like to appreciate the principles set out by his Excellency the
President, particularly regarding the development in the local government
sphere. Members will remember that Mpumalanga is 60% rural and probably
only 40% semi-urban or urban. This poses in our province the very
challenges set out by the President in his speech more than one can
imagine.

We have local government councils which were brought into existence in 1995
in areas where people knew no municipalities. These areas were totally
rural. There were no municipal services or infrastructure, and even the new
councillors had never been trained to do municipal work, let alone economic
development. This new system of local government, we believe, will
alleviate the great problems, particularly the legacy left by the previous
dispensation which brought about more poverty in the rural areas.

Let me say that we do have so-called TLC areas in the province where
councillors literally do not have a cent to control, but they are called
councillors. They depend on what will be coming from somewhere to repair
the roads, bring electricity and supply water. These make a fallacy of a
system in which a person is elected to deliver services, but that person is
not given the necessary capacity or resources to do that. However, having
premised what I said with that, a lot of strides have been taken during
this interim phase. Despite the fact that the councillors were placed in
such a difficult situation, I must say that we have a lot of areas in the
province where a lot of water networks have been put up.

Now for the people who never knew that they could turn a tap and get water,
unlike people in urban areas who find this an ordinary thing, it was a
great achievement in a rural province like ours, particularly in the rural
areas. It was a great achievement for Mama Gumede to be able to turn a tap
and get water in the morning. This might sound trivial to a person who is
used to this facility, but for this lady who had to transport water for
five kilometres in a wheelbarrow, this was a great achievement.

We have had a situation in which even the provision of housing has been
difficult in some rural areas owing to the fact that we have budget
constraints on the building of low-cost houses. But even when there was
some money to build houses, we had problems in the rural areas with
communal land, which belonged to our traditional leaders jointly with the
community.

Some traditional leaders were not very willing to have the land surveyed or
proclaimed in such a way that an individual could get ownership and have
the title deed of the little plot on which he or she lives.

So those were the hurdles which I believe were ably addressed by his
Excellency the President and the Minister for Provincial and Local
Government. These problems will be resolved eventually when the
implementation stage begins. This problem causes great difficulty in the
rural areas.

When one talks about housing one is only talking about it in an area where
one does not have communal ownership. In an area of communal ownership one
has to have a lot of negotiations with traditional leaders before one can
have only one house of maSkomolo being built at that particular place. This
will benefit this poor community which, after six years of democracy, is
still struggling to see the benefits in the areas concerned.

We also agree with the President that the capacity of elected councillors
is an important aspect. It is a problem to have somebody who is not trained
and does not have the capacity to control the vast amount of money which is
put at the disposal of the council. One needs training, as the President
has rightly indicated, not only for the elected representatives, but for
one's officials to be able to control the financial aspects.

They need to be able to do this work, because our elected representatives
in the deep rural areas have never been able to acquire such capacities and
even been able to learn, because, as hon members know, the previous
dispensation prevented this. This is a wonderful setting. It is not an end
in itself, but a start. We believe we will make a difference.

Another aspect we have identified and which we would like to mention to his
Excellency the President is that the tendering system in local government
has left much to be desired in the last few years that local government has
been in power. We have a situation in which the local government itself
must sit as a tender board and decide to whom tenders should be allocated.

Some members of the council are obviously owners of the contractors in that
they are contractors themselves. Now there is this artificial situation,
which I normally have a problem with, in that one recuses oneself when
one's tender is being considered in the same council. [Interjections.] I am
not saying this is wrong.

I do not know if my colleagues in that council know me as the mayor and
know when something is my contract - I just go out while it is being
discussed. Would it not influence my colleagues in deciding to whom the
tender must be awarded when there are competing tenders before them? I
really believe this is one aspect which, in the development of the local
system of government, we should look at.

At the national level we have a separate tender board. I am not saying that
it is perfect, but at least we have an independent body which is separate.
At the provincial level we do have such a body. It is called a tender
board, which is separate. But at local government level one just changes
one's status in that one becomes a tender board. Later on one is the
council dealing with other matters. [Laughter.]

This is really an area which makes it easy for corruption,
maladministration and all other things which might be evil to occur. It is
our plea that something be looked at in our new municipalities. We are not
saying this should happen at the beginning of the era. However, somewhere
along the line, when time allows, the tendering system in local government
needs to be given very clear attention.

Furthermore, we must agree with the President's assessment that good
strides have been made at national and provincial levels regarding the
structures, but in the local government sphere there is still unnecessary
tension. The friction that one finds between councillors is on the grounds
of their shade of colour.

Yesterday I was on an outreach programme with the Cabinet in the areas of
Kriel, Delmas, etc, in the province. One finds only a few councillors, say
six of them, with a different shade of skin while the other four would be a
little bit darker. The situation is that there is still a tendency of
developing formerly white areas. In the other areas one finds very little
being done.

An example of the difficulties which people face in those areas is when
they have to bury their dead in a graveyard which is said to be common to
all, and when there is no other graveyard. It is alleged that one has to
pay R600 to have a corpse buried. This may bring in income, but one must
imagine what it is like trying to bury an old lady such as maMohlamonyane
who was a pensioner and did not have anyone to support her.

This is a situation which is difficult for the other councillors to
understand, as I was made to understand yesterday. They argue that income
is important. I agree. To bury one's loved ones is very difficult,
especially for the disadvantaged group because, generally, unemployment is
very high. It is very difficult just to get a coffin and a few necessities.
Now, to pay R600 for the burial place, I think, is most difficult for most
of those poor people. This tension stems from the differing backgrounds of
the two spheres that the members of the council come from.

I think that in the new dispensation, in which we are deracialising local
government, this will give impetus to improving development and to making
sure that even the people who were disadvantaged form part of the
integrated community. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE NORTH WEST (Mr P S Molefe): Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr
President, Deputy President, premiers and delegates to this House, coming
here to this House once again from the North West province is, for me, like
coming home, for indeed the NCOP continues to be a symbol of the fact that
our united Republic of South Africa seeks to be a home for all of us.

The drafters of our Constitution indeed had the wisdom of Solomon when they
designed a structure that would both protect and advance our provincial
interests and autonomy without rendering our united nation hollow and
empty.

Today we are delighted that we are one nation, united in its diversity, yet
having opted for a system of governance which is driven by the desire to
preserve our unity in the central Government whilst simultaneously moving
closer to the people through provincial and local government.

The fundamental principle of being a Government that is close to the people
continues to be enriched through the transformation and rationalisation of
local government structures. As a nation we are products of a unique
history, a history which has, in the past, sought to divide us into ethnic
nations. When we define ourselves in the Constitution, we are indeed
seeking to transcend those divisions and forge a common nationhood.

One of the primary tasks for us as provincial leaders and delegates to this
House, is to remind ourselves that we are part of one nation with a common
agenda of transformation and meeting the basic needs of the ordinary
people. With this understanding of ourselves, we seek to develop a new
ethos of governance and service delivery. We do so driven by the deep
desire to give a better life to all our people.

We must remind ourselves that we inherited an archaic structure of
homelands and apartheid provincial governance which was marked by role
confusion, tensions and conflict. In the new era we are seeking to
establish a corporative system of governance to bring together these
various levels of government.

We of the North West province have embarked on a transformed vision of
governance, driven by a common vision and strategic goal of integrated and
enhanced service delivery as well as policy planning. We pride ourselves on
having dispensed with sectarian and ``pigeon-hole'' approaches to issues of
governance in various departments.

We have adopted a cluster system which ensures integrated planning and
service delivery. We have begun to reap the fruits of this approach by
achieving more effective outcomes than would have been the case with the ad
hoc and fragmented departmental approaches of the past. In our experience
the cluster approach enables optimal utilisation of limited resources and
also enables us to make maximum impact. It excludes unnecessary duplication
and unnecessary wastage.

Co-operative governance, we have realised, cannot be limited to national
and provincial departments. We in our province have established a
provincial intergovernmental forum, which includes organised local
government, represented by Norweloga or the North West Local Government
Association. That forum also includes traditional leaders, in order that we
may grapple with issues of development in our province.

In addition, we have created another forum of various stakeholders from
civil society, ie nongovernmental organisations, business and labour, which
is a miniature Nedlac in the province and which advises Government on a
range of policy issues and assists in the implementation of those policies.
As a consequence we are able to manage the strains and stresses which are
inherent in intergovernmental relations systems.

Furthermore, we are able to adopt a common strategic vision in confronting
all the challenges that are facing us, such as the challenge of good
governance and the challenge of poverty alleviation. We have a unique way
of resolving our problems and differences amicably and through consensus
mechanisms.

I must say that we had a meeting with our traditional leaders. We are
certain that in the North West province we will be able to participate
together, collectively, in spreading the message of voter education and
mobilising people for further registration.

We will be calling a general meeting of all traditional leaders to ensure
that when they return to their specific places, they, too, will be calling
all their headmen to ensure that their subjects participate fully in the
coming elections.

I would like to thank our traditional leaders in the North West province
for the extent of co-operation that we are experiencing, indeed, for
maintaining the tradition of co-operation.

Although we have achieved all these matters, I must echo the words of the
hon the President that there is still a long way to go towards the
realisation of the ideal of intergovernmental relations and co-operative
governance. Governance is a heavy responsibility, and it can make the
difference whether we make progress on our stated goal of making the lives
of ordinary South Africans better or whether we fail in this regard. And
when we fail, we must know that it is because of bad governance and we must
have failed to ensure that there is co-operation.

We have identified the transformation of governance as one of our strategic
goals. We are doing this by instilling a new culture of public service,
undergirded by the Batho Pele ethos, throughout the province. We have been
conducting road shows to assess the perceptions of the residents of the
North West in respect of the quality and extent of services that are
offered by both provincial and local government. The aim is to continue
reflecting on these matters, and on how we could improve on the manner in
which we deliver to the people and on the standard of our services.

In locating the transformation of the Public Service as one of the
strategic goals of sound governance, we are driven by the belief that a
transformed Public Service will result in improved service delivery to the
poor of our country. Therefore proper financial management, which we
pursued through the appointment of chief financial officers in line with
the Public Finance Management Act, will result in optimal resource
management and thus curb mismanagement of these resources.

I have argued that we need to link governance with social services. We need
to ask what impact our particular form of governance has on the lives of
ordinary people in terms of the capacity to address their basic social
needs. As we embark on the historic transformation of municipalities, I
want to believe that the overriding motive is that of enhancing service
delivery to the people who need this most.

Therefore the strategic challenges that the hon the President so aptly
identified here for us must continue to engage the minds of all of us as we
go into this election, and we must begin to establish new structures of
local government to ensure that those structures are focused and pursue
elements of the national agenda at the local level.

The North West province is ranked amongst the four poorest provinces of our
country. Statistics South Africa says that 37% of those who live in the
North West province earn below the minimum living level of R800.

There are social backlogs in our province and all of them represent the
legacy of the past. They represent the neglect and misrule by both the
apartheid and Bantustan systems. The province has a significantly higher
than average rural population than that of other provinces of South Africa.
Approximately 60% of the people in that province live in rural areas. Added
to this social deficit is the growing threat of the HIV/Aids epidemic. In
the face of these and many more challenges, we need to reflect on what we
as the provincial government are doing to turn the tide.

With respect to HIV/Aids, the province has launched the provincial Aids
council, drawn from various stakeholders in our province. Underpinning that
provincial Aids council are local AIDS councils established at municipal
level. This we see as a further advance on the work that our President
started when he was still Deputy President. We see it as the consolidation
of the partnership against HIV that the President initiated in 1998. We
believe that it lays a rudimentary foundation for the establishment of a
social movement against HIV, an all-round mobilisation of our people and an
all-round raising of awareness of our people on issues of HIV/Aids. Our
department continues to provide ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs G N M PANDOR: Chairperson, Mr President, Mr Deputy President, as I said
earlier, welcome to the National Council of Provinces. It is indeed a great
honour and pleasure for us to have the opportunity to debate with the hon
the President.

I am very relieved that the President made reference to the role of members
in the advancement of transformation in South Africa. It was a subject I
wanted to speak about this afternoon, but since the President has referred
to it and confirmed my own view, I will now leave that matter aside and
pick up on other issues.

I am also pleased that Premier Molefe made reference to the constitutional
framework that shapes the NCOP and to the intention of the writers of the
Constitution when this House was framed. I think we often forget the
constitutional imperative in the many debates that we have about the NCOP
in the country, including the rather ridiculous comments that are often
contained in the media and in some so-called research reports.

I also am happy to be able to report to the House that many countries on
our continent have begun to look at their systems of democratic governance,
and a number have come to the view that a sole assembly is not sufficient
to fully ensure the representivity that many countries seek in their
democracies. We are thus seeing the emergence of several upper houses in a
number of countries throughout the continent. Interestingly, we will be
having a meeting in February 2001 of African Second Houses in Mauritania,
just to further deliberate on the kind of framework that we would want
these emerging institutions to have on the continent of Africa.

I think we present a unique opportunity to our continent in that we have
shaped the NCOP as a House that would both unite while,  at the same time,
asserting diversity. This is a difficult set of objectives to achieve at
the same time, but in South Africa we have sought that link, and I think in
our interaction and action we have begun to achieve the objectives that we
set out. I am very pleased that we do not have in the NCOP an upper house
that is antagonistic to national government, which is the situation that
exists in several other countries where one has an upper house.

For example, I was recently in conversation with senators in the upper
house of Nigeria and I was surprised at their attitude towards government,
which was a purely antagonistic approach and relationship, which does not
augur well for the advancement of democracy and transformation. Therefore,
it seems to me that the model we have in South Africa is one we should
preserve, strengthen and advance so that it serves our objectives.

But let me come to what I actually want to talk about this afternoon. I had
the opportunity to read in some detail recently the 1995-2000 National
Report on Social Development. It presents important insights into our
progress. It confirms that reconstruction and development remain the most
important objectives of this country's government and illustrates in a
coherent and detailed manner the progress that South Africa is making.

With regard to telecommunications, the report indicates that South Africa
has 39% of all telephone lines in Africa. Furthermore, by 1998 more than 21
000 community telephones had been installed and over 620 rural villages
were provided with lines. The current plan is that 2,8 million new
telephone lines will have been provided by Government in partnership with
the telecommunications providers by 2002.

In the field of education, South Africa's commitment to education for all
is gradually being realised. The school-entering-age cohort of age seven
enters school in significant numbers and successfully participates in the
early grades of education.

A clear commitment is highlighted in the report with respect to poverty
eradication. The budget for this particular objective stands at R1,3
billion for the year 2000. Nongovernmental organisations and other
structures are playing a role in creating jobs through rural water
development projects, through infrastructure programmes, and through a
range of Public Works programmes.

All of these and many other examples in the report are an exciting record
of our success at meeting our development objectives. Unfortunately, as the
report indicates, these successes tell only half the story. Distribution of
income in South Africa is one of the most unequal in the world. The richest
20% of households have 65% of all income in South Africa, while the poorest
20% have only 3%, and the poorest 10% as little as 1% of all income. Women
are the hardest hit by poverty and enjoy the least opportunity to the
positive programmes outlined in the development report.

Even more disturbing perhaps are South Africa's statistics on literacy
rates. According to the report, black women and black men are the most in
need of literacy programmes as they make up the majority of those who are
not literate. The recently launched plan for adult basic education and
training will assist Government in reaching over 2 million adults through
literacy programmes in the next two years.

A further challenge will be to translate this literacy, once achieved, into
meaningful empowerment. For newly literate South Africans strategies will
have to be devised to provide skills training and the opportunity to work
in new fields.

Further challenges relate to the progress of our youth, and to the support
and preparation of entrepreneurs who will grow business and wealth. Health
matters, the growing Aids pandemic, the education of young girls about
reproductive health matters and the provision of food security to rural
communities - all of these stand as challenges to us all.

The report is a comprehensive and useful guide to our country. I am sure
that our members of Parliament intend to interrogate it carefully in their
committees, and to report upon it to the nation. It is not my intention to
address the substance of the report. Rather, I wish to raise two concerns
that arose in my mind as I read it.

Firstly, I asked myself whether Government should focus on social
development in a purely social services delivery approach. What form of
society and citizen do we create with such an approach? The report, and
even the annual reports of this year, say very little about the kind of
South African we hope will rise from the ashes of apartheid. In my view,
education, art and culture are important parts of the framework that would
help us to promote and develop a new South African.

Of course it is Government's duty to provide funding for the services I
mentioned earlier, but just giving these out, without using the opportunity
to create new citizens with new values of work, of community development
and of independent enterprise, seems to me to primarily perpetuate the
dependency of apartheid, rather than promote the agenda of transformation.

There has been a great deal of debate recently about the challenge of
eradicating racism. Yet, we see little being done in our educational
establishments to overcome this blight on our society. Gender equality, and
the fair treatment of girls and women, is a further area in which very
little is being done, while a lot is being said.

I have mentioned that education, arts and culture are vital instruments in
promoting a new social development agenda, an agenda that would include the
development of persons. I would challenge the writers of the 2001-2005
development report to find a way of integrating this citizen development
aspect into their analysis of efforts at promoting reconstruction and
development.

I am truly convinced that if we do not address the person in South Africa,
the values that drive them as they act each day, we would not have
sufficiently achieved our objectives of transformation. I do believe that
it is possible to address the person, and to have a new South African
participating in this process of reconstruction and development.

To mention but a few of the areas that would be of concern in determining
and shaping this new person would be, for example, our dismal statistics on
youth crime. Why is it that we are raising teenagers who murder, that we
are raising teenagers who rape young children? Why do we have young men in
homes who believe it is okay to steal pension money from their grandmothers
and to murder them for it? Why is it that we create such individuals? What
should our school system begin to do? What should our families do in order
to create a person that would act in a very different way, who would not
make it necessary for Mr Marais to spend the budget of my province on
secure care facilities? [Applause.]

Mr Marais applauds. I hope he is addressing and creating this new person
and, perhaps, when he contributes later in the debate, he might tell us
what he is doing in the province, both to address racism and the inherent
values that make one a successful participant in shaping a new society. As
I said at the beginning, our social development report indicates that we
are well set on our path of ensuring that the people of our country do
benefit from the change that has been introduced since 1994. But, we do
face this challenge of creating the new South African that I believe the
hon the President has spoken of on many occasions before. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (mnr M L Mushwana): Orde! Ek stel die
agb Piet Marais aan die woord. [Tussenwerpsels.] Verskoon my, die volgende
spreker is die agb mnr Matthee. [Order! I see the hon Piet Marais.
[Interjections.] Excuse me, the next speaker is the hon Mr Matthee.]

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, Mr President, Mr Deputy President, I wish to
dedicate this short speech to the memory of the late Deputy Commissioner of
Police of Mpumalanga, Mandla Mahlangu, who was shot and murdered in an
armed robbery last Monday when he came across a cash-in-transit heist, to
the late Inspector Leon Josias, 35 years of age and the father of two young
children, who was also shot and murdered the next day, last Tuesday, by a
fleeing suspect whom he was trying to arrest, and to all other police
officers who have been murdered. Last year alone 204 were killed in the
line of duty.

On a very personal note, I wish to dedicate this to the memory of my dear
friend, Peter Kostourus, who voluntarily played a major role in ensuring
the safety and security of the residents in the suburbs of Glenmore and
Carrington Heights in Durban, including me and my family, through a
community organisation called Glenmore Patrols, who was brutally gunned
down by armed robbers outside his tearoom on the evening of Monday, 26
September, as well as to the late Mr Boet Barnard, who was gunned down in
his butchery in Port Elizabeth in front of his family the previous
Saturday. He was the brother of Mr Barney Barnard of our catering staff in
the Marks Building. This speech is also dedicated to all our many other
compatriots who have been murdered over the past few years.

Unless we succeed in drastically bringing down the totally unacceptably
high levels of violent crime in our country, we will not succeed in
creating a better life for all our people, because the unacceptable crime
situation in our country deters direct foreign investment and tourists.
This, in turn, inhibits our economy from growing sufficiently to provide
for enough job opportunities, which, in turn, leads to more poverty, and,
unfortunately, more crime.

In the light of the reply from Minister Maduna regarding the implementation
of the new section 49, to which I referred in my notice of motion earlier,
I wish to draw the President's attention to the fact that on average a
police officer is murdered in South Africa every 43 hours.

I hope the hon the President will agree with me that this is an intolerable
situation, and that everything possible must be done to improve the safety
of our policemen and policewomen who constantly find themselves in life-
threatening situations, whilst trying to ensure the safety and security of
all our people.

The problem is that the new section 49, in its present form, will further
endanger the lives of our policemen and policewomen. To corroborate this, I
can call on some formidable witnesses. Firstly, the Minister of Safety and
Security, Mr Steve Tshwete, is reported to have said that this provision
places police officials at the mercy of criminals. Secondly, our National
Commissioner of Police said, ``To me it is a law that is not suited for
this country for now.'' Mr Mluleki George, MP, the chairperson of the
Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, is reported in Die Burger as
saying, ``Klousule 49 maak dit vir die polisie onmoontlik om hul werk te
doen.'' [Clause 49 makes it impossible for the police to do their job.]

The implementation of this section will result in South Africa having one
of the most stringent approaches in the world towards the use of force in
effecting an arrest, more stringent than that of countries like the USA,
the UK, Australia and New Zealand, to name but a few.

There is general consensus that the existing section is too wide and will
probably be found to be unconstitutional as it provides for the use of
deadly force in respect of trivial offences, such as petty theft. The
police, however, have a draft new section which will meet the
constitutional requirements, without hampering the police or endangering
their lives further.

I am convinced that I speak on behalf of all our policemen and
policewomen, and the vast majority of all our law-abiding citizens, when I
plead with the President, with all the sincerity at my disposal, please not
to put the new section 49 into operation, as he has been asked to do by the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, but rather to refer it
back to Parliament for further deliberation and possible further amendment.
There are solutions to this problem. We owe this to our police and to their
families. [Applause.]

Mr M BHABHA: Chairperson, first of all I would like to welcome to the House
the hon the President, the hon the Deputy President and the hon premiers.

The elections held on 1 November 1995 brought to office councillors who
were required to serve in municipalities that were established in a form
that primarily offered a political solution. Consequently the efficacy and
financial sustainability of the municipalities were, in the main,
compromised. I believe that in our haste to critique the performance of
councillors in the past five years, we tend to forget that they were
required to perform in a system that had inherent weaknesses from the very
time of its inception.
Nonetheless, despite its weaknesses, this transitional period brought
political stability and further provided an invaluable reservoir of
experience that informed the legislation that will now be implemented with
the forthcoming local government elections.

The terrain in which councillors operated was not made any easier by the
legitimate expectations of the electorate. It would, however, be
disingenuous to suggest that all the problems that plagued local government
were the consequence of institutional weaknesses. Indeed, many of the
problems were self-inflicted. Failure to consult with the community and a
lack of commitment, on the part of both some politicians and some members
of the administration, has adversely affected the credibility of this
sphere of government.

In honouring our commitment to participatory democracy, and in an effort to
ensure the accessibility of councillors to the community, there is now an
entire chapter in the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill dedicated to
community participation. It will now be obligatory for councillors to
consult their communities.

The present failure to consult communities, in certain circumstances, could
be ascribed to a lack of will. It could also be ascribed to the lack of
confidence that usually ensues from the absence of adequate training. I
believe, with respect, that no matter how sophisticated the institutions
that we create may be or how well-meaning our plans may be, we must arm the
people who occupy these institutions with the necessary expertise to
confront the enormous challenge of transformation that lies before them. In
the end, it is personalities that make institutions.

I have met, for example, councillors that have served on councils for more
than 20 years, but who still need to come to terms with the prerogatives of
transformation. I accordingly urge the Government to embark on a much, much
more aggressive programme to train councillors.

On a lighter note, we need to ensure that councillors are not likened to
the Knysna elephants. We all know they exist, but if only we could find
someone who has seen one!

Anyway, the heart of the new dispensation - the local government
legislation that is now flowing - is that municipalities will be required
to develop integrated development plans. These plans will have to be
consistent with the integrated development plans of provinces, and for this
system to succeed, the importance of co-ordination cannot be overstated.

I would like to suggest, with respect, precisely because local government
is not a function, but straddles various line functions of provinces - and
I am glad that premiers are sitting here, including the hon Mr Molefe -
that perhaps the establishment of a unit in the premier's office to ensure
the co-ordination of the IDPs of the respective municipalities and
provinces should be investigated. I do not have sufficient time to
emphasise this and the importance thereof, but I think a reading of the
Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill would show how important this
aspect is.

I would also like to comment on the anxiety that the hon Premier Mr
Mahlangu has expressed about the possible conflict of interest in the
tendering process. I think it is a very legitimate anxiety, particularly
because it has become necessary to have a system of public-private
partnerships. We have found, in our experience as constituency
parliamentarians and as members of this House, that some councils and some
municipalities would urge that services be privatised because the companies
that tender for those services belong to them. There have been such
practices, and if there is not sufficient accountability, the state could
lose its assets unnecessarily, precisely because of personal interests.

I am glad to report that there is a very strict code of conduct. The role
of the attorney-general has now been invoked in this regard in the new
legislation. Furthermore, there are very strict punitive measures. If a
councillor is now found to be indulging in these kinds of activities, the
likelihood of jail is very, very real.

Let me just mention one or two other points. The process of attrition,
through, amongst other things, retirement in the administrations of
municipalities has created a vacuum, and I think we need to strengthen or
create a second layer of cadreship to replace those that leave. What is
happening is that because we are not doing this aggressively enough, there
is an overreliance on consultants, using moneys that could be spent
elsewhere.

When all is said and done, I think the greatest challenge facing us is to
improve the legitimacy of local government. To do that we will require a
multifaceted approach, an approach that includes discipline on the part of
the councillors, adequate funding and adequate training. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon Marais, I
was in a hurry to let you speak, but I think it is now your turn.

Mr P J MARAIS (Western Cape): Chairperson, I first want to apologise to the
President and the Deputy President. I see they have got me down here on the
speakers' list as Peter Marais, Leader of Government Business. I have no
intention of challenging the hon the President. [Laughter.]

It is an honour to speak here today and I am grateful for the presence of
such a high delegation from central Government.

We are, on all sides of this House, prisoners of our own different
histories. We have been typecast into specific roles and each side is
trying to interpret and act out its part, no matter how inappropriate it
may seem. The only problem is that the once appreciative and applauding
audiences are becoming smaller, impatient and hostile. They have seen our
acts too often, and they have become bored. The expectations were high, and
they have not all been met.

We therefore need to find new scriptwriters or more talented actors to save
politics from becoming the theatre of the absurd. Cleverly rehearsed lines
such as, ``the legacy of apartheid'', ``baasskap'', ``protection of
minorities'', ``protection of norms and standards'', have long lost their
impact on the ears of a despondent electorate, who are becoming
increasingly restless.

As responsible leaders we should feed the stomachs of the masses and not
feed their lust for revenge. It is no use creating policies that force the
rich to look at business elsewhere, such as in Australia, Canada and the
UK. It simply does not make good economic sense to get rid of those who can
create wealth and, more importantly, those who can create jobs.

Ek is aan die kant van diegene wat empatie aan die arm mense wil betoon. Ek
is ook aan die kant van diegene wat beleidsrigtings aanwys wat die land
ekonomies sal versterk en sodoende aan empatie 'n geldwaarde sal toeken.

In dié opsig is landbougrond die voedselmandjie van 'n land. Zimbabwe mag
nooit hier herhaal word nie. Swart en bruin boere moet op ekonomiese plase
gevestig word sodat hulle 'n wesenlike bydrae tot die land se ekonomie en
landbousektor kan lewer, maar geen bestaande boer moet bedreig voel as
gevolg van wettelose optrede deur grondbesetters nie. Grond moet behoort
aan diegene wat dit ekonomies bedryf en nie aan dié wat dit onekonomies
beset nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I am on the side of those who want to empathise with the poor. I am also
on the side of those who espouse policies which will strengthen the country
economically and in this way give monetary value to empathy.

In this respect agricultural land is the food-basket of a country. Zimbabwe
must never be repeated here. Black and coloured farmers must be settled on
economic farms so that they can make a significant contribution to the
country's economic and agricultural sectors, but no existing farmer must
feel threatened by the lawless behaviour of occupiers of land. Land must
belong to those persons who use it economically and not those who occupy it
uneconomically.]

For politicians to discuss the toxicity and medical merits of AZT and other
retroviral drugs simply does not make sense. Cancer patients still receive
chemotherapy which is also toxic, yet we preserve it as we know it does
work. Some people die, some live, but we do not stop giving them
chemotherapy. To discuss the merits of AZT is like discussing the origin of
rain, instead of simply opening up an umbrella over one's head to stop
getting wet. [Laughter.]

To abstain from treating pregnant mothers with AZT and, as a consequence,
leaving thousands of orphans HIV-infected, simply does not make economic
sense. Let us do what makes economic sense. If a child contracts the
disease, I am going to spend 20 times more on trying to cure him. I can
assure members - and I am not speaking as a mayor yet - that after becoming
mayor of the unicity of Cape Town on 5 December, I will make AZT available
to HIV-positive mothers at prenatal clinics. [Interjections.] [Applause.]
And I will make AZT available to rape victims who ask for it. We cannot
build a nation with HIV-infected mothers and babies. When we say, ``let us
build a nation'', let us first find the bricks with which to build it, and
they must be good bricks, healthy bricks.

We are the prisoners of our own history because our parties were born in an
abnormal society, in which race determined one's political affiliation and
who one's leaders were. They had a political noninterference Act. I had to
join the party of Hendrickse because I am coloured. Whites had to join the
party of the NP because they were white, and blacks had to join the ANC
because they were black. [Interjections.] But, of course! [Interjections.]
Now why did members not join the NP then if they could? They could not
because the law stopped them. [Interjections.] They could not join the
Progs, they could not join the liberal parties. They had to join the party
which was registered in terms of the Act - that is a black political party.
Now we must redesign our future. We must go where we know we belong.
[Interjections.] Our political parties were formulated at the time when we
lived in an abnormal society.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order!
Mr P J MARAIS: Chairperson, the ANC, the DP, the New NP, the IFP were not
formed through voluntary associations.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon member,
order! Is that a point of order?

Mr T B TAABE: Chairperson, I was checking if the hon member could take a
question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Do you want to
take a question, Mr Marais?

Mr P J MARAIS: Chairperson, If two minutes are added to my time, I will.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! We will.

Mr P J MARAIS: Chairperson, you will?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Yes.

Mr P J MARAIS: Chairperson, then I will take a question.

Mr T B TAABE: Chairperson, I wanted to check whether what the hon member
Marais has said is a clear demonstration of his political naiveté and
myopia in this House, because of his making the inference to the effect
that we joined various organisations on the basis of the colour of our
skins. What does he think was the reason for the late Comrade Joe Slovo
joining the ANC, and spending all his life working for the improvement
basically of the lives of our people who were systematically and
deliberately ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! That is too
long, hon member. Can you be short?

Mr P J MARAIS: Chairperson, I am sorry, my friend. I will give him a
political lesson but not today. [Interjections.] I am still trying to tell
the hon member that people were prevented from joining political parties of
their choice. That is a historical fact.

An HON MEMBER: That is not true.

Mr P J MARAIS: They were prevented by legislation from joining the party of
their choice. [Interjections.] That is a fact. We were forced by law to
constitute ourselves like we did, because we did not have freedom, and if
this hon member now argues that it was not so, I wonder what he thinks
apartheid was all about. [Interjections.]

To a greater or lesser degree, this is still the situation. Our
Constitution serves merely as a promissory note. It has not yet placed any
money in the bankbooks of millions of people. And yet we continue to act
out our roles of government and opposition, and to measure our importance
and relevance in terms of numerical strengths. Let us stop this facade and
seek divine guidance in reaching out to each other in the search for
solutions.

Three elements are needed to guide this country: power, knowledge and
wisdom. None of us in this House has a monopoly on any of these. Our
followers must feel safe and that their futures are guaranteed,
irrespective of who wins the municipal elections. [Interjections.]

A change in the fortunes of a political party at the polls should not
result in a negative change in the fortunes of that party's supporters.
This golden rule should dominate our strategies. I will dedicate the rest
of my life to trying to convince people to break out of their historical
political cocoons, spun from webs of mistrust, racial prejudice and bias.

Our divisions caused by historical positioning are proof that Dr Verwoerd
is still directing some of our thoughts from the grave. The seeds of
mistrust and racial prejudice still live on in the hate speeches of many
leaders. ``Stick to your kind'', and ``Leave the clan and you are a
traitor'', are the cries. Some political leaders are leaders without a
cause. They have fallen in love with titles and that seems to be the only
goal they aspire to. Any opposition needs to spend its energy on
criticising, influencing and engaging government in a constructive manner,
and not simply on ridiculing or on trying to embarrass. Any serious
government on the other hand, no matter how powerful, will have to heed the
sensible calls of the opposition, and not simply rely on its numerical
strength to force through its position. [Interjections.]

Ultimately they are a government for all the people. We know what the
mission and vision of our various parties are, but I ask these brothers and
sisters what their personal mission is.  Why are they in politics?
[Interjections.] Is it to enhance their own careers or that of their
followers? [Interjections.] Should we only fight to build our parties or
should we build a nation through the policies which we advocate? Should we
fight to preserve and guarantee our various languages or fight to ensure
effective communication between us? Can we break out of our historical
cocoons of prejudice and mistrust and form a united front against poverty,
disease, crime and racism?

I do shed a tear when I witness the chronic poverty in black townships.
Yes, my heart bleeds when I see the suffering and strain in the eyes of
black mothers who lost everything when their shack burned down. But we will
only build a nation if I see a tear on a white person's face because of the
hardship of a black child. Then we are a nation. We are a nation when a
black mother and father can cry, in turn, because of the hardship of a
white child. Then we are a nation. A nation cannot be born in the
Constitution. A nation lives in one's heart, or it does not live at all.
[Interjections.] One is a nation when one says ``I am a nation'', not when
somebody writes it for one to recite at a meeting.

I understand the cry for immediate restitution. It is a valid claim. That
was where I found myself in 1976. I identified with the poor and preferred
to be associated with others who did.

An HON MEMBER: Who has done it to you, by the way? Can you recall?

Mr P J MARAIS: Chairperson, if he wants a chance to debate with me, I will
give it to him, but not here. [Laughter.]

I have broken out of my historical cocoon which shielded me from other
races. Yes, I do sometimes feel there is a lack of understanding amongst
the rich of the impatience of blacks for the restitution of their rights. I
will remain true unto myself no matter how some people prefer to categorise
me. I have said it before and I will repeat it here today, blacks are not
the responsibility of the ANC only. They should not think that only they
can speak for black people. What gives them that right? It is certainly not
their colour. One's heart either speaks for black people, or it does not.
One's heart either cries and laughs with them, or it does not. I believe
that every political party should say that black people are its
responsibility also, and not only the responsibility of the ANC.
[Interjections.]
I refuse to remain loyal to the Verwoerdian regime. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP [Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon member,
even your extended time is over now.

Mr P J MARAIS: Chairperson, does that include the two minutes?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Yes, hon
member. [Applause.]

Mr E RASOOL (Western Cape): Chairperson, if the President feels that the
last contribution has somewhat detracted from the tone that he wanted to
set, I think it had the desired result for Mr Marais. I think he has
convinced the DA members here that he is finally home with them until the
next election. [Interjections.]

I want to say that we are 55 days away from the local government election,
and also I want to say that, for this election, the table has been laid by
legislation for local government to be more than what it has been, for it
to be more than a service delivery agent, and for it to be a developmental
local government. I think that for the first time we are enabling that
local government to play a role directly in the process of transformation.

Maybe this debate, within the NCOP, can do one very important thing which
has not happened in many legislatures across the country and, maybe,
sometimes not even in the National Assembly. In those legislatures and in
the National Assembly the essence of democracy was often defined simply as
the presence of opposition. I think that what we are trying to do with this
change and in this debate in the National Council of Provinces is to say
that maybe the essence of democracy has to be what happens to
transformation and how we confront the challenges of transformation. That
has to be defined as the essence of democracy. Within the process of
defining democracy as such, I think that opposition then becomes an aspect.
Maybe what we need is a new point of consensus that starts to make
transformation that central pillar and, I believe, at which the new
dispensation for local government starts to say that transformation has to
be challenged.

I come from the Western Cape. If I were to ask myself what the challenge
would be for local government across the Western Cape after 5 December, it
appears that transformation would then have to concern itself largely, but
not primarily and essentially only, with, firstly, the fight against
poverty. That fight against poverty cuts across racial lines. It has to
bring into an aggregation the poor amongst the black Africans and the poor
amongst the coloureds, and deal with poverty in its rural and urban
dimensions. Unless politicians in this province are able to define
transformation as firstly, being about the fight against the conditions of
poverty in which those people find themselves, we would have failed them.
We can grandstand a lot, look for new scriptwriters and actors, but we
would have failed the essential test.

The second challenge that has to underpin transformation within the Western
Cape has to be the degree to which we are able to build bridges across the
different groups of our people. The essential fault line within the Western
Cape is the race fault line, as it is across the country. However,
superimposed on that race fault line in the Western Cape is the great
discrepancy in the distribution of wealth and income, which Naledi Pandor
has already spoken about here. That fault line of race, in this province,
takes almost exactly the same shape as that of income distribution.

On top of that, our situation in the Western Cape is made even more
precarious - we sometimes feel like we are sitting on a time bomb - because
there is a further fault line that is superimposed upon those two, and that
fault line is sometimes religion, language or culture. No local government
can speak about transformation unless it is also able to deal with those
three key fault lines within Western Cape society.

The third dimension to our challenge of transformation in the Western Cape
has to be to create the conditions of safety for our people in this
province. I would contend that poverty is the fountainhead for so much that
goes wrong, such as the violence that we experience, the social
dysfunctionality, the family dysfunctionality, and the tendency towards
gangsterism and other forms of marginalisation and conflict that pervade
our society. I would say further that in this province, as is the case
elsewhere, the root of poverty is the economic discrepancy that continues
to exist. Those three things, I believe, are the essential challenges that
constitute the urgent need to transform our society in the Western Cape.

I believe that the new dispensation for local government, in some measure,
enables new developmental local governments to start addressing that.
Unless they can do that, I do not believe that we will make much progress.
Of course, many of the other points that have been made here are important,
such as the calibre of the councillors and the impregnability of the
systems which make sure that honesty and integrity remain the watchwords
for that new local government. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, hon President, I do not want to address
this House today on behalf of my party, my province or even myself, but to
address this Council and our President on behalf of approximately 20
million disadvantaged and disempowered people. The people who contribute
towards this disempowerment are exactly those people who benefited from the
past, the people who benefited from being in exile, being in the struggle
and being imprisoned.

A survey that was recently done showed that 50% of people who do not have
English as their first language do not understand what Ministers, the
President, or parliamentarians say when they address them or when they
issue statements in English. People learn quicker, get better educated, get
better jobs if they use their own language. One can only imagine what it
must be like having to apply for a job, attend a disciplinary hearing or
motivate a moneylender to help one to create one's own small business in
one's second or third language. What will be one's chances? Maybe this is
exactly the reason our programmes on developing SMEs are failing.

A document presented by the Organisation of African Unity in 1986 stated
the following:


  Language is the heart of people's culture. Cultural development of
  Africans as well as their economical and social progress cannot
  materialise without the engagement of the indigenous languages in a
  practical manner.

The President referred to the rural areas, and he is right - they are
disempowered. We have millions of South Africans who cannot make informed
political or economic decisions because their indigenous languages are
being ignored and marginalised. We need the long-outstanding language Bill
and policy now. This Government will never deliver what they promise if
they keep on postponing the political will and decision on the language
issue.

Chairperson Pandor is right in saying that the focus on the individual is
very important, and I want to say to Mr President that the place to start
is right here and the opportunity is right now. The President did this
exactly a year ago when he took command of the language issue in South
Africa, and when he created the opportunity for me to meet and address the
Deputy President on this matter. We have not met often enough, but I still
thank the President for that.

People still ask questions and we have no opportunity other than this to
ask the hon the President questions. I hope that he will answer.

I want to ask the hon the President what happened to the language mechanism
he promised would be established in his office. Does it exist and how does
it function?

However, we also need a national culture and language conference here in
South Africa so that we can promote multilingualism and the benefits
thereof for all our people. Let us experience the strength of our diversity
and build on it.

Are Ministers going to be stopped from implementing their own departmental
language policies according to their preferences without a national
framework to guide them? First of all, Justice has to be stopped, for that
department is creating a lot of language confusion.

The Northern Cape is considering a proposal that the NCOP should host an
interprovincial and multiparty workshop on multilingualism. My party is
committed to empowering all the people in South Africa by promoting their
constitutional language rights.

Ek wil vir die agb President sê die regte klimaat moet geskep word, en
hiermee wil ek afsluit. Die mense daar buite in die stofstrate, in die
teerstrate van Suid-Afrika, se drome begin in die taal van hul voorvaders.
Elke individu het die reg om sy taal te gebruik en trots daarop te wees. Ek
wil vir die agb President sê dat hy die geleentheid het om vir al ons
inheemse Suid-Afrikaanse tale te doen wat 'n voormalige president van
Tanzanië vir Swahili gedoen het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[I want to tell the hon the President that the right climate must be
created, and with these words I want to conclude. The dreams of the people
out there in the rural areas and in the urban areas of South Africa, start
in the language of their forefathers. Every individual has the right to use
his language and to be proud of it. I want to tell the hon the President
that he has the opportunity to do for all our indigenous South African
languages what a former president of Tanzania did for Swahili.]

INkosi mayimsikelele uMongameli Mbeki. [May God bless President Mbeki.] !ke
e: /xarra //ke. [Diverse people unite!]

Enkosi. Ke a leboga. Thank you. Dankie. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Mr Chairman and hon President, many people distort the
situation in South Africa by accepting wealth as a given. We used to spend
a lot of time talking about distribution.

There are people who flag only the moral and social problem of wealth
distribution, but wealth, as the hon the President knows, is never a given.
Wealth has to be created before it can be distributed. Wealth creation is
the challenge at all levels of our society.

I would want to remind this House that the Budget of South Africa in 1911
was only £4 million or, in today's money, not even R40 million. By the
1930s it was £30 million, and last year our Budget was R233 000 000 000. We
need to break the poor perception of our country. We need to break the lack
of confidence and the Afro-pessimism that we do not deserve and which
threaten to sap our strength.

We need to see accelerated, sustainable reconstruction and development. But
how? Privatisation is the locomotive at central, provincial and local
government level that can pull us out of economic stagnation. The beauty of
privatisation is that one can sell one's bull, but one can still have the
bull's service.

We can build confidence, unleash economic activity, attract and generate
capital and technology transfers, create a new generation of shareholders,
improve efficiencies, reduce national debt and unlock money and resources
for the social and educational upliftment in all the provinces of our
country that is so very necessary.

It is a win-win situation. Five years of privatisation impetus will end the
inertia and create the ongoing momentum that will place South Africa in a
totally different league.

In 1997 we did only three privatisations. By contrast, China did 100,
Brazil 26, Australia 50 and the UK 350. I want to say to the hon the
President that we can do better, and I know that he would like to.

My bishop said to me one day in church: The best thing you can do for my
children is to love their mother. I want to say to the hon the President
that the best thing we can do for Africa is to succeed in developing South
Africa.

The second related thing we can do is to recognise that racism is a
disease, but that it is a disease with a cure, and the cure is
reconciliation. I agree with the Premier of the North West that, indeed,
today we are a united nation. However, we need to accentuate the positive
and concentrate on our successes, vocalise our strengths, not our
weaknesses, vocalise our hopes and not our fears, rediscover each other in
a new sense of nationhood with shared goals and respect each other's fears
and aspirations. A confident, reconciled, settled South Africa, not
constantly off-balance, will suck in the world community.

Increased confidence will bring increased savings and development, which
are necessary for economic development. We can do it. Our globalising
companies are already experiencing a renaissance in certain sectors. The
hon the President must take credit for that. The work done to date in terms
of international agreements signed is nothing short of spectacular and
everywhere I can see the hand of the hon the President.

Goethe said that things take time. We must not lose our nerve, the lead
times are long. Let us reconcile our nation and privatise.

I want to wish the hon the President well for the time ahead. Let us honour
God and serve our country. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF KWAZULU-NATAL (Mr L P H M Mtshali): Chairperson, hon
President and colleagues. This debate should not be about words or
policies, but should focus on tangible programmes centred around visible
deeds.

This is an opportunity for each province to report on how it is fulfilling
the most important of all the duties and functions of government, which is
that of bringing about a substantial change in the lives of our people.
Government is no longer the passive observer in social dynamics, but has
long entered the field of development, becoming one of its key promoters.

Nonetheless, we need to identify clearly that which Government can do and
that which it cannot do, along with that which could be done were it not
for it being counterproductive, non-cost-effective or unsustainable. Unless
this Government reaches clarity on the parameters governing its actions, we
run the risk of witnessing the misallocating of resources and possible
waste. In fact, we can confidently state that national consensus has
finally been achieved on Government's priorities in respect of development.

There is agreement that we must reach out to the weakest links of the
social chain and alleviate need where need is strongest. In this fashion,
our action will achieve its marginal utility in alleviating the great
suffering of our people and promoting the wellbeing of our nation. However,
even this important point of departure sheds insufficient light on how we
should go about performing this difficult task.

Different schools of thought clearly show that there are different
approaches which, in theory, are equally viable, ranging from direct
assistance from government to the people concerned to remove their most
pressing needs, to the philosophy of development which sees government as
an enabler which takes actions creating a propitious environment for people
to satisfy their own needs themselves.

In KwaZulu-Natal we have chosen no ideological approach, nor have we
subscribed to any theory or school of thought. We realise that this matter
is too crucial and important to be trapped in any type of dogma and that
each approach may hold special benefits and advantages over the others.
Accordingly, we set the basis for a multifaceted strategy which approaches
development from all sides from which government can make a positive
contribution.

However, we have set down a policy that all our actions must conform to
basic common denominators centred around the notions of feasibility,
sustainability and empowerment. We apply these notions both in respect of
government's own programmes as well as the outcome of such programmes. We
must be equally concerned that what we plan to do is feasible, sustainable
and properly managed and that the outcome of whatever we do adheres to the
same criteria.

For this reason, in KwaZulu-Natal we identified the first step as enabling
government to perform its functions in this field. In order to do so, we
have stressed the element of co-ordination between our provincial
departments and the various tiers of government, for we have identified
such lack of co-ordination as one of the major impairing factors.

We have conducted a reconnaissance of the many programmes and activities
conducted in the province which have an impact on the struggle for poverty
alleviation, or which may be so adjusted to achieve such a positive effect.
This exercise highlights duplication of resources and lack of viability in
many programmes due to the fact that they were conceived or conducted in
isolation of one another.

Therefore, under the leadership of my department, we began the effort of co-
ordinating existing programmes and redirecting our activities to give them
an added dimension which relates to poverty alleviation. Simply put, we
made it a priority to do more and better with the limited resources we
have. I believe that this is an essential priority of any government and
that much more can be done with what we have if better managed, co-
ordinated and redirected. Obviously, this objective is not achieved once
and forever, but requires constant monitoring and ongoing reassessment of
what has been done and how it has been done. Failing this essential element
of continuous management, the risk exists that lack of co-ordination and
duplication of functions will re-emerge within the functioning of
government.

Moreover, we have realised that in our effort to co-ordinate and better
manage available funds and resources, we may utilise whatever available
expertise we may tap into. In this respect, my department is now
negotiating with the United Nations Development Programme to provide us
with assistance to enable us to streamline and standardise our systems, and
build the necessary capacity to ensure that such systems are effective.
This will enable us to assess the output of our programmes and their impact
on poverty levels in the province.

We are also working to improve our co-ordination to ensure that the
provincial government can work with unity of action and intent, even in our
different and respective capacities and roles. We have strengthened co-
ordination with the existing regional councils, as we shall do next year
with the new district councils and municipalities. We have also worked very
closely with traditional authorities and traditional leaders.

In our province we have long recognised that traditional authorities are a
fundamental component in the equation of social development and economic
upliftment of our rural areas where needs are most intense. We believe that
it would be a mistake if we failed to resource adequately traditional
authorities with both the powers and functions of local government, and the
financial and logistical means which new municipalities will receive after
the elections. We need to create a new system of local government which
fully capitalises on existing structures, rather than obliterating them and
replacing them with new structures which are foreign to our people and have
no track record.

Therefore we believe that the combination of municipalities operating at a
regional level, and traditional authorities operating at a local level,
will create a harmonious symbiosis of local government which will maximise
the developmental potential of local government. For this reason, we have
great expectations that the President will be able to formulate and
implement the required solution to ensure that the local government powers
and functions of traditional leaders will not be eroded by municipalities.

Also in this respect, we must act without ideological dogma and rely on the
pragmatic value of a multifaceted approach and recognise the value of
traditional authorities. My government has also pursued the multipronged
strategy in respect of the nature and scope of the various programmes we
have conceived and implemented to alleviate poverty. For instance,
programmes such as the road maintenance programme in Zibambele have
assisted people by providing direct opportunities for employment driven by
government action.

We know that existing problems cannot be solved by government becoming a
large-scale employer. We must plant the seeds of development within
communities. Such seeds must be spread across different fields, ranging
from the creation of local markets to the stimulation of the production of
local products and commercial activities. For instance, along these lines,
our department of welfare has developed our village bank programme.
Furthermore, we have come to the conclusion that development begins from
the people and only succeeds if the effort is made to enable people to grow
in confidence and personal skills and capacity.

Unless we promote the human development of our people, the cause of
development will not succeed. However, the greatest effort in human
development cannot come from Government but from the people themselves. For
this reason, my government has adopted and promoted the philosophy of self-
help and self-reliance, which, in our province, has driven community
development for more than two decades. Self-help and self-reliance must be
a culture of community activities which gives hope to people and confidence
that they themselves can act to better their own conditions. Government has
the responsibility of promoting this culture and creating projects which
can show people how the practice of this culture can turn the tide of
dependence and despair.

In this respect I must mention the many projects undertaken by our
department of agriculture and environmental affairs, such as the ongoing
review and expansion of Xoshindlala, which has enabled people to utilise
the land to grow their own produce and keep livestock to satisfy their
primary needs. The value of these programmes is incommensurable, not only
because they satisfy the most dramatic needs of people, but also because
they show people how they can take the further steps conducive to their
further social growth and development.

The struggle for development is neither easy nor simple; it is difficult
and complex. It must be conducted with the awareness of the limits under
which we operate. We must undoubtedly dream of a better world, but we must
do so with our feet firmly rooted on the ground. My government has chosen
the approach of hard work, pragmatism and good administration. We hope that
our results will speak louder than any words. We hope that our example may
be of use to other provinces which are struggling with the same problems.
We are constantly looking to other provinces to learn from their
experience, because we know that in the struggle for development we need to
rely on our shared leadership and common commitment. [Applause.]

Ms C MABUZA (Northern Province): Chairperson, hon President, hon members,
the true test of the successful transformation of South African society
ultimately lies in our ability to improve the quality of life of
marginalised communities. Government at national, provincial and local
spheres received mandates from the people to implement programmes that will
address the issues of poverty, underdevelopment and socioeconomic needs.

The position of women remains an important indicator of our success in this
regard, for it remains true that we cannot claim to have achieved true
freedom unless the living conditions of the women of our country have
radically improved to enable them to participate in all aspects of life as
equal members of society.

During the past six years this Government has committed itself to
empowering women to overcome poverty by directing resources to specific
programmes that are targeting the development of women. At national level,
this includes a sharper focus on education, elimination of all forms of
gender discrimination, greater access to health services which leads to
women's increased control over their lives and destiny, and positive action
to facilitate equal access to resources, employment and income
opportunities.

In many instances we have only just left the starting blocks. Too often we
are faced with the consequences of centuries of neglect and deprivation.
Unfortunately the ghost of the past will still be haunting us for some
years to come.

However, it is true that we have indeed turned the corner. Already we can
celebrate the victory of hope over despair. We have an unwavering
commitment to uproot poverty and to address the plight of rural
communities. In the Northern Province we are engaged in a battle against
poverty on a daily basis. This is indeed not an easy task, but we draw our
inspiration and strength from the daily experience of ordinary men and
women who are striving for a better life for themselves and for future
generations.

During the past 18 months we focused on community-based public works
programmes as a vehicle where the efforts of national, provincial and local
governments meet the needs of our citizens. Last year more than R84 million
was allocated to specific programmes aimed at poverty alleviation. The
programmes focused on sustainable poverty alleviation in rural areas
through the delivery of critical infrastructure. Success is determined by
the interaction between the three tiers of government, and the active
participation of communities in the determination of priorities and the
identification of projects.

Through their participation in these projects, men and women gain
opportunities to acquire new skills and training. This is of particular
benefit to the large number of households in our province that are headed
by single women. We remain committed to the development of our human
capital as a priority in the process of reconstruction and development in
South Africa.
In this process we have created valuable partnerships between national,
provincial and local governments, traditional leaders and communities in
securing the delivery of these projects. We share the responsibility to
ensure that communities take ownership of their assets and utilise them for
the greater welfare of society. We are confident that these programmes will
continue to grow, once fully democratic local government structures are in
place in two months' time.

We must also pay tribute to the commitment and dedication of our
communities. Without them these projects would fail. To achieve success in
our struggle to uproot the scourge of poverty we need the joint energy and
commitment of Government, civil society and the citizens of our province.

The NCOP has developed into an important forum where the needs of provinces
such as ours are continuously placed on the agenda and assured attention at
the highest level of Government. We must trust that this current session
will make another contribution towards finding solutions for the
alleviation of poverty and the improvement of the lives of all our people.
[Applause.]

Ms C BOTHA: Mr Chairman, hon President, it is a rare privilege to see the
hon the President in person in Parliament, and not only on television. I
suppose the reason that he no longer comes here to answer questions in this
Council is that his overseas obligations take up most of his time.
[Interjections.] I know he goes there because he wants to do great things
for Africa. What I do not know is what the President will do for the people
in my town.

I come from the second-poorest province in this country. The lives of a lot
of people there are dependent on the welfare of farming. As hon members
know, the ANC removed all protective measures from farming when they came
to power. Our farmers get no subsidies, which all of Europe and America
does. They get no diesel rebate and, as Mr Marais pointed out, the spectre
of Zimbabwe is knocking on their door.

On their behalf, and on behalf of all emerging, new farmers, who must
survive economically to produce our food, I am asking the hon the
President, not new and untested municipalities, for an unequivocal
commitment to their future today. I will not speak about their physical
survival, national concern though it should be, because it is not the
biggest killer stalking the platteland today.

The people on our farms are dying of Aids. They are not slick city dwellers
who read newspapers and wear little red ribbons. One young man on our farm,
a newly qualified welder, died within a week after diagnosis. His wife, who
was diagnosed first, is still alive, who knows for how long. She lives with
their children, together with her unemployed brother and his children, in
her mother-in-law's house and off her old age pension.

When I talk to them about Aids, they shrug. They sit around. It is not that
they do not want to work; it is just that there are no jobs. Their cousin
left to go to school in the city last year, looking for a better future.
She came home pregnant. Her baby lived only for a few weeks. She is now
back with her parents on the farm, together with her two unemployed
brothers. They cannot get jobs on the farm, because farmers cannot afford
to employ new people. Somehow they are paying off their funeral debts. The
family does not talk about the reason for her baby's death.

As things stand now, I can put names to people in our province who will not
survive the President's Aids policy, nor will their dignity survive the
current failure of delivery. The President places high hopes for delivery
on the new local government system. It is not systems which deliver, it is
people, people who serve all the people, not only some, and not only some
of the time. For three successive visits to the pension payout point, one
of our farm people was told that the systems were down, and to come back
the next week. His rheumatism is so bad that he can hardly walk, but he has
to go back. He has two Aids orphans to support.

I agree with Mr Mtshali and Mr Rasool that we must all contribute to real
transformation. This is what the DA will do: The DA will give 300 000
school-leavers opportunity vouchers, 3 000 a year, a head start, for five
years in a row, funded by the existing and as yet unspent, in the hon the
President's hands, Unsobomvu Fund, to give young people a chance at a job.
[Interjections.] If the hon the President does not want to give people
work, he should give us a chance. [Interjections.]

The DA will give farmers a diesel rebate. The DA will institute a basic
income grant to help the destitute. The DA will amend those labour laws
which inhibit job creation, and the DA will speak out against despots like
Mugabe. [Interjections.] The DA will give rape victims and HIV-positive
pregnant mothers antiretrovirals. [Interjections.] What will the hon the
President do? [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mrs C NKUNA: Hon Chairperson, was it not the previous government, that is
the NP, that used the strategy of divide and rule? The hon Marais is going
to understand the language that I am going to use now. [Interjections.] It
is not a matter of advocating for a language, but one of communication,
especially with those out there that largely contributed to putting this
Government in place. He cannot come and preach to the converted.
[Interjections.]

Mutshami wa Xitulu, Presidente wa Afrika Dzonga, varhangeri vo huma eka
Swifundzankulu ni vatirhi-kulorhi ndza nkhensa. Ndzi kombela ku rhanga hi
ku tshaha. Ku tshaha swintsongo eka mbulavulo wa Presidente lowu veke kona
hi siku ra 25 Khotavuxika 1999, loko a pfula Yindlu leyi. U vule leswi
landzelaka: ``ndzi tsakile ku mi tivisa hi manana loyi a nga kuma xiyimo xo
sungula hi tlhelo ra ku lwa ni vusweti, ku dyondzisa vanhu hi
xitsongwatsongwana xa HIV na AIDS, manana wo huma eMakgaung Community
Projects, vito ra yena a nga Rosina Komana wa le ka Xifundzankulu xa
N'walungu. Ku tinyiketa ka vamanana lava a ku hi tiyisi. Ku hi nyika
matimba hinkwerhu eku akeni ka tiko ra vumundzuku bya hina.'' Presidente u
yile emahlweni aku: ``hi tshamile kwala palamende. Kunene ni sweswi hi
tshamile. Hi nyikiwile matimba hi vamanana va Xifundzankulu xa N'walungu
leswaku hi va yimela tanihi varhangeri. Naswona loko hi endla mintirho ya
mfumo, hi nga va rivali. Hi longoloxa swilaveko swa vona eka minongonoko ya
hina.''

Tindlela to hambana hambana ta ku antswisa tindhawu ta le makaya ti vile
kona eka minkarhi leyi nga hundza, kambe vanhu a va swi kotanga ku kuma ku
pfuneka eka swilo swo fana na vusweti, nxaniseko wo va munhu a ti kuma a ha
ri eka tiko leri ra ha lavaka kuva ri akiwa hi vuntshwa. Laha ku
pfumalekaka swilo kumbe switirho swo tala. Ku fana na tindlu, mati,
swikolo, mapatu, magezi, swibedlele, swi tele leswi munhu a nga swi
hlayaka.

Xiyenge xa vunharhu eka Vumbiwa ra Afrika Dzonga ra lembe ra 1996, xi komba
kahle mafumele ya ntirhisano ni ntwanano xikarhi ka mimfumo ya le xikarhi,
mimfumonkulu ya swifundza, tindhawu hi ku hambana hambana ka tona. Leswi i
``co-operative governance''.

Mimfumo leyi yi fanele kuva yi tirha kun'we, swikongomelo swi va leswi
yelanaka kumbe swi fanaka. Ku va ni vuxaka, tindzawulo ti famba hi ndlela
leyi ku nga pfumelelaniwa ha yona leswaku hi ta sivela timhaka ta leswaku
hi tshama hi ri karhi hi yisana lomu ka Tihuvonkulu.

Swa laveka swinene leswaku ku va na ku tirhisana eka tindhawu ta le makaya
eka tindzawulo hinkwato ta mfumo. Nakambe, matirhele lamaya ya khale ya
xihlawuhlawu ya fanele ku herisiwa. Ku landzeleriwa matirhele ya ntwanano
no nyiketana hi tindzawulo hinkwato ta mfumo. Xirhalanganya lexikulu lexi
hi nga na xona lexi se xi vuriweke, i mhaka ya vusweti ngopfungopfu eka
swifundzankulu leswi landzelaka, eKapa-vuxa, Xifundzankulu xa N'walungu na
Xifundzankulu xa Free State.

Swifundzankulu na tindzawulo ta mfumo, swi fanele swi langutana na swilo
swimbirhi swi nga leswi landzelaka leswi ndzi nga ta swi vula hi xilungu,
``integrated rural development strategies, integrated programme for land
distribution and agricultural development''.

Maendlele lama ya ntirhisano, ya ta endla leswaku tindzawulo ta mfumo ti
languta ku antswisiwa ka tindhawu ta le makaya hi vonele rin'we leswi hi
xilungu swi vuriwaka ``a common vision''. A hi ali leswaku swiyenge kumbe
tindzawulo ta mfumo ti na swikongomelo swo karhi hi ku hambana hambana ka
tona, kambe lexikulu xikongomelo xa kona hi leswaku a swi ve leswi fanaka.

Ku ta fanela ku va na nkunguhato wun'we, hikuva ndza tshemba leswaku hi
Afrika Dzonga rin'we. Nkungahato wa ku nyika vanhu tindhawu to tshama,
masimu yo rima eka lava faneleke, swi fambelana na swikongomelo leswi nga
va kona eka nhlangano wa vaholobyenkulu va swifundzankulu . Xikongomelo xo
sungula i ku antswisa madyelo ya swifuwo na mbuyelo eka tindhawu ta le
makaya, xa vumbirhi, ku pfuna varimisi lava ha ku sungulaka. Xa vunharhu,
ku herisa timhaka ta xihlawuhlawu eka ku va ni purasi leri nga ra wena. Ha
swi tiva leswaku sweswi swa tika kuva munhu a nga kuma purasi kambe loko
swi landzeleriwa munhu a fanele kuva a kuma purasi leri ri nga ra yena. Ku
aka vuxaka eka vurimisi na swiyenge swin'wana. Ku seketela vantshwa lava
tshamaka etindhawini ta le makaya. Ku endla leswaku lava kumaka ku pfuniwa
ko karhi va kota ku yisa emahlweni eka swa timali na rihanyu. Loko kuri hi
leswaku ndza ha salele hi timinete tin'wana timbirhi, ndzi ta kombela ku ti
tirhisa mundzuku. I nkomo. [Va phokotela.] (Translation of Xitsonga
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, hon President of South Africa, leaders from the NCOP and my
colleagues, I thank you. Please allow me to quote briefly from the
President's speech during his address at the opening of Parliament on 25
June 1999 when he said:


  I am happy to tell you about a woman who obtained first position in
  regard to issues such as fighting poverty and educating people about
  HIV/Aids and she is from the Makgaung Community Project. Her name is
  Rosina Komana from the Northern Province. The dedication of these women
  gave all of us courage to build our future in this country.

The President went on to say:


  We sit in this Parliament, authorised by these women from the Northern
  Province ... to work as their representatives.

And whenever we perform our official duties we should not forget them, we
should list all their needs in our programmes.

Different methods of improving rural communities were used in the past, but
people were never relieved of things like poverty and the suffering of
people staying in a country that still needed to be reconstructed afresh,
where infrastructure in the form of houses, water, schools, roads,
electricity, hospitals and many things was still unavailable. A lot can be
mentioned about this.

Section 3 of the 1996 South African Constitution sets out clearly the
principles of co-operative governance between central Government and the
NCOP. Different departments should work together harmoniously in what is
known to be co-operative governance.

These governments should work together with similar objectives. There
should be a relationship and departments should work together in accordance
with what was agreed upon so that by so doing we avoid legal proceedings
against one another in the High Courts.

It is imperative that co-operation should exist in order to develop rural
areas, and all departments should work together. It is essential that the
old system of working in a discriminatory way should come to an end and
that we should follow the system of working together harmoniously in all
departments of our government. The most serious stumbling block we are
experiencing and which has been mentioned already is poverty, especially in
the following provinces: the Eastern Cape, Northern Province and the Free
State. The NCOP and government departments should concentrate on two
things, namely integrated rural development strategies and integrated
programmes for land distribution and agricultural development.

These co-operative systems will enable the government departments to
maintain a common vision of rural development. We do not disagree with the
fact that each of the different departments has its own objectives, but
what is important is that there should be one common vision.

There should be one proposal, because I believe that we all belong to one
South Africa, and it is in regard to allocating people residential sites
and giving fields for ploughing to people who are able to engage in
farming, so that this may be relevant to the objectives, propounded during
the meeting of the premiers of the provinces. The first objective should be
the improvement of grazing areas and income of the rural poor who want to
start farming. The second objective should be to assist new farmers who
have just started farming. The third objective is to eliminate
discrimination where one possesses a farm for oneself alone, but if that
could be done properly, one should be able to get one's own farm in a
proper way. Other objectives are to build a good relationship between
agriculture and other institutions, and to support the youth in rural areas
in order to enable promising young people to extend their opportunities so
as to improve their financial and social wellbeing. If I still have two
minutes left at my disposal, I request that I be allowed to use them
tomorrow during my deliberations. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson, Your Excellency the President, hon premiers
and the honourable House, I stand to join the chorus of congratulations
directed to His Excellency the President, for in spite of his tight
schedule and pressure of work he has found time to come to the NCOP. I
suppose we have an equal opportunity to claim him as much as the other
House.

I wish to commend His Excellency the President for clarifying to us the
thorny issue of traditional leaders, with regard to their powers and
functions. I sincerely believe that an amicable solution will be found, not
only to the satisfaction of the traditional leaders themselves, but also to
the satisfaction of their subjects.

Many of us were at first sceptical about the incorporation of rural and
tribal areas into municipal dispensations. But we do know that any new
development usually causes some scepticism, and we have come to accept that
this new dispensation would ultimately benefit our people. Our fears were
merely the fear of the unknown. The President's clarification that rural
communities would also benefit from a stronger resource base allays our
fears.

In a magazine named Sawubona, circulated on SAA flights, there appears a
five-page exposition of tourism and places of national interest in the
North West. These are the international airport of Mmabatho, the game
parks, showing large game accommodated therein, the Sun City and Lost City
complexes, and others.

The hon premier made the appropriate comment that the North West province
is a leader or is excelling in many fields. However, the hon premier
omitted to credit the so-called Bantustan for this magnificent development
and delivery of job-creating services to our people. [Interjections.]

The President's efforts at reconciliation could sometimes be frustrated by
us at the lower levels, by our engaging one another in unnecessary party-
political feuds and unceasing attacks on our leadership, instead of working
jointly towards the delivery of services to our people.

In this regard, St Paul says to the Philippians:


  Forgetting the things that are past, I stretch myself towards the goal of
  the high calling of God.

Our goal is to deliver services to our people. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I call upon Ms L Jacobs to
address the House.

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, the surname is Jacobus, not Jacobs.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I am sorry.

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, hon President, hon premiers and members, it is
always a privilege for me to address this House, but I am particularly
honoured to speak on this auspicious occasion when we are able, as members
and permanent delegates from our provinces, to interact with the President
on a number of burning issues that affect our communities and provinces.

In my capacity as chairperson of the NCOP Select Committee on Social
Services, I have found that my committee is at the forefront of driving the
transformation objectives that we have set ourselves as Government since we
came into power in 1994.

We in this committee and our counterparts in the provinces deal on a daily
basis with the wants, needs and expectations of the poorest of the poor,
whether they be in urban areas or in rural areas. Our experiences and the
outcomes of the extensive national consultative processes have taught us
that invariably, the poorest of the poor translate largely into black,
rural women and children.

Sometimes the task of redressing the past and fulfilling expectations is
overwhelming, but we try to remain focused on our goal, which is to improve
qualitatively the lives of our people, creating an environment for a better
life for all.

More often than not, our Bills, programmes and campaigns are the subject of
much media debate, scrutiny and speculation. We only need to look at the
current debate on HIV and Aids, and the Department of Welfare's poverty-
alleviation programmes as specific cases in point.

All our Ministers, but especially those in charge of health and welfare,
have been in the unenviable position of having to undo the magnitude of
injustices created and reinforced throughout the decades of apartheid and
colonial rule and to strategically and systematically eradicate those
injustices, I do not think that any of us realised, when we first entered
Parliament, the full extent of the inhumanity our people had had to endure.
 Undoing all those inequalities and injustices has proved to be no small
task and also a long road strewn with many obstacles, not the least of
which is limited financial resources and constant challenges from the
opposition parties and other detractors.

To contextualise the level of poverty that still faces our people, we need
to note that each month the provincial welfare departments distribute close
to R1,5 billion to approximately 2,7 million beneficiaries. Two thirds of
grant recipients are women. The proportion of women is highest for the
grants targeted at care-givers, like the maintenance grant, care dependency
grant, child support grant and foster care grant. Seven out of every ten
old age pensioners are women, reflecting the greater poverty needs of
women. The Eastern Cape reflected the highest percentage of welfare
recipients, again mostly rural women and children.

A new threat that has reared its ugly head once again targets our young and
economically vulnerable communities, the threat of HIV/Aids. The Department
of Health, in its HIV/Aids strategic plan for South Africa, has indicated
that in a recent estimate six out of every ten people living with HIV are
men, eight out of every ten are women and nine out of every ten are
children in sub-Saharan Africa. Data obtained from antenatal clinics for
the past nine years show that young women aged between 20 and 30 had the
highest prevalence rates and young women under the age of 20 had the
highest percentage increase compared to other age groups in 1998 as
compared to figures of 1997.

There is no doubt that an integrated approach is needed to deal with this
scourge. In addition to Government's response to HIV/Aids - and I refer
members to the strategic plan of Government, including the ABC campaign -
we also need to make sure that our people have access to clean drinking
water, decent housing, adequate nutritious food and so on. To this end I
again want to raise the matter of food security - I have done so in the
past, and other members have also referred to it - for families living
below the breadline or those with no income at all. I humbly request
Comrade President to encourage the Departments of Agriculture, Health,
Welfare and Finance, as well as the private sector, to come together to see
how best to respond to this need. This, once again, will give meaning to
private-public partnerships as we strive to address the needs of our
people.

In his budget speech at the beginning of this year, Minister Skweyiya
highlighted what seems to be eluding us as members of intergovernmental
fora and is a vital cog in the wheel that turns co-operative governance.
The Minister spoke about change and transformation at the national level
that have yet to be translated into tangible gains that can be felt by
women, children and the poor at the household level. As provinces, and with
the co-operation of local government, I believe we can support with more
vigour the implementation strategies, like the integrated poverty
eradication strategy, right to the level of individual poor women living in
the remotest of our areas.

This by no means implies that we have done nothing to improve the lives of
women and children. Indeed, we have done a lot. All too often, as an ANC-
led Government, we do not take credit for our achievements. We allow our
detractors to pick holes in what we have done better to eradicate the cycle
of poverty that still grips our rural community and our townships. We are
far too modest to acknowledge that when we inherited the health care
system, it consumed 8,5% of our GDP. It was skewed along race, gender,
urban and rural lines. We have redirected resources to ensure a more
equitable and affordable health care system accessible to all who need it.
Our women and children under the age of six can now have access to free
health care right in their communities. Women do not have to subject
themselves to unsafe and unhealthy terminations of pregnancy. More children
in need now have access to a child support grant. The list is endless, and
this not only refers to social services, but to everybody else and to all
the other departments.

Again I am not implying that enough has been done and that we are going to
rest on our laurels and be content, having patted ourselves on the back. I
am sure the President will not allow us to sit back and relax while there
is work to be done, especially in the light of the upcoming local
government elections, which he has referred to extensively, local
government being the sphere of government where social delivery takes
place. I believe, with the will which we as the ANC-led Government have
displayed under his able leadership, we will turn the tide of poverty and
improve the lives of our fellow South Africans living in both rural and
urban areas, especially the most vulnerable, the women and children.
[Applause.]

Mr M MADLALA (Salga): Chairperson, hon President, premiers, members of the
Council and ladies and gentlemen, Salga takes criticism and observations
made in this Council as lessons to be learned which constitute the building
blocks for the future as a permanent feature of our local government in
South Africa. We believe, considering what has been said here, that if we
all contribute positively, we will be able to make the future of local
government prosperous.

The existence of a socially conscious Government in South Africa has placed
the need to address inequality firmly at the centre of the nation's agenda.
I do not need to remind this House that such a Government is currently led
by President Thabo Mbeki. This has been reflected in the poverty audits
undertaken as well as the numerous policies and programmes that have been
formulated and implemented over the past six years. These policies and
programmes have different implications for different sectors and spheres of
government. Furthermore, they have different elements, some of which
require action by local government, while others require national and
subnational government action. Local government is set to play an important
role in the growth and development of South Africa and, by implication, in
the alleviation of poverty.

To add to the statistics provided earlier by the Chairperson of the NCOP,
Naledi Pandor, I can say that according to the 1996 census, 55% of the
South African population live in urban areas, with a significant component
living in the metropolitan areas.   On the other hand the spatial
distribution of poverty is such that 75% of the South African poor live in
rural areas. Within the urban sector there are significant concentrations
of poor people in small towns, and large inequalities in the level and
quality of life exist within major metropolitan areas. Given these
realities, as well as the role of local government in urban and rural areas
in the economy, and its mandate as reflected in the Constitution and the
White Paper on local government, local government cannot escape a role in
the economic development process and in poverty alleviation. Like in the
other two spheres of government, local government has a developmental role
to play.

At the core of the South African development agenda is the eradication of
poverty and inequities as it is recognised that there can be no long-term
political and social stability within the country without these being
addressed. The role of local government is clearly defined in the
Constitution, with its objective defined as the provision of democratic and
accountable government to local communities; the provision of services to
communities in a sustainable manner; the promotion of social and economic
development; the promotion of safe and healthy environment; and, finally,
the involvement of communities and community organisation in the matters of
local government. The Constitution further outlines the developmental role
of local government as to structure and manage its administration and
budgeting and planning processes to give priority to the basic needs of the
community, and to promote the social and economic development of the
community, and to participate in national and provincial developmental
programmes.

The success of local government and of the implementation of the above-
mentioned constitutional mandate depends on a number of factors. Firstly,
it will be determined by the nature of the policies and programmes that
result from the influences constituted by this mandate.

Secondly, it will depend on the capacity of local government to manage the
interlocking intergovernmental dimensions that constitute the environment
within which local economic development and poverty alleviation strategies
have to be implemented. The third factor will be the availability of fiscal
resources to implement local economic development. In this regard
antipoverty programmes will be crucial.

We will all recall that in 1998, in delivering the medium-term budget
policy statement, the Minister of Finance identified the following as
pillars of the country's antipoverty strategy: meeting the basic needs of
the people; accelerating the basis of sustained economic growth,
development and job-creation;  developing human resources; ensuring the
safety and security of citizens and the state; and transforming the organs
of Government to reflect the development-centred and people-centred nature
of the democratic state. In order to indicate how local government, in
pursuance of good governance, contributes to enhanced service delivery and
ultimately to poverty alleviation, it is important to look briefly at some
of these pillars of the country's antipoverty strategy.

Regarding the meeting of basic needs, the key issue for local government in
meeting the needs of the people is to ensure that our own service provision
is in line with national goals. For example, within the national framework
of meeting the basic needs, national Government has identified primary
health care, basic education, housing, social security and water and
sanitation as important programmes. Our service delivery, as local
government, supports this emphasis. In line with the indigent policy in our
municipalities, all residents are provided with a free 5kl basic amount of
water, and there is a step-line tariff in electricity and other municipal
services so as to help the poor. Those who use more than the basic amounts
are required to pay for the extra services used.

We will not only provide basic services, but we will make sure that plans
and programmes meet the needs of the aged and people with disabilities.
Municipal services and buildings will be made increasingly accessible to
our disabled communities. Improved service delivery at local government
level, with the introduction of free basic services, will vastly improve
the lives of the poor and therefore alleviate poverty in our society.

Local government, in the spirit of co-operative governance, will work with
national and provincial government to speed up the delivery of these
services and alleviate poverty. Section 152 (2) of the South African
Constitution states that a municipality must strive, within its financial
and administrative capacity, to achieve these objectives.

The Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill, which was passed by the two
Houses of Parliament recently, is primarily aimed at fundamentally changing
the modus operandi in local government. In other words, the White Paper
provisions and the vision of a developmental local government are clearly
legislated in the Bill. The Bill introduces local government to the
principles of creative service delivery patterns, community participation
and integrated development planning. It should be noted that the public
sector or our municipalities should be the preferred option to provide
these services. Where local government lacks the necessary capacity to
provide municipal services it may engage in partnerships with other
Government institutions such as state-owned enterprises or other
municipalities as well as community organisations or the private sector, or
may, finally, contract with the private sector if it is unable to provide
such services in-house.

As far as accelerating economic growth, development and job-creation are
concerned, local government is pursuing growth paths that encourage labour-
intensive sectors of the economy, it supports small, medium and micro
enterprises and enforces a regulatory framework that creates an environment
conducive to investment. Other initiatives at the local level, such as the
social plan fund, which provides financial assistance to municipalities to
undertake local economic regeneration studies, and the Community-Based
Public Works Programme, support the national job-creation programme at
local government level.

The third area relates to integrated development planning. The Local
Government: Municipal Systems Bill makes provision for the compilation of
integrated development plans by municipalities. These IDPs must be prepared
by municipalities in order to ensure that the constitutional objectives of
local government are achieved and also to give effect to the developmental
duties of local government as articulated in the White Paper on Local
Government. Municipalities, as per the Local Government: Municipal Systems
Bill, adopt a plan that links and co-ordinates plans and proposals from
various line functions, align the plans with fiscal and other resources and
ensure that the IDP framework is adopted. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnr C A T SMITH (Noord-Kaap): Mnr die Voorsitter, agb President, lede van
die Huis en dames en here, laat my toe om van hierdie geleentheid gebruik
te maak om die agb President geluk te wens met die spoed waarmee hy en sy
Kabinet tans transformasie in ons land laat geskied van armoede tot 'n
beter lewe vir ons mense.

Graag wil ek ook die opmerking maak dat wit Suid-Afrika en die res van die
wêreld, anders as Afrika, natuurlik nie met hom kan saamstem nie dat
armoede een van die grootste oorsake is van hoe dit ons mense vernietig, om
die eenvoudige rede dat hulle die oorsaak is van die armoede wat tans in
Afrika heers.

Ek wil graag ook van die geleentheid gebruik maak om ons verskoning namens
die premier aan te bied omdat hy tans by die huis vasgevang is in
onderhandelings met die mense van Namakwaland. Meer daaroor 'n bietjie
later in my toespraak. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C A T SMITH (Northern Cape): Mr Chairperson, hon President, members of
the House and ladies and gentlemen, allow me to avail myself of this
opportunity to congratulate the hon the President on the speed with which
he and his Cabinet are currently implementing transformation in our country
from poverty to a better life for our people.

I would also like to make the comment that white South Africa and the rest
of the world, as opposed to Africa, naturally cannot agree with him that
poverty is one of the biggest causes of the destruction of our people, for
the simple reason that they are the cause of the poverty currently
prevailing in Africa.

I would also like to take this opportunity to offer our apologies on behalf
of the premier, because he is currently engaged in negotiations with the
people of Namaqualand at home. More about that later in my speech.]

I consider it a singular honour to be in the Chamber this afternoon to
share ideas with, listen to and learn from members who are present here
today in order to deal with the subject raised by the hon the President,
which is central to the mission and vision of our province. We are
committed, as never before, to eradicating poverty and racism. To this end,
most of our programmes in the province are geared towards job creation and
rural development to address the needs of the rural poor.

We are acutely aware of the enormous challenge to create a viable economy
and employment opportunities for a large number of our people. The strategy
includes a series of projects and programmes which would have to be brought
on stream and undertaken, in some instances, jointly with the private
sector and, in others, individually. Support for the SMMEs has seen the
launch of the recently opened business incubator centre in Kimberley, which
is aimed at stimulating local business development, and which we are very
proud of, joint public-private sector collaboration projects and the
proposed R5 billion Gamsberg zinc mine development with Anglo American. The
mine promises to create 5 500 temporary jobs during the three-year
construction period, 1 100 jobs once the mine is up and running and a
further 100 indirect jobs in the surrounding areas of Aggeneys in
Namaqualand. The mine will generate off-shore revenues of R2.2 billion and
annual tax revenues of R309 million.

Dit is deel van die rede waarom ons premier nie hier kan wees nie, naamlik
omdat hy besig is om met mense in ons provinsie te onderhandel omdat daar
opportunistiese koloniale paternaliste is wat graag hierdie werkgeleenthede
van ons mense, ons arm vaders en moeders, wil wegneem in die strate van
Namakwaland. Ons wil dit graag in hierdie debat onder die agb President se
aandag bring, en ons hoop en vertrou dat hy ons daarmee kan help sodat ons
dan ook werkgeleenthede daar kan skep. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[That is part of the reason why our premier cannot be here, namely because
he is negotiating with people in our province because there are
opportunistic colonial paternalists who would like to take these job
opportunities away from our people, our poor fathers and mothers in the
streets of Namaqualand. We would like to bring this to the attention of the
hon the President in this debate, and we hope and trust that he can help us
in this regard so that we can then also create job opportunities there.]

Initiatives also include infrastructure development, fast-track housing
delivery, schools building projects and many more, as well as social
delivery and the building and upgrading of clinics. Indeed, these
initiatives will give impetus to the economic revival of the province. We
are confident about the future because, as a province, we have laid a solid
foundation and will continue striving towards the creation of a caring and
humane society for future generations.

Much of the financial year has been characterised by improving
intergovernmental relations between provincial and local government.
Realigning the spending of district councils and local government towards
meeting the reconstruction and development objectives has ensured enhanced
delivery at this critical level.

As a semirural province, we welcome the new local government structures
because they promise to deal with the challenges that confront our
province. Indeed, local government is an important sphere of governance and
plays a crucial role in the delivery process. The Northern Cape province is
committed to this.

Ons is ook verbind tot openbare deelname ten opsigte van die opvoeding van
die gemeenskap. Ek wil agb lede herinner aan 'n projek van die Noord-Kaapse
regering, naamlik ``Cabinet meets the people'', wat groter openbare
deelname aan die funksies van die regering aanmoedig. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We are also committed to public participation with regard to the education
of the community. I would like to remind hon members of a project of the
Northern Cape government, namely ``Cabinet meets the people'', which
encourages greater public participation in the functions of the
government.]

Local government has been described as the hands and feet of reconstruction
and development in South Africa. Through its grass-roots linkages,
infrastructure investment programmes, local economic development
strategies, partnerships with the private sector and integrated development
plans, local government is the Public Service agency best able to have a
direct and enduring impact on the lives of its citizens.

Local government indeed is undergoing a major process of transformation
that will result in a new system of local government after the next local
elections. To this end we are happy that new legislation has been enacted
and policies are being put in place. This will ensure the extension of
basic services which play a major role in service delivery and poverty
alleviation to all parts of the province.

Most of our rural areas, in particular the Hantam region, are
concentrations of poverty and neglect where women and children bear the
brunt of poverty more than anyone else.

Hierdie gedeelte van die land is deur apartheid verwaarloos in die sin dat
daar geen nywerhede weg van die groot sentra geleë is nie. Ongeletterdheid
is ook 'n groot probleem in dié gebied.

Ek wil vir die agb President sê - dit is al voorheen gesê en ons wil dit
weer eens onder sy aandag bring - omdat ons provinsie 'n semi-plattelandse
gebied is en ons so 'n klein bevolking het en dit tans die beleid van die
Regering is om begrotings per capita te bereken, kry ons die kleinste
gedeelte van die koek. Ons wil dit egter onder die aandag van die agb
President bring dat die geweldige afstande wat afgelê moet word in die
lewering van dienste ook in berekening gebring moet word. Die afstand van
Port Nolloth af tot by Kimberley is meer as 1 000 km. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This section of the country was neglected by apartheid in the sense that
no industries are situated away from the major centres. Illiteracy is also
a big problem in this area.

I want to tell the hon the President - this has been said before and we
would like to bring it to his attention again - that because our province
is a semirural area and we have such a small population and it is currently
the policy of the Government to calculate budgets per capita, we receive
the smallest piece of the cake. However, we would like to bring to the
attention of the hon the President that the tremendous distances which must
be covered in rendering services should also be taken into account. The
distance from Port Nolloth to Kimberley is more than 1 000 km.]
Yes, the new face of local government will enable an environment where
employment opportunities do arise. It is the express policy of Government
that the programmes take place on a more structured basis. This is a
requirement that should be welcomed by municipalities as a means to guide
officials to serve, and not to dictate, as good examples to the citizens of
a municipality.

Social services and social development projects are spread across the
length and breadth of our province with a view to reaching a great number
of our people. This will hopefully inculcate a culture of self-reliance
among the greater majority of our people.

The co-operative social and development projects and programmes will, inter
alia, support sustainable development in order to promote the quality of
life of the people of the Northern Cape.

The scourge of HIV/Aids also poses a serious threat to the economic growth
of our people. Some of the highlights to contain the rapid spread of the
disease were the formation of the interdepartmental committee on Aids, the
provincial Aids conference and the launch of the provincial Aids council
this year.

In die aanloop tot die verkiesings kom daar baie mense aan ons deure klop.
Ek hoor hulle maak ook deesdae geraas hier in die NRVP. Dié mense kom
vertel ons graag van die regte van swartmense. Ek wil die Huis graag
daaraan herinner dat dit hierdie einste mense is wie se hande drup van die
bloed van ons vaders en ons moeders, ons broers en ons susters, wat ons van
ons regte en ons menslikheid beroof het, wat ons grond van ons weggeneem
het en wat ons huise gesteel het.

Dit is hierdie mense wat vandag aan ons deure klop en graag vir ons wil kom
sê wat ons regte is. Ek wil agb lede graag daaraan herinner dat die
Grondwet meer as net geld vir ons mense gegee het. Die Grondwet het ons
integriteit gegee. Dit bewys dat die DA meer oor geld begaan is as oor
integriteit, en daarom weet hulle nie eens wat identiteit is nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Is hulle die NP, die Nuwe NP, die PFP of die DP, wat is dit nou? Heel
waarskynlik skrik hulle môre wakker en dan is hulle die ``Demo-weet-nie-wat-
nie''. Vra vir hulle waar die geld vandaan kom en hulle sal agb lede 'n
bank gaan wys. Ons mense wil nie geld hê nie, ons mense wil integriteit hê
en daardie integriteit is in die Grondwet opgeteken. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In the run-up to the election many people knock at our doors. I hear that
these days they also make a noise here in the NCOP. These people are eager
to tell us about the rights of black people. I would like to remind the
House that it is these very people whose hands are dripping with the blood
of our fathers and mothers, our brothers and our sisters, who robbed us of
our rights and our humanity, who took our land away from us and stole our
houses.

It is these people who are knocking on our doors today and want to come and
tell us what our rights are. I would like to remind hon members that the
Constitution has given our people more than just money. The Constitution
has given us integrity. It proves that the DA is more concerned about money
than about integrity, and therefore they do not even know what identity is.
[Interjections.] Are they the NP, the New NP, the PFP or the DP, or what is
it now? Tomorrow morning they will probably wake up and they will be the
``Demo-do-not-know-what''. Ask them where the money comes from and they
will show hon members a bank. Our people do not want money, our people want
integrity and that integrity is contained in the Constitution.
[Interjections.]]

Finally, it has been my honour and privilege to make this presentation to
the NCOP. [Applause.]

Mr I P JACOBS (Gauteng): Chairperson, Mr President, premiers, hon members
of this House, I bring you warm greetings from the provincial government of
Gauteng, the golden heartbeat of South Africa. [Interjections.]

Last week Premier Mbazima Shilowa presented a report to the provincial
legislature on progress made thus far in the delivery of services to the
people of Gauteng. This report was the result of a commitment we made at
the beginning of our term that we would give regular reports to our people
through the provincial legislature and facilitate direct contact through
community outreach programmes in both black and white communities in our
province. Unlike others, we do not want to polarise South Africa; we want
to build a nonracial nation in this country.
We committed ourselves to this because of the belief that a good government
communicates with its people on both its successes and its weaknesses. This
occasion today is a further reflection that ours is indeed a good
government, a government that is willing to openly raise the challenges it
continues to face in implementing a commitment made to the electorate so
that they themselves can be the judges of delivery or lack thereof.

It is appropriate that the topic of this discussion and the focus of the
speech of the hon the President is about what we are doing to build strong
local government as a new, dynamic partner in the fight against poverty,
because this is indeed the biggest challenge that we face as a nation.

Three days ago the UNDP released its 2000 South African Human Development
Report, in which it states that South Africa's rate of poverty, a
measurement of the extent of absolute poverty, is 45%. This translates into
3,1 million households or more. Pegged at an income of R350 in mainly rural
provinces, the figure rises above 50%.

This level of poverty is unacceptable. We have made a dent in this, but we
still need to do more. Many hon members may be wondering why we are
concerned about this matter in Gauteng, because recently Statistics South
Africa reported that, in terms of their study on the levels of poverty in
the country, Gauteng is the richest province in South Africa.

While this may be true, it is a very subjective conclusion. There are many
poor people in Gauteng. We are as much challenged by this problem as other
parts of this country, but we will continue to develop so that our wealth
also gets redistributed to our rural sister provinces.

Poverty, being the result of systematic oppression and the isolation of
African, coloured and Indian people in particular in South Africa, affects
all parts of this country where black people are found. We are not thrown
into a state of complacency by the conclusions of the report.

In fact, Minister Manuel responded correctly to the report when he made the
observation that the report does not measure levels of inequality and
poverty within an area. He said, in relation to Gauteng, that it tells us
that Cullinan is the poorest place,  with a mean monthly household
expenditure of R2 000, and that Pretoria is the richest, with an average
household expenditure of R6 000, but it does not tell us specifically about
the poor who have no income at all, but just live on the social security
grant from Government.

To respond to this challenge, the provincial government views social
security as one of the major poverty alleviation mechanisms. Our social
security programme caters for an average of 380 000 people monthly, the
majority of whom are the elderly who receive old age pensions.

The number of children that receive child support grants has increased from
29 000 in January to 74 000 at the end of September 2000. I wonder whether
Mr Marais can say that about the Western Cape.

Another challenge we face together is the scourge of HIV/Aids.  We have
established the Premier's Committee on Aids to drive the prioritisation of
the HIV/Aids campaign in the province. We have launched the Gauteng Aids
council to strengthen the partnership between government and civil society
in our fight against the spread of HIV/Aids. An important focus in our
efforts to deal with HIV/Aids has been the promotion of safe sex and the
prevention and treatment of sexually transmitted diseases. There are early
indications that our strategies are beginning to work and that there is a
lot that we as the Government, together with other sectors, are doing
right. We are currently distributing over 7 million condoms a month in
Gauteng. The steady increase in the demand for condoms means that the
message, ``Abstain, be faithful or condomise,'' is starting to get through.
Our province has not just stuck to antiretroviral research in nevirapine in
one area. We are conducting it in two large hospitals, namely the Chris
Hani-Baragwanath and Coronationville hospitals, and have now extended it to
the Natalspruit and Ga-Rankuwa hospitals - whilst the Western Cape is now
claiming that it is the only province that does so.

In February this year the government of Gauteng announced 10 spatial
development initiatives throughout Gauteng, aimed at uplifting the economy
and creating jobs that will lead to a better life for our citizens. We will
be spending R1,6 billion on these projects over three years. These public
funds are being used to leverage private sector investment in the provision
of economic infrastructure with the aim of creating an enabling environment
by which to boost economic growth, generate wealth and create jobs.

The President touched on the important issue of the role of the NCOP and
provincial government in co-operative governance and intergovernmental
relationships. He has addressed this issue time and time again in this
House, and that reflects the passion he has on this matter. This House
should embrace all three spheres of government: national, provincial and
local. The democratic local government elections that will take place on 5
December are the very key to the continued shaping and building of our
young democracy.

The importance of local government cannot be ignored, but it must help us
to move faster and assist us in the fight against poverty. It must also
help us unite our community, both black and white, as we work on the
national project of deracialising our communities as we deracialise our
schools, religious institutions, Government departments, clinics, hospitals
and other services.

Indeed, we in Gauteng can proudly proclaim that we are contributing to the
national project of building a nonracial, nonsexist democratic country. In
our province the challenge to build strong local government is a top
priority. We will have three megacities that we will be establishing
because we believe in strong local government to improve our services to
our community. Strong local government is needed to deracialise our
communities so that, unlike others, we are able to unite our people. We
believe in strong local government as a critical sphere of government to
defeat poverty. We will not succumb to pessimists who want us to believe
otherwise. For those of us together with our people who make policy, policy
is only effective when it is implemented at the coalface, where it matters.
Service delivery has improved and only can get better.

We are indeed on course as a government of our people. Our programmes are
improving the lives of many people who previously lived on the periphery
and had no hope for a better life. Today our people are not just living on
hope, but are beginning to experience working together to build a better
life for all our people, and they know that their children are guaranteed
an even better life.

The schools will close on 2 December, but, as Gauteng, we want to ensure
the President that we will, after today's debate and his call, speak to our
school principals and our teachers so that they can contribute on 5
December to assisting the democratic process and local government
elections. For Mr Marais's benefit, I do not know whether he is a candidate
mayor or will be a mayor, but I just want to say that just yesterday in
Gauteng, 40 members of the DA defected to the ANC, including the sister of
Sheila Camerer. She is a quite a senior member of the DA. [Applause.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, Mr President, premiers, special delegates and
colleagues, we have heard members of the ANC try to define themselves and
the Government they have formed as a caring, compassionate and responsible
Government that has delivered what they promised to the people of our
country.

The people of our country will assess the facts and decide for themselves
whether this is, in fact, so. The people know what they have been promised
and the people can also see precisely what has been delivered. The DA will
do more than simply project themselves as a caring, compassionate party.
The DA will put programmes in place that will actually make a difference to
the lives of the most vulnerable in our society. In this regard I refer to
a programme to provide our youth with opportunity vouchers that can be
traded for educational or work opportunities. During the tenure of the ANC
there has been a net loss of jobs and the youth of our country have been
the real losers. Unemployment of this magnitude sets the stage for the
socioeconomic situation that leads to an increase in the rate of crime.

The ANC principally provides opportunities for comrades, cronies and
members of their families. In effect the ANC has created a new elite and
privileged class in society for its own comrades. The DA will endeavour to
look after the interests of all the people, regardless of race, class,
gender or political affiliation.

In the second instance, the DA will have a programme to provide
antiretroviral drugs to rape survivors and HIV-positive pregnant women.
Successful schemes of this nature are already up and running in areas where
the DA is in power. By contrast the ANC callously engages in sophistry,
semantic arguments and grand conspiracy theories on the causal link between
the HI virus and the condition that for historical reasons is termed
``Aids'' and is perhaps more correctly described as HIV/Aids. Such
arguments serve little or no purpose, but sow a tremendous amount of
confusion amongst those who are most vulnerable to infection by the HI
virus.

The ANC will never promote sufficient economic growth to provide employment
for all our people, because of their inability to deal with the scourge of
crime. Instead of this problem being dealt with, the statistics are simply
suppressed. This does not fool our people and potential investors; instead
they ask what the ANC Government is hiding.

One also has to distinguish between what the ANC says and what it does. In
its election manifesto the ANC promises to remove councillors who do not
deliver. I do not have to list the ANC's track record in this regard. The
people of South Africa know the score.

Finally, we need to ask: Which party will really care for all the people of
our country? Chairperson, it is not the ANC. [Interjections.] [Applause.]
Mr R M NYAKANE: Chairperson, all good service rendered to the people on the
ground is sure to gain them rich reward, and if we work with what is pure,
then our weakest efforts will endure. My province is grossly afflicted with
inhibiting socioeconomic factors such as superstitious beliefs, witchcraft,
the practice of throwing bones, unemployment and the lack of essential
services, like water, electricity, health amenities, roads - you name it!

The UDM subscribes, without reservation to the Northern Province vision of
aspiring for peace, self-sustenance and prosperity.

The dawn of democracy cherished the hope that there would be facilitation
of economic growth that would, in turn, adequately address the problem of
unemployment. However, in terms of the status quo, about 46% of the
economically viable sector of our population is unemployed. A survey points
out that 97 000 new jobs will have to be created per annum in order to ease
this backlog by the year 2004. We have to bear in mind that the unemployed
group are idlers, and as such their minds have become the devil's workshop,
hence the propensity for criminal acts.

May I, in the interests of time, address only one issue of constraint,
namely the provision of potable water in the rural areas? Four months ago
the Northern Province received heavy rains which culminated in floods. Dams
were filled to capacity, and even now they are still full. Service
pipelines and reservoir dams seem to be dysfunctional in most rural areas,
especially in the areas of Naphuno, Giyani, Sekhukhune, Moletjie and
others.

I happened to visit the Nghonyama High School, located near Tzaneen. A
waterborne toilet system has been constructed, but has not been able to
function for the past 18 months because of the scarcity of water. The
teachers told me that they relieved themselves in the dry pit latrines of
the household located next to the school. One can only imagine how boys and
girls manage to cope with this situation.

Local residents who own light delivery vehicles or bakkies seized the
opportunity to manipulate the poorest of the poor by charging them R2 to R5
for a litre of water. An optimistic estimate for water per household can
amount to R300 per month, taking into account the laundry needs.

I wish to point out that problems that our people encounter on the ground
should be viewed from an apolitical perspective. We need not point fingers
at each other, as political parties, because crime, cholera and poverty
know no party politics. We should remember ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Chair, your Excellency the President, colleagues, I
have chosen to address the issue of poverty. The HIV and Human Development
Report of 1998 says, amongst other things, and I quote:


  Human development is the end, economic growth a means. The purpose of
  wealth should be to enrich people's lives, to broaden people's choices,
  and to enable every citizen, every child, every woman and every man to
  reach his or her full potential. Yet, as the experience in many countries
  has shown, economic growth does not automatically translate into human
  development.

Just like HIV/Aids, poverty, you will agree with me, is a disease. When we
seek pharmaceutical answers to curb and cure HIV/Aids, we need to
simultaneously curb and cure poverty. In short, we need to have a holistic
approach.
Poverty has dehumanised the African masses, and, of course, Africa as a
whole. People in poverty cannot actually think properly, cannot struggle
vigorously against anything, and that is why the West would like to see us
perpetually drowned in poverty. Poverty kills one's power, one's dignity
and one's soul and, of course it kills one's humanness. Let me venture to
say that I think, ultimately, it kills one's immune system. Therefore, when
one introduces poverty relief programmes, within the context of the African
Renaissance, one is bound to be a victim of international racist forces.
[Interjections.]

In South Africa, and in Africa, poverty was calculated and designed to be
there by the colonialists. The international community, together with the
former South African regime, did nothing, actually, to alleviate poverty.
[Interjections.] Their myopic strategy was: Make them poor so that you will
be able oppress them perpetually. That was the strategy. Therefore, when
the President came up with an African solution for treating HIV/Aids and
other related diseases, he was viewed as creating a dangerous precedence,
because he was questioning Western morality. [Interjections.] He is
actually questioning Western scientific norms and standards. He is actually
questioning and creating an intellectual barrier against the international
pharmaceutical industry, which would affect their economies.
[Interjections.]

Therefore, inequality in South Africa is seen as inextricably linked to the
question of poverty. Distribution of income in South Africa is one of the
most unequal in the world. According to recent statistics, the richest 20%
of households account for 65% of all income, while the poorest 20% account
for only 3%.

The oppressive apartheid regime left South Africa with a legacy of
underdevelopment, the magnitude of which South Africans are just starting
to appreciate. [Interjections.] Statistics show that 61% of Africans live
under conditions of abject poverty, while 1% of whites are poor. It is this
reality that calls for our urgent attention to give capacity to our local
government so that they can effectively undertake to alleviate poverty by
way of engaging in poverty alleviation programmes. The promotion of local
economic development and poverty alleviation programmes in local
governments are key areas on which we should focus our government.

In conclusion, I want to say that in KwaZulu-Natal, for instance, where I
happen to come from, the poverty rate is estimated at 51,9%. This is the
situation in a country that is classified as a middle-income developing
country with an ample supply of natural resources, well-developed
financial, legal and communication systems, a modern infrastructure and a
stock exchange which ranks amongst the 10 largest in the world. However,
the extent of poverty and inequality amongst its people shows that income
is not being invested equitably in human development.

We need to take stock of the warning of Mr Baldwin in his book, The Fire
Next Time, because he warns us that if we are not careful, such a thing
will actually consume us. V Y Mudimbe in his book, The Invention of Africa,
says amongst other things:


  When the African comes forward with his peculiar gifts, he will fill a
  place never before occupied. He is, nevertheless, coming forward,
  gradually rising under the influences of agencies seen and unseen.

[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I think, Deputy Chairperson of
Committees, you have succeeded in waking members up. [Interjections.] I
call upon the hon Premier Direko to address the House.

HON MEMBERS: Haak Vrystaat! [Go, Free State!]

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Miss I W Direko): Haak Vrystaat! [Go, Free
State!] Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Deputy
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon President of South
Africa, whom we respect and whom we will follow and back to the hilt,
fellow premiers of provinces, members of the Cabinet, if they are still
here, distinguished guests up there, if they are still there, ladies and
gentlemen, and hon members, I want to start off by thanking our President
for explaining and clarifying, once and for all, the thinking behind the
restructuring of our third tier of government, that is the local government
structure. It is not just a mean trick to make nobodies somebodies, but
rather an honest attempt at the integration of urban and rural areas for
the specific purpose of the utilisation of resources equitably, not for
just a minority who in the past regarded themselves as God's chosen people.
This is done, as envisaged by the President as the leader of the governing
party, as an honest attempt to give each one of the peoples of the country
a good slice, an equal slice of the cake. After all, that is what democracy
is all about.

One hopes that the President's plea for deracialisation of communities and
residential areas will receive the response it deserves. South Africa
belongs to all who live in it. That means living where one chooses to be,
and not by way of decree.

By the way, I give Mr Marais this message. [Interjections.] I am very
comfortable to be where I belong, and that is in the ANC. To Mr Marais I
say that if he is perhaps looking around for comfort, security and
satisfaction, I invite him to join me on this side. [Interjections.]

I would like to ask Mr Lever where his DP was during the days of the
African struggle against apartheid. Why did his grandfather and father not
come forward at that point to do what they promise to do now? Of course,
his knowledge of what happened in the past or what should happen now is
skewed, because he was not yet born then. [Laughter.]

I would like to say to Mr Conroy that I overheard him ask, when the hon
member from KwaZulu-Natal spoke: ``Who wrote your speech? Was it the CIA or
the KGB?''

Mr M J BHENGU: [Inaudible.] [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order!

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Miss I W Direko): I would like to say to Mr
Conroy that he forgets that today we live in a democratic South Africa, not
in the police state that existed when they were running this country.

On behalf of the Free State province, I would like to join the entire
nation in welcoming the President's address on the role of the Government
in the achievement of service delivery and the alleviation of poverty. Of
course, those who survived through enjoying the fleshpots of Egypt will not
understand what poverty means. [Interjections.]

In a world where the rich get richer and the poor poorer, we seem to be on
the wrong side of the equator. The economic and political power relations
between the rich countries of the North and the poor countries of the South
have never been more unequal. The inequalities have never been sharper.
[Interjections.] Those hon members should have done something about it when
they had the chance to do so. [Interjections.]

In a recent study conducted by Statistics South Africa, using the household
poverty line based on consumption expenditure of R8 000, more or less per
month, my province, according to 1996 prices, has been declared the second
poorest in the country. According to this study, more than 40% of our
province's citizens live in abject poverty - inherited from the past, I
must hasten to add. The aforementioned study defines poverty as, I quote -


  ... the denial of opportunities and choices most basic to human
  development to lead a long, healthy, creative life and to enjoy a decent
  standard of living, freedom, dignity, self-esteem and respect from
  others.

This is what the majority of the people of this country were deprived of in
the past.

This definition illustrates that poverty is not an accident caused by
statistical sociological analysis, but is clearly the consequence of
serious imbalances in political and economic power relations prevalent in
the world today.

It further reminds us of the havoc wreaked by the social engineering of the
system of apartheid. For my province statistics demand that one takes a
deep breath, a long leap of faith, in the reconstruction and development of
the province. A total of 62,5% of Free Staters are in informal dwellings,
with a total of 56,8% having access to electricity and only 42,2% having
taps in their dwellings. Where was the DP?

As few as 45,1% have flush or chemical toilets and only 22,9% have access
to telephones. Only 5,5% of heads of households are adequately educated,
because we were told by the former leaders that we must not be educated,
for then we would clamour for green pastures. The aforementioned statistics
are a product of the past.

The above figures are compounded by the reality that 30% of Free Staters
are unemployed, and that the rate of infection of HIV and Aids is the
second highest in the country. Our President is doing his utmost to find
out exactly how we can contain the situation. He is not getting any thanks
for that, but let me assure him that we stand foursquare behind him.
[Applause.]

The struggle for a better life has never been clearer, the need to deepen
democracy is much more challenging, and the urgency of political and social
transformation is more pronounced.

The questions that people may ask are: What are the strategies? What plans
have been put in place in the Free State province to map the way forward?
The vision of our provincial strategic plan which was launched in April
this year is aimed at a unified Free State province with a vibrant economy
which provides for sustainable growth and development, and equitable
opportunities for all - black and white - to achieve and sustain an
improved quality of life. [Interjections.] Nie net vir 'n handjievol mense
nie. [Not only for a handful of people.]

Our provincial strategic plan has prioritised three areas. First is the
provision of infrastracture and housing. Houses in the Free State are
coming up like mushrooms. Second is job creation. Our business incubator
which was launched last year is beginning to give results. Third is
economic and human resources development and I am talking about the
development of the human resources of all the people of the Free State. Ek
herhaal - nie vir 'n handjievol mense nie [I repeat, not only for a handful
of people].

We have, in addition, identified flagship programmes such as our
antipoverty strategy, and we have already trained women in building
construction who are employed in big construction companies at this point
in time, and we have put in place an integrated development framework. The
objective of these flagship programmes is to significantly reduce poverty
levels in our province. We will and must succeed.

The past six years of democracy has demonstrated that a long walk to
freedom still needs to be undertaken towards the creation of a nonracial,
nonsexist and democratic society which will offer equal opportunities to
all. [Interjections.] Whilst our detractors occupy themselves with throwing
as many obstacles as possible in our way towards ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon member, I sincerely regret that
your time has expired. [Applause.]

Mr President, I really am very aware that you are an extremely busy person.
If I were not sympathetic to that busyness, I would really have asked you
to be here tomorrow morning. I have not seen the House so full or so
attentive since your last visit to us. May I now call upon you to respond
to the debate.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson, I would like to come back to
the House myself, but not in the way the matter has been agreed to for
today. The particular arrangement is indeed to respond, as you are saying.
I feel so, in part, because I think we need to engage one another more
regularly. [Interjections.] Indeed, I think the point that the hon Peter
Marais was making is that in many instances we continue to be prisoners of
our past, and it is an important point. I think that to get out of that
prison might, indeed, very much require that we do interact with one
another a bit more frequently.

I must also confess that I always find it a great pleasure to be in this
House. I do not want to make rude comments about the other Houseÿ.ÿ.ÿ.
[Interjections.] ... but I always find hon members reflective about
important questions facing us in the country and very practical about some
of the responses that are required.

The point made by the Premier of Mpumalanga, the hon N J Mahlangu, about
the need for us to look at this question of the tendering system is
important. Certainly, we would want to take that matter up with Minister
Mufamadi to see what we can do. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development has not yet approach me with regard to section 49. He has not
yet come to me as far as I know. At least, he has not reached me, although
he might have reached my legal adviser - I do not know. But it has not
reached me yet, but I would certainly want to discuss the matter with the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. I understand very well
the concern that the hon Matthee is raising about this issue. I know that
the National Commissioner of Police and the police officers have themselves
expressed a view about this matter. We will certainly discuss it and,
indeed, the hon member may very well be correct that the matter needs to
come back to Parliament for some further discussion.

I would like to say to the hon Van Niekerk that at its meeting yesterday,
the Cabinet had a brief discussion on this language question, because we
ourselves are moving from this position that we need to move with a little
bit more vigour in addressing this issue and in reflecting on the last
report of the Pan South African Language Board. Minister Ben Ngubane is
leading that process so that we take the sort of steps that he is urging. I
would want to agree with him that we need to move like that and certainly
not allow a situation in which any of our people get disempowered because
they are unable to use some language which might be popular among people
who sit in these Houses, including myself. Indeed the point that he was
making about the importance of a language to a person as part of their
identity and their being is correct. I indeed agree very much with that. I
am saying we are actually attending to this matter in the Cabinet and we
want to be moving on this.

What I have said with regard to issues relating to language, culture and so
on is that we have agreed in the Presidency that the Deputy President will
be dealing with those issues. So I am very glad to hear that the hon member
has had some interaction with him and, certainly, if any matter arises,
whether it is the use of language in the courts or in the justice system
and so on, we would want to deal with that matter there so as to ensure
that, indeed, we do not produce a result which is disadvantageous to any of
our language groups in the country. The matter is in the hands of the
Deputy President and people who will help him deal with that matter.

I am quite certain that the hon Ken Durr has seen the Government report
issued by the Minister for Public Enterprises on the matter of the
restructuring of state assets. I am quite sure that he would have seen that
the Government is indeed very determined to speed up that process and move
it forward as rapidly as is possible. There have been, as I am sure the hon
member would know, some matters which have been rather difficult to deal
with; for instance the Transnet pension fund, which is very problematic.
One could not move with regard to that whole group of companies without
addressing this particular issue. But I believe that we have found a
solution to that. However, it would be wrong to pretend that the solution
would have been, under any circumstances, easy, because I think if one knew
the evolution of that pension fund problem at Transnet, one would
understand why it was such a complicated matter.

I know that the matter of the long distances in the Northern Cape is an
issue that we certainly have discussed as Government. We have sought to
urge the Financial and Fiscal Finance Commission to look at it in order to
see in what way they can deal with it. These allocations are determined by
them, and this becomes a factor for them to take into account. Therefore
there is consciousness and awareness of the fact that this problem is
there.

I think we have agreed in our discussion here that we face as a country and
society, huge problems of poverty, racism and sexism and all manner of
other such problems. I think the hon Kent Durr said that given the size,
variety and volume of these problems, for which we have got to find
solutions, the lists are long, and I agree with that. That is part of the
reason why I was saying that we perhaps need to talk amongst ourselves a
bit more in order to understand the depth and scale of the problems we
face.

When the hon M J Bhengu talked about the impact of poverty, I thought his
statement about how poverty dehumanises people, how it kills their dignity
and souls, was a very important statement. It is related to the question
you raised, Madam Chairperson. Why do we want to read development and
change in the country merely as being about whether we have built two extra
houses, installed another tap for water or built a new rural road? Yes,
indeed these things are important, but to the extent that the demand that
Government must deliver means that another house and tap for water must be
delivered, it suggests that the people must do nothing but receive this
thing which is going to be delivered. Are we not thereby - I am not saying
that Government does not have a responsibility to do all these things -
perpetuating that sense of dehumanisation, of the disempowerment of people,
so that they feel that because they can do nothing, Government will come
and deliver. I said this is a point that the Chairperson was making.

As we talk about that delivery, what kind of human beings do we want to
emerge out of this? What kind of society are we trying to create? The
additional house is important, but other questions are posed, such as the
concern which the hon Matthee raised, quite correctly, about the the levels
of violence in our society. This is a very serious and worrying matter, but
where does it come from? This is one of the things you spoke about, Madam
Chairperson, by asking why we are bringing up these teenagers who are
criminals. What should the families and schools do? Where does it all come
from? It is a serious question that we need to consider and reflect on
among ourselves, because I think it is only when we understand it that we
will be able to make the correct interventions.

Of course criminals must be arrested and locked up and heavy sentences must
be given to those who are responsible for serious crimes. Law enforcement
must happen, but we must try to get an answer to the question: Why does
society spawn this kind of person? We say that we are reconstructing and
developing this society, and I think you were quite right, Madam
Chairperson, in saying that progress should not be measured only by the
number of houses one builds. Progress must be measured, also, by the kind
of person that emerges out of the society, who surely should be different
from the person who is a thief and a killer and who is corrupt. So what do
we do to answer that kind of question?

What do we do to deal with the problem of people who were so beaten down
that they came to believe that they were naturally inferior? What does one
do about that? To answer your question, Madam Chairperson, we cannot say
that we have a liberated South Africa, that we are advancing and making
progress and that the social development report shows all these positive
things, when we are left with people who are convinced that they are
inferior to others, whether on the basis of gender or of colour. What do we
do to respond to that?

I have heard it said that the culture of volunteering in our society has
disappeared, that when one asks people to go out and do some public good,
such as helping old-aged people on a Saturday, they expect a little bit of
reward at the end of it. Why is our society so driven by material gain? We
are so driven by it that anything becomes permissible as long as when one
emerges at the end of it, one is able to get a big house, a posh car, and
so on. This is a successful person. Where does such a person get the
resources from to become so successful? I am asking what it is that drives
us. Maybe it is not a South African disease only. Maybe it is universal
that those material values have assumed such importance that they have
displaced other value systems in terms of governing how we behave.

I am only making these remarks in order to say that we perhaps need to
discuss these things amongst ourselves a bit more in order to see what we
can do. I agree with you very much, Chairperson, that we cannot measure our
progress merely by the number of houses we build, important though that is.
We have got to measure it fundamentally by the nature of the society that
we create.

The Deputy President was very distressed last night. He had just returned
from Namibia and asked to see me. He came and related the following story.

He was in Namibia attending a conference convened by the international
Herald Tribune, where he spoke to some journalists. They asked him what
President Mugabe had said at the meeting because, evidently, they had not
been there. So he explained. He gave them a summary of what President
Mugabe had said.

Later, at the end of the whole conference, he and other leaders from the
SADC region sat on a panel answering questions from the press. A British
journalist put the question whether there was any possibility or likelihood
that what had happened in Zimbabwe with regard to the land question would
happen in any of the other countries in the region.

As the Deputy President was the first one in that row, he said it was not
going to happen in South Africa. We have got the law, there are not going
to be any invasions, nobody is going to break any law, and if they do we
will arrest them. Procedures exist for dealing with land issues in our
country and therefore there is not going to be any such thing happening
here.

Indeed, I would like to say that myself. I am making the same statement,
because I thought I heard a remark being made by somebody to the effect
that Zimbabwe is knocking on the doors of our farmers. It is not. It is not
necessary to be spreading scare stories. It does not help in any way. It is
not going to happen, and all of us know that.

I was saying that the hon the Deputy President was very distressed by this.
They were going to issue a statement last night to explain all of this. I
do not know whether they did.

I am mentioning this particular matter because, again in the context of
what I was saying about the need for us to talk to one another more often,
it seems to me that there are some people who are quite determined to make
sure that as many negative messages are communicated about our country as
possible. They look for it, as in this particular instance.

It was entirely mischievous to suggest, as was suggested after the Deputy
President had given a summary of what President Mugabe had said, to suggest
that he had spoken in support of land invasions in Zimbabwe. He never did.
I am saying that it is something that we shall have to attend to. What
happens when we are not in contact with the truth, is that we then believe
all of these strange stories that are told. They govern our behaviour. For
many of us it is indeed much easier to believe a negative piece of news
than to believe a positive piece of news.

I think we need to talk to one another a bit more. I think it will help all
of us. I am addressing this also to the hon Peter Marais. Let us get out of
these prisons and seek to understand this country together. The lists are
long.

A US Congresswoman who once visited our country said to me that what she
thought we should do, was talk about a marathon race in South Africa every
day. She told me that she had been to our country a number of times and had
looked around and visited people. It was clear to her that such was the
scale, size and depth of our problems that our people should run a marathon
race. It was not short sprints, not 100 metres, she said, but a marathon
race.

She said that I should try to convey this image because it carried with it
the idea of long distance, and the notion that even as we would be getting
close to the tape, we would be getting more and more tired because the race
would be long. As one is getting tired, it is precisely at this point that
one needs one's greatest resolve to be able to finish the race.

I thought that she was right. I hope that the NCOP will be very much part
of the people of our country as we run that marathon race which we cannot
avoid. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Thank you, hon members.  Thank you, Mr
President.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 18:00.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           MONDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services:


     (1)    Proclamation No 819 published in the Government Gazette No 21482
         dated 25 August 2000, Establishment of the prison at Kokstad,
         KwaZulu-Natal Province, to be known as the Ebongweni Correctional
         Centre, made in terms of section 5(1) of the Correctional Services
         Act, 1998 (Act No 111 of 1998).


     (2)    Proclamation No 820 published in the Government Gazette No 21482
         dated 25 August 2000, Establishment of a new prison at Empangeni,
         KwaZulu-Natal Province, to be known as Empageni Qalakabusha
         Prison, made in terms of section 5(1) of the Correctional Services
         Act, 1998 (Act No 111 of 1998).

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Water Affairs and
     Forestry for 1999-2000 [RP 101-2000].

                          TUESDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 10 October 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (1)    South African Rail Commuter Corporation Limited Financial
         Arrangements Bill [B 64 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75)
         (Select Committee on Public Services - National Council of
         Provinces)

2.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    Mr J L Mahlangu has been appointed as chairperson of the Ad hoc
         Select Committee on General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill with
         effect from 10 October 2000.


     (2)    Ms S N Ntlabati has been appointed as chairperson of the Ad hoc
         Select Committee on Pan-African Parliament with effect from 10
         October 2000.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:


1.    The Minister of Finance:


         Resolutions of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for 2000
         and replies thereto obtained by the National Treasury - Fifth,
         Sixth and Seventh Report, 2000.


2.    The Minister of Labour:


         Report and Financial Statements of the National Productivity
         Institute for 1999-2000.

                         WEDNESDAY, 11 OCTOBER 2000


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled and are now referred to the relevant
     committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Select Committee
         on Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and
         report:


         (a)     Rome Statutes of the International Court of Justice,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Rome Statutes.


         (c)     Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
              and Political Rights, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (d)     Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
              Civil and Political Rights, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
              of the Constitution, 1996.


         (e)     Explanatory Memorandum to the protocols.


         (f)     Extradition Treaty between the Government of the Republic
              of South Africa and the Government of the United States of
              America, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (g)     Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the United States of America on
              Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, tabled in terms
              of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (h)     Explanatory Memorandum to the treaties.


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts, Culture, Science and Technology and to the Select Committee
         on Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


         Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the event of
         Armed Conflict (the Hague Convention) with regulations for the
         execution and the coverence resolutions, 14 May 1954, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry, the Portfolio Committee on Labour, the
         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, the
         Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, the Portfolio
         Committee on Health, the Portfolio Committee on Welfare and
         Population Development, the Portfolio Committee on Housing, the
         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Children, Youth and Disblaed Persons and the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Women. It is also referred to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs, the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises,
         the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, the
         Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, the Select
         Committee on Social Services and the Select Committee on Public
         Services:


         National Report on Social Development for 1995-2000.


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs. It is also referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration and report:


         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
         Standards for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements.


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of Vote 1 - President for the period 1 April to 31 May 1999
              [RP 110-2000].
         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the South African Wool Board for 1996-97 [RP 150-2000].


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises, the Portfolio Committee on Defence, the Select
         Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Pty) Ltd for 1998-99.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled and are now referred to the Select
     Committee on Education and Recreation:


     (1)    Government Notice No 777 published in the Government Gazette No
         21444 dated 11 August 2000, The date on which TEFSA ceases its
         functions, made in terms of the National Student Financial Aid
         Scheme Act, 1999 (Act No 56 of 1999).


     (2)    Government Notice No 789 published in the Government Gazette No
         21438 dated 11 August 2000, Approval that the pilot project Travel
         and Tourism Standard Grade, Grade 10 - 12 becomes a fully fledged
         instructional offering, made in terms of the National Education
         Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (3)    Government Notice No R.848 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21501 dated 1 September 2000, Correction notice to Government
         Gazette No 21192 dated 18 May 2000, made in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (4)    Government Notice No 3102 published in the Government Gazette No
         21539 dated 6 September 2000, Call for public comment on draft
         document - The National Policy Framework on Whole-school
         Evaluation, made in terms of the National Education Policy Act,
         1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Public Enterprises:


     Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Pty) Limited for 1999-2000.

2.    The Minister of Communications:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
     Corporation for 1999-2000.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications and to the Select
     Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Sea
     Transport Documents Bill [B 28B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 10 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
         subject of the Sea Transport Documents Bill [B 28B - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has
         agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
     Adult Basic Education and Training Bill [B 42B - 2000] (National
     Assembly - sec 76), dated 10 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having
         considered the subject of the Adult Basic Education and Training
         Bill [B 42B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it,
         reports the Bill with an amendment [B 42C - 2000].

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 48B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
     76), dated 10 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having
         considered the subject of the Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 48B
         - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it, reports the
         Bill without amendment.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
     Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 55B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
     75), dated 10 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having
         considered the subject of the Higher Education Amendment Bill [B
         55B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports
         that it has agreed to the Bill.

5.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on the Abuja
     Treaty, dated 11 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having considered the
         request for approval by Parliament of the Treaty establishing the
         African Economic Community (Abuja Treaty), referred to it,
         recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Treaty.


     Report to be considered.

6.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on the African
     Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund Bill [B 65B - 2000]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 11 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having considered the
         subject of the African Renaissance and International Co-operation
         Fund Bill [B 65B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to
         it, reports the Bill with proposed amendments, as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 5


         1. On page 3, in line 15, after "available" to insert "or
              disbursed".


         2. On page 3, from line 17, to omit subsection (4) and to
              substitute:


              (4) Loans or other financial assistance must be granted or
                  rendered in accordance with an agreement entered into
                  between the relevant parties, excluding assistance for
                  the promotion of democracy and good governance or the
                  prevention or resolution of conflict.


                                  CLAUSE 6


         1. On page 3, in line 32, after "Fund" to insert:


                  in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act
                  No.1 of 1999)

7.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on
    the Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 57B - 2000] (National
    Assembly - sec 75), dated 11 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, having
         considered the subject of the Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill
         [B 57B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it,
         reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

8.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the
     Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions Second
     Amendment Bill [B 66 - 2000] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76),
     dated 11 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
         Professions Second Amendment Bill [B 66 - 2000] (National Council
         of Provinces - sec 76), referred to it, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 66A - 2000].

                          THURSDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 12 October
         2000 took a decision, in accordance with Joint Rule 216, that the
         Marine Living Resources Amendment Bill [B 68 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 76(1)) be fast-tracked by, where necessary,
         shortening any period within which any step in the legislative
         process relating to the Bill must be completed, in order to make
         it possible for the Bill to be passed by both Houses of Parliament
         before adjournment in November 2000.


         In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in both
         Houses for ratification.


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 12
         October 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:
         (i)     Marine Living Resources Amendment Bill [B 68 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism - National Assembly).


     (3)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bill:


         (i)     Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B
              51D - 2000] - Act No 33 of 2000 (assented to and signed by
              President on 11 October 2000).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 12 October 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (a)    Firearms Control Bill [B 34B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
          75) - (Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs -
          National Council of Provinces).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The President of the Republic:


     Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "Presidency-", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

2.    The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
     National Council of Provinces:


     Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

3.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

4.    The Minister of Education:


     Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Education", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

5.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs:


     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

6.    The Minister of Defence:


     Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Defence", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

7.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Statistics South Africa",
         Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (2)    Memorandum on Vote No 36 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (3)    Memorandum on Adjustments Estimate for 2000-2001.


     (4)    Adjustments Estimate of Expenditure to be defrayed from the
         National Revenue Fund during the financial year ending 31 March
         2001 [RP 1-2000].

8.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - --"Provincial- and Local Government",
     Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

9.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Arts, Culture, Science and Technology",
     Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

10.   The Minister of Transport:


     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

11.   The Minister of Public Enterprises:


     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Public Enterprises", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

12.   The Minister of Public Works:


     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Public Works", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

13.   The Minister of Social Development:


     Memorandum on Vote No 35 - "Social Development", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

14.   The Minister of Safety and Security:


     Memorandums on -


     (1)    Vote No 17 - "Independent Complaints Directorate", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (2)    Vote No 28 - "South African Police Service", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.
15.   The Minister of Housing:


     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Housing", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

16.   The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

17.   The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Justice and Constitutional Development",
     Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

18.   The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Environmental Affairs and Tourism",
     Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

19.   The Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Memorandums on -


     (1)    Vote No 24 - "Public Service and Administration", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (2) Vote No 25 - "Public Service Commission", Adjustments Estimate,
         2000-2001.


     (3) Vote No 27 - "South African Management Development Institute",
         Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

20.   The Minister of Communications:


     (1) Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Communications", Adjustments Estimate,
         2000-2001.


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
         Institute of South Africa for 1999-2000.

21.   The Minister of Labour:


     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Labour", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

22.   The Minister of Correctional Services:
     Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Correctional Services", Adjustments
     Estimate, 2000-2001.

23.   The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Memorandums on -


     (1)    Vote No 3 - "Agriculture", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (2) Vote No 20 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

24.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry", Adjustments
     Estimate, 2000-2001.

25.   The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Minerals and Energy", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

26.   The Minister of Health:
     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Health", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

27.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation:


     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Sport and Recreation", Adjustments
     Estimate, 2000-2001.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
     Life and Status of Women on Police Crime Statistics on Rape, dated 10
     October 2000:


         The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
         and Status of Women has noted the fact that crime statistics
         reported by the SAPS at present do not disaggregate rape
         statistics by sex.


         Rape, as defined in South African law, is a crime which can only
         be perpetrated against women. Yet, the police present their crime
         figures routinely per 100 000 of the total population (ie men and
         women), instead of presenting those figures per 100 000 women.
         Since women make up approximately half the population, the burden
         of rape faced by women is essentially twice that faced by the
         total population. Presenting figures per total population
         diminishes the seriousness of the problem, especially in the
         calculation of the rate of rape.


         The editor of "The World's Women 1995: Trends and Statistics" has
         reported that most countries define rape in relation to the female
         population and therefore present data only for the female
         population, per 100 000 women.


         The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
         and Status of Women therefore calls on the SAPS and Statistics SA,
         during the review of crime statistics that is currently under way,
         to ensure that -


         1) rape statistics are disaggregated by sex; and
         2) all crime statistics are routinely presented in a manner which
              is sex-disaggregated.
         The above will bring South Africa in line with the commitments
         made by Government in respect of the Beijing Platform for Action
         and CEDAW.


