---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 11 April 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-04-11
---

TUESDAY, 11 APRIL 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 10:01.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I would like to welcome members back
from their constituency period, which, I understand, was extremely busy.

I heard reports of the work of the ad hoc committee we had appointed to
look into the flood disaster and other disaster management throughout the
country, and I understand it was a very busy period for them. As the House,
we certainly look forward to hearing their report on our management of
flood disasters and other forms of disaster in our country.

Welcome as well to members of the executive who are here to respond to
questions.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr L G LEVER: Madam Chair, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
Council, I shall move:


  That the Council -


  (1) resolves in respect of Zimbabwe that -


       (a)  it deplores the flagrant disregard for the rule of law in
           failing to give effect to a High Court order and in failing to
           protect people seeking to exercise their fundamental right to
           peaceful demonstration;


       (b)  it deplores the manner in which racial tensions are being
           inflamed and manipulated for political purposes; and
       (c)  it regards these orchestrated disturbances as a setback for
           regional integration within SADC and further regards such
           behaviour as an impediment to the African renaissance; and


  (2) further resolves to inform the Consul-General of Zimbabwe of this
       resolution for onward transmission to his government.

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
Council I shall move:


  That the Council -


  (1) calls upon the Minister of Defence, with the disbandment of Western
       Province Command, to consider taking action to preserve the Castle
       and its valuable cultural heritage and contents, so that it may be
       protected and preserved in the interests of tourism and our military
       and cultural history at the Cape;


  (2) also calls on the Minister to give consideration to the Castle being
       made available to be occupied as a Reserve Force garrison base
       occupied by the five Cape ``traditional'' units - the Cape Field
       Artillery, the Cape Garrison Artillery, the Cape Town Rifles (Dukes),
       the Cape Town Highlanders and Regiment Western Province;


  (3) notes that the Castle is -


       (a)  a world-famous example of classic military architecture on which
           tens of millions have been spent on restoration over the past 10
           years;


       (b)  South Africa's largest military building and functioning
           installation;


       (c)  a proclaimed national monument;


       (d)  the seat of the renowned William Fehr collection of Africana;


       (e)  the repository of irreplaceable historic and other treasures;


       (f)  a vital part of our long military heritage linking with most of
           South African folk histories; and


       (g)  an important part of South Africa's early social and political
           history because it was the focus of political and military
           history for more than 200 years; and


  (4) therefore calls on the Minister to act expeditiously before the
       Castle falls into disrepair and becomes vandalised.

Mev A M VERSFELD: Mevrou die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek by
die volgende sitting sal voorstel:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem dat -


       (a)  geen nuwe toetreders tot die pelagiese bedryf vir die vang van
           sardyn en ansjovis toegelaat gaan word nie;


       (b)  daar nie uitvoering gegee word aan die Wet op Lewende Mariene
           Hulpbronne nie;


       (c)  die Minister nie die aanbevelings van die advieskomitee op 22
           November 1999 aanvaar het nie; en


       (d)  transformasie nie plaasvind nie en nuwe toetreders nie 'n kans
           gegun word nie; en


  (2) derhalwe 'n beroep op die Minister doen om -


       (a)  onmiddellik uitstaande pelagiese kwotas van makriel en masbanker
           toe te ken;


       (b)  'n komitee soos voorheen voorgestel deur die Demokratiese Party
           aan te stel om alle uitstaande kwotas, konsessies en permitte
           toe te ken; of


       (c)  die departement onder geregtelike bestuur te plaas.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mrs A M VERSVELD: Madam Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall
move at the next sitting:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  no new entrants are going to be allowed into the pelagic
           industry as regards the catching of pilchards and anchovies;


       (b   the Marine Living Resources Act is not being implemented;


       (c)  the Minister has not accepted the recommendations of the
           advisory committee on 22 November 1999; and


       (d)  transformation is not taking place and new entrants are not
           being afforded an opportunity; and


  (2) therefore appeals to the Minister -


       (a)  immediately to allocate outstanding quotas of mackerel and
           maasbanker;


       (b)  to appoint a committee, as previously proposed by the DP, to
           allocate all outstanding quotas, concessions and permits; or


       (c)  to place the Department under judicial management.]

      CONGRATULATIONS TO UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH BUSINESS SCHOOL ON
      ACCREDITATION WITH EUROPEAN FOUNDATION FOR MANAGEMENT DEVELOPMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Voorsitter, ek stel voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) die Nagraadse Bestuurskool van die Universiteit van Stellenbosch
       gelukwens met sy akkreditering by die Europese Stigting vir
       Bestuursontwikkeling; en


  (2) daarvan kennis neem dat hierdie internasionale erkenning 'n prestasie
       is waarop die hele Suid-Afrika trots kan wees as in ag geneem word
       dat die Universiteit van Stellenbosch se Bestuurskool die enigste in
       Afrika en een van net twee bestuurskole buite Europa is wat by die
       Stigting geakkrediteer is.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I move:


  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates the postgraduate Business School of the University of
       Stellenbosch on its accreditation with the European Foundation for
       Management Development; and


  (2) notes that this international recognition is an achievement of which
       the whole of South Africa can be proud when it is considered that the
       University of Stellenbosch Business School is the only one in Africa
       and one of only two schools of business outside Europe to be
       accredited with the Foundation.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  CONDOLENCES TO FAMILIES AND FRIENDS OF BUS ACCIDENT VICTIMS AND DENA RAST
                                 NÉÉ FERROW

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr E A CONROY: Madam Chair, I move without notice, on behalf of the New NP:


  That the Council -


  (1) expresses its condolences to the friends and family of eight persons
       who have died in the tragic bus accident at Mossel Bay on 24 March,
       and wishes a speedy and complete recovery to the 42 persons who were
       injured in the same accident; and


  (2) also expresses its condolences to the husband, young son, friends and
       family of Dena Rast néé Ferrow, who was brutally murdered in a
       senseless assault on her at their estate near Johannesburg on 10
       March of this year.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Sabelo Simelane)

Mr G A LUCAS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with sadness the tragedy that befell the grandson of one of our
       country's eminent sporting heroes;


  (2) notes that five-year-old Sabelo Simelane, grandson of former World
       Boxing Council champion Sugarboy Malinga, tragically died in a fire
       at his grandparents' home; and


  (3) wishes to convey its deepest sympathy to the parents and grandparents
       of Sabelo.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   RETURN OF LAND TO BATHLAPING COMMUNITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the historic signing over of more than 28 000 hectares of land
       to the Bathlaping community of the Northern Cape who were
       dispossessed of their land in 1968;


  (2) commends the Ministers for Agriculture and Land Affairs and of
       Defence for their decision to transfer legal ownership of the land to
       its rightful owners; and


  (3) wishes to assure all those people and communities who had been
       dispossessed of their land that this Government will not be deterred
       in its effort to restore their rightful ownership.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                      ASSAULT BY FARMER ON YOUNG GIRLS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D M KGWARE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) expresses its shock at the barbaric assault on two young girls (aged
       10 and 11, respectively) at the hands of an East Rand farmer for
       allegedly stealing a few mealies;


  (2) is of the opinion that this assault constitutes a serious criminal
       offence; and


  (3) therefore calls on the Child Protection Unit and the Director of
       Public Prosecutions to spare no effort in their investigation into
       this farmer's conduct.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   ILLEGAL OCCUPATION OF FARMS IN ZIMBABWE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr P A MATTHEE: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem -


       (a)  van die ernstige situasie wat in ons buurstaat Zimbabwe
           ontwikkel het ten opsigte van die onwettige besetting van plase
           van blanke boere;


       (b)  dat die polisie van Zimbabwe weier om gehoor en uitvoering ...
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the serious situation which has developed in our neighbouring
           country Zimbabwe with regard to the illegal occupation of the
           farms of white farmers;


       (b)  that the police of Zimbabwe refuse to adhere to and execute ...]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! You are moving that motion without
notice?

Mr P A MATTHEE: Yes, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We have just had notice of a motion on
a similar subject.

Mr P A MATTHEE: Can I therefore not proceed?
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Essentially, the Rules state that no motion on
a similar subject can be moved. If one tables notice of a motion, one is in
fact moving that motion in terms of the conventional definition. I
therefore cannot allow a similar subject at this point.

    EXTENSION OF PERIOD OF OPERATION OF CERTAIN SECTIONS OF CRIMINAL LAW
                                AMENDMENT ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the Council gives its consent that the President by proclamation in
  the Gazette extend the period of operation of sections 51 and 52 of the
  Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1997 (Act No 105 of 1997), in terms of
  section 53(2) of the said Act for a further period of one year, with
  effect from 1 May 2000.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution (Free
State abstained).
                   FINANCIAL SERVICES BOARD AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Chair and hon members, the world we
live in today, the so-called global village, has seen a proliferation of
financial services and institutions of all types. In fact, these account
for major transactions and flows of capital which have a large impact on
the direction of economic activity globally.

Thus, it becomes important to ensure that our regulatory regime can cope
with the dynamism of today's world, while at the same time protecting our
people's interests. These particular amendments are not of major
consequence, but serve to clarify certain aspects of the principal Act and
to regularise, through legislation, certain practices.

Firstly, through these amendments we create a hierarchy of decision-making
that clarifies the relationship between the board and the executive of the
FSB. Secondly, we seek to describe more simply and clearly the functions of
the board, so that instead of supervising the exercise of control, the
board will supervise compliance with laws regulating financial institutions
and the provision of financial services. Thirdly, the FSB will now, as part
of its work, engage in consumer education which is particularly important
in the South African historical context of inequitable access to
information, financial institutions and markets generally. Fourthly, the
amendments relieve the President of the function that relates to the
appointment of members of the board, which is now to be exercised by the
Minister of Finance, as the FSB falls under him and as he already exercises
other functions such as the appointment of the executive of the FSB and
members of the board of appeal. Fifthly, we expand the representation of
the executive committee to include administration and finance.

We also make it obligatory for consultation with the financial services
industry before imposing levies through which the FSB activities are
funded. Other amendments do the following: they streamline procedures that
relate to consultation between the Minister of Finance and the board and
the executive. They also relax the secrecy provision of the FSB somewhat by
making it possible for it to exchange information with other local
regulators and self-regulatory bodies and to assist foreign regulatory and
supervisory authorities, provided that it is not against the public
interest. They also redefine limitation of the FSB's liability incurred in
the course of the performance of its functions to make it clear that gross
negligence will not be tolerated. We also regulate, through these
amendments, the use of the logo of the FSB.

Importantly, however, we make changes to the composition of the board of
appeal. Previously, one member of the FSB board needed to serve on the
board of appeal.

We have seen this as possibly in conflict with the Constitution, in that
the board member may have been directly or indirectly a party to a decision
on which an appeal has been noted. The board of appeal will now be
constituted by a lawyer, an accountant and a party acquainted with the
financial services industry, all of them having wide experience and expert
knowledge of their fields of expertise.

Provision is also made for alternate members to be appointed to each of the
members of the board of appeal, as well as the co-option of an assessor to
assist the board if that should be deemed necessary. The noting of an
appeal will not have the effect of suspending the registrar's decision,
with the proviso that the board of appeal may on the application of an
interested party, direct otherwise. Possible orders which the board of
appeal may issue have been extended to include a referral back to the
registrar, as well as an order of costs in accordance with the procedures
of the High Court. These are all the amendments that we are effecting to
this Bill, through which we really intend to improve the legislation.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, before we proceed, I would
like to note the return of Boyce Willem. He is back in his seat, and we
welcome him back to the House after a long period of recuperation following
a car accident. We are very pleased that you are back, safe and sound, hon
member. [Applause.]

I also note that our next speaker, Ms Mahlangu, was in fact herself
involved in an accident recently, if I am not incorrect. I urge all members
to really ensure that we drive safely and really take care on the road. We
are glad, hon member, that you are safe.

Ms Q D MAHLANGU: Chairperson, I think your remarks are really welcomed, but
I also think that the Arrive Alive Campaign must also make sure that other
motorists drive safely on the roads, so that they should not cause
accidents and create problems for people like me.

Deputy Minister of Finance and hon members of this august house, the
Financial Services Board Amendment Bill seeks to bring technical amendments
which are of a substantive nature to the principal Act. The Financial
Services Board is an independent statutory body established by an Act of
Parliament, namely the Financial Services Board Act, 97 of 1990. The board
supervises the South African nonbanking financial sector, which, amongst
others, includes insurance companies, asset management and so on.

The Financial Services Board's mission is to promote sound, efficient
financial institutions and services, together with mechanisms for investor
protection. The Financial Services Board is accountable to the Minister of
Finance. The purpose of the Bill before us is to correct and improve
various aspects of the Financial Services Board, its structure and its
functioning - to correct various provisions and delete others.
The existing Act uses words like ``supervision'' and ``supervise'' on a
number of occasions to describe the relationship between the executive
officer and the Financial Services Board. This implies that the board
controls the activities of the executive officer. The executive officer is
also the registrar in terms of the regulatory laws, which imposes
obligations on the executive officer as the registrar.

The present Act implies that the board has to approve all decisions made by
the executive officer. In this light the approach adopted by the Bill we
are seeking to approve today is that words like ``supervise'' and
``supervision'' should refer to three tiers of decision-making, as the
Deputy Minister has indicated.

This being the first level of significant decisions which the board has to
approve, the second level of decision-making is where the executive officer
must make decisions within guidelines set by the board. The third level -
which is of less significant decisions - is where the executive officer can
make his or her decisions without any consultation. Since the board cannot
confirm every minute decision, the separation of decisions into various
categories allow for significant decisions to be taken under close
supervision, less significant decisions to be taken within guidelines and
routine decisions to be taken freely without any consultation again.

Secondly, section 3 of the current Act states that the board should
exercise control, in terms of any law, over the activities of the financial
institutions and over financial services. This is not correct as the board
does not exercise such control. The Bill before us is trying to state
unambiguously that the board is to supervise the compliance, within the
financial regulatory laws, of those parties to whom these laws apply.

The committee had a very lengthy discussion over one of the new functions
of the board, that is, investor education. The committee was very happy
with the inclusion of investor education. This will help ordinary people to
know and understand which products they are getting themselves into and
what services they are entitled to as ordinary South African citizens as it
relates to their investments and other things. We also welcome the idea of
the helpline because it is also going to help people to be further able to
consult the Financial Services Board from time to time. The existing Act
also prescribes that the President appoints a member of the board. The
Deputy Minister has spoken about the issue that it was an unnecessary
burden on the President. Therefore the Bill seeks to make sure that the
Minister of Finance performs this function.

Lastly, in terms of the present Act, the board has the right to impose
levies on financial institutions and it is not required to adopt a
consultative approach in this regard. But the Bill before us today provides
for a compulsory consultative process prior to imposing levies if this is
necessary. This is in line with upholding the democratic values and
principles of our Constitution that are giving people the right to comment
on issues that will affect them such as the imposition of levies and so
forth. Therefore the select committee is convinced that the Bill and the
amendments that are brought before us are correct, and we ask that the
House supports the Bill.

Dr E A CONROY: Mevrou die Voorsitter, Adjunkminister en agb lede, die Raad
op Finansiële Dienste is 'n onafhanklike statutêre instelling wat ingevolge
die Wet op die Raad op Finansiële Dienste van 1990 gestig is om toesig te
hou oor die Suid-Afrikaanse finansiële dienstebedryf buite die banksektor.
Die raad, wat verantwoordbaar is aan die Minister van Finansies, is reeds
die afgelope nege jaar in werking, en het in dié tyd plaaslik en
internasionaal respek verdien vir die rol wat hy in die gladde,
doeltreffende en mededingende finansiële dienstebedryf speel.

Sedert 1990 het dit egter nodig geword om sekere wysigings aan die wet aan
te bring. Die voorgestelde wysigings is tegnies en nie van besondere
gewigtige aard nie, en is hoofsaaklik gerig op die opheldering van sekere
van die hoofwet se aspekte wat daagliks in die raad se werksaamhede ter
sprake kom.

As voorbeeld kan genoem word dat die woorde ``toesig'' en ``toesig hou'' op
verskeie plekke in die wet gebruik word, en aangesien daar in die gemenereg
'n bepaalde betekenis aan dié woorde geheg word, sou dit vertolk kon word
as sou die raad die uitvoerende beampte se werksaamhede beheer en al sy
beslissings moet goedkeur.

In hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp word die woorde ``toesig'' en ``om toesig
te hou'' omskryf om te verwys na betekenisvolle beslissings wat die raad
moet goedkeur, na beslissings wat die uitvoerende beampte moet neem binne
die riglyne wat deur die raad gestel word en na minder betekenisvolle
beslissings wat die uitvoerende beampte self kan neem.

Nog 'n belangrike wysiging wat ingevoer word, is 'n nuwe funksie, naamlik
die bevordering van finansiële instellings se programme en inisiatiewe wat
op die opvoeding van verbruikers gerig is. Hierdie ontwikkeling, wat in die
toekoms 'n hoë voorkeur in die raad se werksaamhede sal geniet, word wyd
verwelkom.

Die wysiging waarvolgens die President se funksie by die keuring en
aanstelling van die lede van die raad na die Minister van Finansies
verskuif word, is reeds vroeër deur die Nuwe NP bevraagteken, alhoewel dit
slegs semanties is aangesien effektiewe beheer oor die aanstellings reeds
vir alle praktiese doeleindes in die hande van die Minister van Finansies
is.

Dit is egter 'n saak van beginsel aangesien vele kundige persone wat met
groot vrug in die raad sou kon dien, deur hierdie wysiging daarvan weerhou
sal word om hulle vir hierdie diens beskikbaar te stel aangesien hulle
maatskappye se aktes van oprigting politieke betrokkenheid verbied, en 'n
aanstelling deur 'n Minister as politieke betrokkenheid beskou kan word.

Die President daarenteen is die staatshoof, en aanstellings deur hom geniet
hoë status en kan kwalik deur enigeen geweier word. Dit sal trouens met
groot eer aanvaar word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr E A CONROY: Madam Chairperson, Deputy Minister and hon members, the
Financial Services Board is an independent, statutory institution which was
established in terms of the Financial Services Board Act of 1990 to
supervise the South African financial services industry outside the banking
sector. The board, who is accountable to the Minister of Finance, has been
operational for the past nine years, and has in this time earned local and
international respect for the role it plays in the smooth, efficient and
competitive financial services industry.

However, since 1990 it has become necessary to effect certain amendments to
the Act. The proposed amendments are technical and not particularly
significant, and are primarily aimed at the clarification of certain
aspects of the principal Act which are at issue daily in the deliberations
of the board.

An example would be the words ``supervision'' and ``supervise'' which are
used in several places in the Act, and since these words have a specific
meaning in common law, they could be interpreted as meaning that the board
controls the functions of the executive officer and must approve all his
decisions.

In this amending Bill the words ``supervision'' and ``supervise'' are
defined as referring to significant decisions that the board must approve,
decisions that the executive officer has to make in accordance with the
guidelines set by the board and less significant decisions which the
executive officer may make on his own.

Another important amendment which has been introduced is a new function,
namely the promotion of financial institutions' programmes and initiatives
aimed at the education of consumers. This development, which will enjoy a
high priority in the future functions of the board, is widely welcomed.

The amendment according to which the function of the President concerning
the selection and appointment of the members of the board is shifted to the
Minister of Finance, has already been questioned by the New NP, although it
is a question of semantics, because efficient control of the appointments
already rests, to all intents and purposes, in the hands of the Minister of
Finance.

However, it is a matter of principle, because many experts who could have
been a great asset to this board, will be prevented by this amendment from
making themselves available for this service, because their companies'
memorandums of association forbid involvement in politics, and an
appointment by a Minister could be considered to be involvement in
politics. On the other hand, the President is the head of state, and
appointments by him enjoy high status and can hardly be refused by anyone.
As a matter of fact, it will be accepted with honour.]

Furthermore, the number of members of the executive is being expanded, a
process of consultation with the industry before levies for the funding of
the financial services industry are proclaimed is being introduced, a new
clause is being inserted to streamline the procedures for continual
consultation with the Minister, the FSB secrecy provision is slightly
extended to enable it to exchange information with other local regulators
and self-regulatory bodies and the limitation of the FSB's liability
incurred in the execution of its functions is being redefined to make it
clear that gross negligence will not be excused.

The Bill has no organisational, human resources or financial implications
for the state and is, despite the reservations mentioned earlier in respect
of the appointment of board members, supported by the New NP.

Mr J L THERON: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and hon colleagues, at the
outset, I want to state categorically that the DP supports this Bill. To us
in the DP good supervision of the financial sector is of critical
importance and therefore we support this Bill.

The Financial Services Board Amendment Bill deals primarily with a large
number of technical amendments applicable to the operations of the
Financial Services Board. Improving the operations of the Financial
Services Board could only be positive and therefore we support these
improvements. The Financial Services Board, or the FSB, as it is commonly
known, plays an oversight role in respect of participants in the financial
services industry other than banks or mutual banks, which are controlled by
the Banks Act, Act 94 of 1990, or the Mutual Banks Act, Act 124 of 1993.

The oversight roles that the FSB has over insurance and investment
companies are of critical importance to the ordinary man in the street. We
all have short-term and long-term insurance and we all invest in our
pension schemes. We trust that the FSB will ensure that our financial
investments will be financially well managed for our long-term wellbeing.

The most important issues of the Financial Services Board Amendment Bill
are covered in clauses 1 and 2 of the Bill and relate to the refining of
the nature of the supervision which the board has to carry out. There was
uncertainty as to the precise nature of the supervision required, which was
highlighted by some court judgments.

There are some bodies which are not happy because they believe that the
board, as a whole, may take over the many functions currently performed by
the registrar as designated in a number of the Acts governing the financial
services industry. In practice, however, the executive officer of the
Financial Services Board is also the registrar in terms of the various
Acts, and it does not therefore seem illogical that he or she should have
guidelines laid down by the Financial Services Board. The amendments with
regard to the supervision were supported by all the parties in the select
committee and we also support these supervisory aspects.

The new three-tier approach to decisions is also welcomed by the DP. At the
first level, that of significant decisions, the board has to approve the
decisions. At the second level, the executive officer makes decisions
within guidelines set by the board. At the third level, that of less
significant decisions, the executive officer can make his or her own
decisions.

'n Verdere belangrike aspek van die nuwe Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Raad
op Finansiële Dienste vind ons in klousule 2 van die wysigingswetsontwerp,
wat die volgende paragraaf by artikel 3 van die hoofwet invoeg:


  Die werksaamhede van die raad is om -


     Programme en inisiatiewe deur finansiële instellings en liggame wat die
     finansiële dienstebedryf verteenwoordig om gebruikers en potensiële
     gebruikers van finansiële produkte en dienste in te lig en voor te lig,
     te bevorder.

Hierdie is nuwe inisiatiewe waaroor die DP verheug is. Ons sien baie uit na
hierdie programme en inisiatiewe wat die raad kan loods om verbruikers in
te lig. Vandag is dit uiters noodsaaklik vir enige organisasie om
verbruikersvriendelik te wees, en hierdie is 'n positiewe ontwikkeling.

Hierdie aspek is ook bespreek in die gekose komitee en ek het toe reeds
lede van die raad wat daar was daarop gewys dat dit nie nodig is om die
wiel weer te herontwerp nie. Baie universiteite en technikons bied reeds
programme in hierdie verband aan wat van groot hulp kan wees om hierdie
programme en inisiatiewe te steun.

Dit sal vir die gebruikers van hierdie produkte en dienste van onskatbare
waarde wees om baie goed ingelig te word voordat enige geld belê word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[A further important aspect of the new Financial Services Board Amendment
Bill is to be found in clause 2 of the amending Bill, which inserts the
following paragraph into section 3 of the principal Act:


  The functions of the board are to -


  (c) Promote programmes and initiatives by financial institutions and
       bodies representing the financial services industry to inform and
       educate users and potential users of financial products and services.

These are new initiatives about which the DP are delighted. We are very
much looking forward to these programmes and initiatives that can be
launched by the board to inform consumers. Today it is absolutely essential
for any organisation to be consumer-friendly, and this is a positive
development.

This aspect was also discussed in the Select Committee and already at that
stage I pointed out to members of the board who were present that it was
not necessary to reinvent the wheel. Many universities and technikons are
already presenting programmes in this regard, which can be of great
assistance in supporting these programmes and initiatives. It will be
invaluable to the users of these products and services to be very well
informed before any money is invested.]

In conclusion, as hon members could have deduced by now, the DP feels
positive about this legislation and therefore we support it. We will
definitely take part in the oversight role that we have over these bodies
and hope to play a positive role to ensure that the consumers out there
will get good financial products and services to ensure them a good and
prosperous future. [Interjections.]

Mr G A LUCAS: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister of Finance, hon permanent
delegates of this House and all special delegates who are here today,
before I start, I wish to indicate that it is the first time that all
parties have agreed, without any reservations, to all the amendments that
we have made thus far. I think it is good and commendable on their part to
at least acknowledge that there is some good in what we are doing.

Act 97 of 1990 states that the Financial Services Board must regulate and
supervise the South African nonbanking financial services industry. This,
by its very definition, is a mammoth task for a statutory body like the
FSB. It is an important task which the FSB must carry out with diligence,
honesty, fairness and, above all, integrity. Those responsibilities which
fall within the ambit of the FSB contribute in a major way to our country's
economy, thus also playing an important role in the economic growth and
sustainable development of our country, which is the agenda that we have
set for ourselves.

It is also important to know that, through the Financial Services Board's
daily operations, we can either build or destroy investor confidence in our
country and therefore it requires from us as public representatives to
ensure that the FSB is above corrupt practices and other matters which
might affect the FSB negatively.

The regulatory functions of the FSB as entrusted to the registrars of
insurance, friendly societies, pension funds, unit trust companies, stock
exchange and financial markets are an indication of the importance of the
existence of such a body as the FSB to ensure that there is fair and honest
competitiveness within these institutions.

Concerning the amendments themselves, I am particularly pleased that the
Bill before us makes the promotion of investor education obligatory for the
Financial Services Board. We, as members of this House, conveyed the
concerns and interests of our constituencies when scrutinising this Bill.
Our constituencies feel helpless when it comes to dealing with financial
institutions, especially those in the nonbanking sector such as the long-
term insurance industry and the stock exchange. This is not surprising, as
a large percentage of our population is illiterate and the intricacies of
investments and share trading confuse even the most educated members of our
communities.

Therefore the protection of individuals from fraudulent insurance
salespeople, fund managers and unethical insurance brokers is also a
mandate of the Financial Services Board. We, as members of this House, view
the education of the public about the proper conduct of financial
institutions as being very central to the objectives of our national
Constitution.

Other objectives of the Bill are that provisions with regard to the pension
rights of officers and employees that were transferred from the Public
Service to the Financial Services Board are repealed as they are no longer
necessary. The secrecy provision regarding information obtained by the
Financial Services Board is relaxed so as to allow the Financial Services
Board to provide information and assistance to other regulatory
authorities, local as well as abroad. This clause, together with the
provision on indemnity in respect of performance of functions by certain
persons and bodies, will aid our campaign against money laundering and
corruption, and facilitate the implementation of the Insider Trading Act,
which was passed by the previous Parliament.

This Act makes it illegal to profit from any information on the trading of
shares on the stock exchange which is not available to the public. The work
currently done by the Financial Services Board with regard to prosecuting
beneficiaries of insider information and/or compensating victims of insider
information is commendable and unprecedented in the history of share
trading in this country.

The Financial Services Board Amendment Bill before this House enjoys the
support of the ANC because we are convinced that the functions of the
Financial Services Board will be enhanced through these amendments.

I wish to inform the House that the ANC wholeheartedly supports the
amendments as presented before the House.

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, may I say that I agree very much with the hon
member who has just sat down in his comments - hich were also raised by the
chairperson of the select committee - on the whole question of investor
education. Nothing can, in the long term, be more important to our economic
future than that kind of effort, not only there, but elsewhere in society.

I wish to refer to clause 3 of the Constitution - and I am glad that the
New NP feels the same as we do: We feel that the situation where the
Minister replaces the President in appointing the Financial Services Board
is wrong. It is far more than being purely technical, as it is pretended
that the Minister does it anyway. We know how it works: Ministers do make
recommendations, but we believe it to be a mistake for several reasons.

Firstly, the board members will be seen as placemen for the Minister -
which, indeed, they will be. Secondly, the presidential appointments carry
much more weight and can, therefore, attract a far higher calibre of
person. The people themselves will be and will feel more independent when
differences arise with the Ministry. By allowing the Minister to appoint
the board, the legislation Finlandises the board.

I know many companies - and have been on the Board of some of them - where
the very senior people in the company will not accept a ministerial
appointment, but will only accept a presidential appointment. The more
junior people will then go to the ministerial appointments further down the
line and other appointments to various statutory bodies.

The Financial Services Board is one that should be rigorous, independent
and have the highest calibre of person serving on  it. Indeed, as I have
said that some companies will not allow a person to serve because when one
accepts a ministerial appointment, it is taken as a political appointment
whereas if it is a presidential one, it is seen as nonpolitical. This is
because the President appoints people wearing two hats, one for political
and the other for nonpolitical appointments. So, there are companies which
are precluded from accepting such appointments.

The second thing I would like to raise with the Minister is the question -
which I am disappointed about, and was mentioned in his speech - of
ombudsman for the financial services sector. It is an urgent priority that
such an ombudsman should be appointed and, in my view, have statutory
powers. We should be doing something about it, particularly now that the
banks are moving into microlending - Standard Bank has just bought a
microlending company meaning that it is moving into microlending and the
other big banks will probably move in that direction as well. I am very
pleased that they are, because some people in the microlending industry
should not be in the business at all. The industry will have to be far more
responsible as the big banks get involved.

But the need for an ombudsman is clear, because it will save millions in
legal costs - the ombudsman could be funded by the industry itself. This
will allow problems to be dealt with quickly, fairly and inexpensively, and
there are no financial implications for the state. I really would ask the
Minister, if he is not already doing so, to give it his urgent attention.

I also want to raise the question of microlending, which again affects the
Financial Services Board directly. This microlending industry frightens me.
I sat in my car in my village where I live, and watched people going into a
microlending agency. I know the people - shepherds; simple and fine people.
These people are like putty in the hands of microlenders, who take their
IDs and whatever surety these poor people can offer.

The excellent name which our financial services sector has built in South
Africa over a hundred years and longer is being squandered by these loan
sharks that we very often find in these villages.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your time is up. In fact,
I gave you an extra five seconds because you were talking about something
of very great importance.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Chair, I would like to thank all hon
members for supporting the Bill that we are dealing with.
I must say that I am sorry that I may not have heard some of the concerns
that were raised by Dr Conroy, because I was battling with the hearing aid,
as he was speaking Afrikaans. Therefore, I may have missed some of the
concerns that he has raised.

On the question of the role of the Minister of Finance, raised by Mr Durr,
I would imagine that if we hold the Minister of Finance accountable, we
have to give some role to the Ministry in terms of determining the area
over which he has responsibility. He also has some role in determining who
are the people who play a role in the institutions that carry out work on
behalf of the Minister of Finance. I am sure that, in the environment that
exists in South Africa today, we should not particularly be harbouring
worries about people appointed by a Minister not being able to differ with
the views of the Minister. Therefore, I believe that this is really a
matter that enables the streamlining of all the work that is involved in
putting together all the structures of the Financial Services Board.

I take the points Mr Durr raised concerning the question of an ombudsman
for the financial services sector, and I hope it is something over which we
will, perhaps, someday come back to in the House, because at the moment I
am not certain what sort of work is being done in that regard. However, one
will hope that, in due course, we can, perhaps, come back to the House and
give an indication of what direction we are moving in.

On the question of microlenders, of which I am very sorry that he could not
finish his point, that is really a matter of critical concern. In a sense,
it is an anomaly of the South African society. It is a combination of many
things. It is a reflection of our history and of our past, where access to
financial services was a problem. But it is also a reflection of the
current economic situation in our country. We are undergoing major changes
in the economy, and these are exerting various pressures on people's
incomes, and so on. But, indeed, it is a serious issue. The conduct of a
... [Interjections.]

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, can I ask the Deputy Minister a question?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Are you prepared to answer a
question, hon Deputy Minister?

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Yes, Madam Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Yes, hon member, you can ask the
Deputy Minister a question.

Mr K D S DURR: I just want to say to the Minister that had I been able to
complete my speech, I would have said that. However, is he of the opinion
that the control of the Usury Act and microlending should be transferred
from the Department of Trade and Industry to the more appropriate Financial
Services Board? For a start, with the Standard Bank, for example, entering
microlending, one is going to have dual control. The Financial Services
Board are going to be regulating some aspects of their businesses, and
Trade and Industry the others.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! You were supposed to ask a question,
and not to make a speech.

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Madam Chair, yes, that is a fair question. Mr Durr
should know that there are a number of areas where one finds that
regulation in South Africa is actually scattered over a number of different
departments. This creates a problem. One of the debates that are going on
at the moment is about how we can try to consolidate regulation. Of course,
one of the debates that are taking place is whether we should not establish
what one can call a super-regulator! In other words, establish a
comprehensive and consolidated regulatory board or authority, which will
resort under one department.

Currently we have some regulatory bodies accountable to the Department of
Trade and Industry and the Department of Finance, and others to the Reserve
Bank. So there is a debate that is going on around consolidation. It is an
ongoing debate amongst Finance, Trade and Industry, the FSB and the SA
Reserve Bank, and I am sure that in due course, that is once we have taken
those discussions to a certain point, we will be able to inform the House
as to the direction in which we are moving.

This was really to make the point that the question of microlenders is a
matter of great concern, and we hope that we can, at least, remove some of
the negative aspects of the microlending industry.

Of course, Mr Durr is correct when he says that banks are actually moving
into the microlending sector. I think Absa was the first, and I hear that
Standard Bank has also done the same. We would simply hope that this would
actually go some way in ensuring that banks themselves extend services
which previously they did not extend to certain sectors of the community.

I would like to thank all members. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Business suspended at 11:23 and resumed at 14:01.

                              Afternoon sitting

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                             (Review of Policy)

Vote No 3 - Agriculture and Vote No 20 - Land Affairs:

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Mr Chairperson, earlier on
in the day we were told that there would be two separate debates, one which
would start in the morning and the other in the afternoon. It looks as if
there have been changes. I will try to juggle the two policy speeches, and
hope that hon members will not be bored. We will try to be very exciting. I
know this House is one of those Houses that is very intimate in the way in
which it interacts with us as Ministers. Therefore all of us always look
forward to it when we are invited to the NCOP.

The President, in his address to Parliament last year, reconfirmed our
commitment to reconstruction and development of our society, a task which
can be achieved when we all work together in partnership. He further
acknowledged work done in the past five years which, in my view, remains as
a foundation for our building blocks as we reconstruct and build South
Africa. One of the challenges we therefore all face is to improve the
quality of life of all South Africans, particularly for those who were
disenfranchised by the apartheid government.

In executing our task, we are always mindful that, as South Africans, we do
not move from the principle of working towards a levelled playing field.
Through this budget debate, therefore, it is my hope that we will highlight
those critical issues at the interface of national and provincial
governance that need to be addressed through the allocation of budgetary
resources to benefit the entire South African nation.

Today we will debate the Budget Votes of both the Department of Agriculture
and the Department of Land Affairs. I will start, however, with the Budget
Vote on Agriculture, Vote No 3. The challenge for Government in terms of
developing South African agriculture remains the need to deracialise the
sector and to promote and support economic growth, as well as to ensure
that, in our pursuit of these policies, we attain a better life for our
people, and continuously nurture our natural resources.

This was well articulated by the ANC in 1994 when we ushered in our new
democracy, particularly through the Reconstruction and Development
Programme. Various initiatives to respond to the legacy of apartheid were
put in place, and now, almost six years later, we are beginning to see the
results of those interventions.

One key initiative was the effort to broaden access to agricultural
services, particularly for those who did not have it before. As an outcome
of that process, we identified the constraints faced by disadvantaged
farmers, prioritised their concerns and developed new instruments for
information dissemination amongst farmers.

Important in this context of the new South Africa is the range of
initiatives aimed at creating a culture of inclusivity in the industry. We
now no longer find it strange, as it would have been before, to find black
people, young people and women playing an active role in the agricultural
economy. On another level, our chaste approach to the conservation of our
natural resources has resulted in our people taking responsibility for
caring for the soil and water and the biodiversity that we have.

One such programme is our land care programme. The land care programme thus
remains a flagship programme for the Ministry. The aim of this programme is
to have communities and individuals adopt an ecologically sustainable
approach to the management of South Africa's environment and natural
resources while improving their livelihood.

This implies that cultivation, livestock grazing and harvesting of natural
resources will be managed in such a manner that the degradation of our
soil, nutrient loss and loss of components of the vegetation, as well as
the increased run-off water, are curtailed. The consequences of this will
be the opportunity for smallholder farmers and resource-constrained farmers
to improve the quality of these natural resources, and to improve
productivity per unit of land.

I must say here that one of the setbacks that we have started to realise,
particularly in those provinces that were badly hit by the floods, is that
in many instances we are starting to see some degradation and soil erosion.
Our challenge, therefore, as part as the reconstruction after the floods,
will be to ensure that we put this natural base that we have, the land, to
good use and improve it for today's, as well as for tomorrow's,
generations.

The consequences of this will be the opportunity for smallholder farmers
and resource-constrained farmers to improve the quality of these natural
resources and improve productivity per unit of land. Through the
implementation of this programme we have also developed synergies with
other international partners and citizens. Of note is the relationship we
have with the Australian government and its people. We are continually
building up institutional capacity at national and provincial levels in
order to grow and sustain our land care programme. This is one of the
programmes that we are working at together with our provincial departments
of agriculture. On the whole, and taking into consideration where we come
from, we have made remarkable progress.

The initiative confirms for us the seriousness with which we view the role
of agriculture in building a strong economy. The challenge is to work for
increases in production and incomes at the farm level in order to provide
the necessary stimulus for the development of the economy.

One of the realities of South Africa is that most black farmers, whether
small-scale or not, have limited access to land and capital, and have
received inadequate or inappropriate research extension and marketing
support. This has constrained their ability to grow, and is a direct result
of the legacy of apartheid and the history of land dispossession. This, in
turn, has resulted in an undue reliance, to a greater or lesser extent, on
subsistence production.

The truth of the matter is that black farmers are not exclusively small,
neither would it be correct to limit the definition of small-scale or
subsistence farmers to those who are black. Small-scale farmers in South
Africa, we know, can be anyone, black or white. Given the South African
experience of subjectivity linked to the use of the term ``small-scale'',
we have resolved to deal with all farmers, recognising that they operate on
farms of different sizes.

What is of essence now is that small-scale enterprises can be made
commercially viable. What remains is to finalise the characterisation of
small, medium and large-scale farming, using the combination of size
holding and its capacity to generate income. Those members who are aware of
the ecological situation in the country, may find that that which is small
in the Northern Cape, may actually not be the same size as one's small-
scale farm in KwaZulu-Natal, because of the difference in local vegetation
in those areas.

Nonetheless, I wish to reiterate that the challenge facing us in this
second democracy with regard to deracialisation of the sector is to ensure
that we increase the participation of those who were previously
disadvantaged.

In order to achieve our Government's objectives of black empowerment and
poverty eradication, policies will therefore address problems faced by
black farmers in general, and resource-poor farmers in particular. Together
with the MECs of Agriculture and Land Affairs in the various provinces, we
agreed on several priorities last year for agriculture. Those priorities
include a farmer settlement programme, extension services and improved
trade promotion. There are many others.

I would like to say that one of the important priorities we all recognise
as essential for agriculture, whether on a small or large scale, is that of
human resource development and capacity-building in the form of farmer
training, and the development of institutions in order to allow us to
improve our advisory services as well as our technological transfer. I must
say these issues are also critical if we were to look at the role that our
different colleges have to play in the various provinces.

Other priority areas which we as the agricultural leadership in Government
will be paying attention to is the development of policies and programmes
on food security, as well as on infrastructure development. This will be
pursued within the framework of the agricultural growth agenda, as well as
in support of the integrated rural development strategy announced by the
President in his address to Parliament. This House will realise that one of
the constraints that farmers face, whether they be small or large when it
comes to infrastructure, is that South Africa's rural roads are not in good
shape, and therefore this has an impact not just on how one interests one's
input suppliers in those areas, but also on how one accesses markets in
return.

It is on this basis that we have explored with Public Works ways in which
we can draw on their resources to improve rural roads in order to enable
agriculture to thrive in those areas. Working with the provinces and other
Government departments as a national department and in order to consolidate
those efforts, we will work continually to strengthen co-ordination between
national and provincial departments in order to ensure that we treat
agriculture as a system, and not as diverse activities. Critical in this
process will be bringing the planning and implementation in the restitution
and redistribution process in the Department of Land Affairs, and financial
support programmes of the Land Bank, the National Marketing Council and the
Agricultural Research Council into alignment with our national focus areas.

Furthermore, we will build on existing co-operation arrangements that exist
with other departments and provincial departments of agriculture and launch
joint programmes in rural areas. Some examples of these are the initiative
of restructuring the irrigation systems in the northern and eastern
provinces. Linked to this initiative is a rethink about how we as
Government can facilitate the development of production and marketing
infrastructure, particularly in the ex-homeland areas.

Our view is to change those white elephants into black elephants that can
move and walk. I am currently engaged in discussion with other line-
function Ministers nationally and with the MECs in the provinces,
particularly those of transport and public works, as well as minerals and
energy, because as much as infrastructure such as roads is critical, energy
sources are also important for agricultural development.

We do realise that our rural community is still dependent on land for
production purposes and for food security. Therefore our contribution as a
department, when we work with other departments in looking at the rural
development strategy, is to define what should be the role of agriculture
in this regard. The challenges of rural development are complex, and we
have adopted a strong geographic focus in the strategy that we believe
should go a long way in unlocking economic potential, supporting social
development and creating synergy in Government programmes.

For agriculture, our targeted intervention is in the form of the special
food security programme, which is designed to improve household food
security among the resource-poor in rural and peri-urban areas.

The special food security programme will, through a series of well-designed
pilot activities, demonstrate that the rapid and significant increases in
food production and household incomes could be achieved. It will identify
additional constraints on increased food production and assist in
developing a consolidated approach and investment programme in order to
increase national agricultural production.

In direct response to the challenge to the growth of our economy, we held
an agricultural indaba in October last year with the aim of establishing an
annual forum for dialogue between Government, farmers, labour and other
interested stakeholders in order to deliberate on those issues which are
critical for the sustainable development of the sector. There was general
agreement that the overarching challenge facing us all is that in order to
create a sector that is viable, we need to improve the competitiveness in
this industry. The intention is to promote economic growth and create more
jobs, because failure to do so will result in the destruction of domestic
industries by foreign competitors.

We have since engaged with the stakeholders about the constraints on
competitiveness, productivity and informal dissemination. One such workshop
will take place between our department and the grain producers of South
Africa at a meeting on 18 and 19 April. We will be looking closely at the
grain industry of South Africa to see, firstly, what issues we need to deal
with together; secondly, what constraints we need to remove; and thirdly,
what sacrifices we may need to make in order to ensure that this industry
becomes competitive.

It is now imperative that the country dedicate enough resources to the
gathering and proper analysis of statistics, the search for effective
policies and development strategies, the commercialisation of the
subsistence sector and interaction with other countries in order to promote
and protect our international trade interests. I am raising these things
because if we have a long-term view of where we want to take agriculture,
competitiveness becomes the key. Also, for competitiveness to occur, it
needs to be supported properly by information and proper analysis of our
own situation and that of those that we compete with.

Regarding trade facilitation, our enthusiasm to participate in the global
market is not without due regard for the inherent dangers presented by
unfair domestic support. Export subsidies and denial of access to our
products by developed countries remains one of the challenges that we face.
Our farmers can be assured of our commitment to protect them from unfair
international trading practices, through intelligence-gathering and the
institution of countervailing and antidumping measures.

I know that hon members will agree with me that growth must increasingly be
based on the ability to export products and compete on the world market. We
will therefore continue to engage the World Trade Organisation, the EU
partners and other trading partners in order to achieve this. We will
commence with efforts to increase the economic integration of the SADC
region. To beef up our capacity to transform the industry, we will need to
ensure that our resources are allocated in a manner that will ensure that
there is capacity for the promotion of a domestic market, management of
agricultural statistics, development of defensive trade measures and
promotion of international trade.

I also give the assurance that this will be done with the full appreciation
of the fact that empowerment of historically disadvantaged citizens remains
a continuous thrust of all economic programmes.

In concluding the agricultural policy statement, it is important to stress
that our objectives will only be achieved by a comprehensive, well-designed
package of policies. A long-term approach for agricultural transformation
requires a complete reorientation of skills and service delivery to
farmers, including the decentralisation of such services to the level of
local government and farmers' organisations. Market orientation became
critical in this regard.

However, in order to be effective, strategies to support farmer development
not only have to be conceptually sound and noble, but also have to be
properly capacitated.

There is therefore a need to continuously reflect on, reprioritise and co-
ordinate the budgets and activities of both the national and provincial
departments of agriculture and of our parastatal in order to give effect to
this strategy. It is my hope, therefore, that in looking at Vote No 3 on
Agriculture, we will be able to find synergy in terms of our policies and
resource allocation.

Chairperson, I know that in terms of the time allocation, I may be running
out of time, but you did tell me that I have two debates to discuss.

I now turn to a very important issue, namely the land issue, which our
Government has to deal with under this portfolio. Our promise to the
electorate, as we went to the polls in 1999, was that we would recommit
ourselves to the transformation agenda of our country. One of the
fundamental issues we still need to resolve is the inequities in terms of
land distribution and ownership patterns, which reflect our past history as
well as legislation under apartheid rule.

The President, in his state-of-the-nation address, identified poverty
alleviation, urban renewal and rural development as areas which remain a
major challenge for our country as a whole.

The portfolio of Agriculture and Land Affairs is critical to the
achievement of the Government's objective of transforming rural lives and
landscapes. This is largely because of our role in facilitating access to
land.

The land question is thus fundamental to the economic transformation
process in South Africa. The legacy of gross inequality in land ownership
continues to prevail in South Africa even after five years of democratic
rule and the introduction of major land reform programmes.

I must say that, in the past few weeks and days, we have been asked many
questions, and even given all sorts of advice on what we should tell the
government of Zimbabwe regarding how it should resolve its land reform
programme, and many other related issues. For me, one thing that has been
missing from the debate is what we should be doing in South Africa.

Many newspapers and different news media have been trying to draw us into
this debate on Zimbabwe, but none of them actually spend time reflecting on
the South African situation and asking themselves how they can make things
better for South Africa.

I am raising this point because I think it is an important matter which we
sometimes avoid. If one looks at areas such as Mpumalanga, and the Northern
Province in particular, where one still finds persecution of farmworkers
and farm dwellers, it becomes very clear that the land question in South
Africa is still one of those daunting tasks we face.

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The MINISTER: If one looks at the legislation that we have just passed to
secure tenure for farmworkers and increase publicity regarding this in
order for labour tenants to understand their rights, it becomes clear that
this is a matter that South Africa cannot continue to postpone. In my view,
and I think hon members will agree with me, the sooner we confront the land
question in South Africa, and confront it earnestly, with the aim of
resolving it and with the aim of dealing with our past and creating our
future, the better it will be. We would actually be engaged in a much more
fruitful debate than debating what Zimbabwe should do or should not do.
[Interjections.]

My own view is that land is not just an emotive issue, as others would like
us to believe, but it is a productive base for many of our people. It is
also an asset on which we can base our primary economic objectives.

In pursuit of land reform goals, our primary objective is to create and
maintain an equitable and sustainable land dispensation in support of
reconstruction, growth and development. In the past five years we have laid
the basis both in terms of legal instruments and programmes for addressing
the legacy of our past.

In my policy statement dated 11 February 2000, I clearly outlined the
following: that we continue our commitment to the Government's objective
set in the RDP document - to increase access to land, particularly
agricultural state land, for those who were previously disadvantaged.

A number of hon members will remember that in the RDP document we said we
would release 30% of farm land to those who were previously disadvantaged.
This was our ultimate objective, which we still stand by, but which we have
not been able to meet so far. However, we cannot meet this objective unless
we work together, in partnership, with those who are current landowners and
those who are aspiring to own.
I also outlined the need to accelerate the integration of the work of the
two departments within the Ministry, particularly land and agriculture, as
well as to formulate policies for the implementation of our land reform,
which continues to be our challenge. We are also saying to ourselves that
we need to consolidate and rationalise land administration laws in respect
of land reform in our country, as well as creating a system of land tenure
and statutory rights that can be understood by all.

The Budget Vote of the Department of Land Affairs represents one of the key
instruments in the delivery of our core objectives. In presenting the
Budget Vote, I will begin by indicating the achievements that have been
made, the challenges that continue to confront us and the programmes and
budgetary implications in dealing with this. Delivery under the restitution
programmes has shown steady progress. This has been reflected in the
exponential increase in the number of settled claims, from 41 claims
settled in March 1999 to the 3 919 claims which had been settled by 3 April
2000. I want to say that this is indeed an indication of how we have hit
the ground running.

To this extent, I would like to thank the regional commissioners and the
Land Claims Commission, particularly those who have worked to ensure that
we meet the deadline we set ourselves, of that 3 000 claims by 30 March. We
have actually exceeded that. The improved pace of delivery in land
restitution is becoming more evident as more claims are concluded and,
where possible, people are returning to the land. Those who do not want to
return are given their due compensation.

Recently, a restitution agreement totalling about R15 million was signed
with the Putfontein landowners in the North West, resulting in the
restoration of land to the communities that were forcibly removed. Progress
has also been made in negotiating a settlement of claims in cases such as
Pelcrown in Port Elizabeth, Schmidtsdrift in the Northern Cape, Sophiatown
in Gauteng and Paynville. We shall continue with this pace and ensure that,
as far as possible, we deal with the backlog of the claims that we still
have in the restitution process.

I must say that I am mindful of some of the difficulties that the
commissioners in the different provinces have experienced, but, also, I
think it is correct to indicate that we do realise that there were certain
problems in terms of the performance of some of the commissioners, which we
have actually resolved, as expressed by hon members from the Northern
Province and Mpumalanga. We have not been deaf to their concerns, but we
have actually acted.

In a growing number of cases, local authorities, particularly, have seen
that restitution can benefit development in their own areas. A concerted
effort has been made to increase their involvement and that of other
sectors of society to combine their efforts in bringing about the
resolution of claims and promoting reconciliation.

I would like to indicate that the case which we will be settling on Sunday,
16 April in East London, the West Bank claim, has actually been a claim on
which we have worked together with local authorities and the Department of
Housing. When those communities go back to their land, they will not just
go to a barren piece of land, but they will go back to land with
infrastructure and housing development.

This recent experience will serve as a demonstration of the fact that,
indeed, a comprehensive, well-designed and targeted land reform programme
can serve as a basis for economic transformation, social cohesion and
development.

A policy on a standard settlement offer for urban claims is now being
debated. This will allow even greater acceleration of claims delivery.

In support of the restitution process, preliminary budgets of R149,5
million for 2001 and R187,9 million for 2002 have been made available. An
amount of R100 million is due to be spent in 2000. We hope that we will be
able to live up to our standard in ensuring that these budgeted amounts
will be spent in record time.

Concerning the restitution process, priorities for the next two years will
focus on speeding up the settlement of restitution claims, reviewing the
current methods of calculating monetary value, reducing administrative
costs through closer collaboration with other relevant departments so that
we can mobilise and use available Government resources, refocusing our
efforts in settling rural claims in particular, and restructuring the
restitution process to enable the speeding up of the settlement of such
claims.

As a department we have committed ourselves to another important programme,
namely that of tenure reform. A legislative land reform programme was
initiated which integrates land reform legislation. The guiding principles
which will inform this proposed legislation are: Redistribution and land
tenure reform that is in line with the constitutional provision of
equality, in order to ensure that everybody can have a title to his or her
land; an integrated approach which links land redistribution to tenure
reform, thus providing land as well as security of tenure; the promotion of
co-operative governance and integration between the different spheres of
government and other departments; and a unitary, nonracial system of land
rights administration in South Africa. This is what we hope to achieve with
the new legislation.

Communal land is another matter we need to deal with in South Africa. I
think one of the challenges that we face is that, as a country, we still
remain - particularly at Government level, I would say - a nominee of
tribal land, where we still act as a trustee. In respect of any development
that takes place in tribal communities, Government still acts as trustee
and decides whether the community can enter into whatever form of
developmental partnership. I am sure that, as a new democracy, we will
ensure that this situation changes. However, as we review the situation, we
need to ensure that we work closer with traditional communities and their
leaders in finding a better way to retain the security of tenure of those
communities while, at the same time, allowing for development objectives to
be realised in those areas.

Groups of farmers, as well as those people who seek other forms of
development, have expressed their frustration when it comes to land in
communal areas. Because there are no statutory rights currently in place,
those communities do not have access to the financial services that any
city dweller can access. This poses a hindrance. I would say iinkosi zethu
[our chiefs] would be far more helpful in working with us to resolve the
tenure system in communal land areas. I would venture to say that, as a
woman, I hope the issue of gender equality is taken into account when
resolving this problem, particularly as we know that, in a number of our
communities, there are households led by women.
There is another important matter with regard to state land management that
I want to refer to. We agreed with our MECs that state agricultural land
will be administered by the provincial departments of agriculture, through
a power of attorney which will be given to the responsible MECs. This will
enable us to move speedily with our programmes for farmer development and
economic growth in agriculture.

It will also shorten the administrative process where decisions, which can
be taken at local level, have to go up to Pretoria to be finalised by the
Minister. I think it is important to indicate that, as part of our working
together with the Department of Agriculture, we in Land Affairs have agreed
that we will strive to ensure that young people and women are targeted as
beneficiaries when we implement a farmer settlement programme.

We will also ensure that, where possible, we endeavour to give human
resource development and capacity-building support to those who will be put
on land as new beneficiaries.

Other matters within this budget will be dealt with by the Deputy Minister
with regard to the land survey as well as the deeds and special planning.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the chairperson of the select
committee and other members for the way in which they were able to interact
with us on the budget review. We do note that the time was not enough and
it is our hope that, during this year, there will be more dynamic contact,
because they are our ears and eyes as well as being the ears and eyes of
the MECs of the provinces to ensure that we bring synergy into this
portfolio because it is one system which is not fragmented.

I would also like to thank the Deputy Minister for the support he continues
to give, as well as his leadership in the areas of his responsibilities
both in the area of land and agriculture. I thank the directors-general as
well as the officials from other parastatals who have been very useful and
who have really worked hard. I think they deserve leave because of the way
in which they have been pushed to ensure that we achieve the objectives
that we have achieved so far. [Applause.]

Mnr H G VAN RENSBURG (Wes-Kaap): Agb Voorsitter, baie dankie vir die
geleentheid om in u Raad te mag optree. Ek wil my toespraak die naam gee
van ``Landbou reik uit'', oftewel ``Agriculture reaches out'' in Engels.

Ek wil baie dankie sê aan die agb Minister, Thoko Didiza, en aan adv Dirk
du Toit vir hulle vars en nuwe benadering tot landbou. Ek wil ook dankie sê
aan my mede-LUR'e vir hulle gees van samewerking.

Landbou in hierdie provinsie skep werk vir duisende mense in die landelike
gebiede, en ons kan geklassifiseer word as een van die mees gevorderde
streke in Afrika. Dit is hoofsaaklik te danke aan die uitvoergerigtheid van
die vrugte- en wynbedryf. Ons landbou kan egter nie die inherente risiko's
van die bedryf ontwyk nie. Hiervan is die afgelope maande van brande en
rampe 'n voldonge bewys. Dít en die vinnig veranderende mark maak die
modernste tegnologie nodig om produkte en markpryse te stabiliseer.

Die Organisasie van die Verenigde Nasies oor Voedsel en Landbou is van
mening dat as ons die sukses van sommige Asiatiese en Afrikalande in ag
neem, dan behoort regerings ten minste 25% van hul begrotings aan landbou
en landelike ontwikkelingsprogramme te bestee. Ek glo minister Thoko Didiza
sal die woordjie wat ek by die Kabinet daarvoor probeer doen, waardeer.
Landbou word nog steeds beskou as die bron van ekonomiese groei in Afrika
en die grootste teenvoeter vir hongersnood en armoede. Landbou voorsien 70%
van die werkgeleenthede in Afrika suid van die Sahara.

In die Wes-Kaap se susterprovinsie Beiere word 5% van hulle begroting aan
landbou bestee, terwyl ons in die Wes-Kaap net 0,67% van ons begroting aan
landbou spandeer. Vir die volgende boekjaar, die 2000-01 boekjaar, is die
begroting landbou in die Wes-Kaap van R77,8 miljoen verhoog na R84,7
miljoen, 'n verhoging van R6,9 miljoen waarvoor ek baie dankbaar is.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr H G VAN RENSBURG (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, thank you very much
for the opportunity to speak in your House. I want to call my speech
``Agriculture reaches out''.

I want to say thank you very much to the hon the Minister, Thoko Didiza,
and Adv Dirk du Toit for their new approach to agriculture. I also want to
say thank you to my fellow MECs for their spirit of co-operation.

Agriculture in this province creates work for thousands of people in the
rural areas, and we can be classified as one of the most advanced regions
in Africa. This is mainly thanks to the export-driven fruit and wine
industry. Our agriculture cannot escape the inherent risks of the industry.
The fires and disasters in recent months are irrefutable proof of this.
This and the fast-changing market require the most modern technology in
order to stabilise products at market prices.

The food and agriculture organisation of the United Nations is of the view
that if we take the success of certain Asiatic and African countries into
consideration, governments should spend at least 25% of their budgets on
agricultural and rural development programmes. I believe that Minister
Thoko Didiza will appreciate the word that I am trying to put in with the
Cabinet in this regard. Agriculture is still regarded as being the source
of economic growth in Africa and the greatest counter to famine and
poverty. Agriculture provides for 70% of the job opportunities in Africa
south of the Sahara.

In the Western Cape's sister province, Bavaria, 5% of their budget is spent
on agriculture, while we in the Western Cape spend only 0,67% of our budget
on agriculture. The budget for the coming financial year, the 2000-2001
financial year, in the Western Cape has been increased from R77,8 million
to R84,7 million, an increase of R6,9 million, for which I am very
grateful.]

Agriculture in the Western Cape reaches out to other countries. In order to
stay at the forefront of technological developments in agriculture and thus
to stay at the top of the treadmill, we are currently in the process of
embarking on a number of joint projects with institutes from abroad. Not
only has this international experience shown that in doing so the cost of
technology development can be significantly lowered, but it will result in
the most up-to-date technology being available to our farmers.

Die doel van die wetgewing met betrekking tot produkte van oorsprong is om
'n bemagtigende en 'n vrywillige raamwerk vir landbouers te ontwikkel
waarmee hulle hul produkte kan differensieer. Op hierdie manier kan 'n paar
van die probleme van die plaasprobleem omseil word. Aangesien tradisionele
produkte grootliks aan die orde van die dag is, sal voorheen benadeelde
gemeenskappe die meeste voordeel uit hierdie wetgewing trek.
Konsepwetgewing word binnekort vir insette van die publiek gepubliseer.

Landbou in die Wes-Kaap reik uit na nuwe boere omdat dit vir ons 'n saak
van erns is dat ons nuwe landbouers suksesvol gevestig word. Hierin sal ons
die nasionale Departemente van Landbou en Grondsake ten volle ondersteun.
Ons sal ook gevestigde nuwe boere aan die hand neem, bystaan en oplei om
winsgewend te wees.

Ek wil 'n beroep op die Regering doen om staatsgrond aan provinsies
beskikbaar te stel sodat ons opkomende boere so gou moontlik kan vestig. Ek
wil die Minister bedank vir wat sy nounet gesê het. Ons sal graag met haar
hieraan wil saamwerk.

Grondeise moet so gou moontlik geprosesseer en afgehandel word. In die
afgelope vyf jaar het die Kommissie op Herstel van Grondeise Suid-Afrika
bykans R75 miljoen gekos. In hierdie tyd is 3 000 van die 63 400 eise
afgehandel. Teen hierdie tempo - en minister Didiza het dit geëskaleer en
dit gaan beter - as 'n mens dit vooruit projekteer, gaan dit nog ten minste
20 jaar neem om af te handel. Dít sal ons drasties moet versnel. Ons moenie
toelaat dat frustrasies ontstaan omdat die proses te stadig is nie. As
grondhervorming in Suid-Afrika te stadig plaasvind, kan landbouers nie
beskuldig word nie, maar sal die Regering self die skuld moet dra.

Dit is lofwaardig om te sien hoeveel inisiatiewe gegenereer word deur
landbouers om hulle plaaswerkers te bemagtig. Daarvoor is ek dankbaar en
trots op die landbouers van die Wes-Kaap. Hulle is nie deur wetgewing
hiertoe verbind nie, maar doen dit uit hulle eie vrye wil.

Plaaswerkers speel 'n onontbeerlike rol in die ekonomie van die land. Kom
ons gee erkenning vir die belangrike werk wat hulle doen. Daar kan gerus
meer met hulle gepraat word, en minder oor hulle gepraat word. Daar kan
gerus meer vir hulle gedoen word, en minder wette oor hulle gemaak word.

Ek wil die besetting van plase in Zimbabwe ten sterkste veroordeel. As
gewelddadige intimidasie plaasvind, mag ons nie siende blind wees nie. Dit
is ons plig om die regering, sy burgers en hulle eiendom te beskerm. As ons
verantwoordelik wil optree, ontwikkeling en beleggings in ons streek wil
bevorder, sal ons hierdie onheilspellende stilte oor die gebeure in
Zimbabwe moet verbreek. Kom ons wees ook hiér die leier in Afrika en bedien
ons bure met goeie raad, en skep so vertroue onder internasionale beleggers
en wêreldleiers. President Mugabe dobbel nie net met die toekoms van sy eie
land nie, maar ook met die toekoms van die hele Suider-Afrika.

Ek wil 'n beroep op president Mbeki doen om hom in die openbaar hieroor uit
te spreek. Menseregte mag nie so geskend word nie. Laat ons almal saamwerk
om grondhervorming in Suidelike Afrika ordelik te laat plaasvind.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The objective of the legislation relating to products of origin is to
develop an empowering and voluntary framework for agriculturalists by means
of which they can differentiate their products. In this way a few of the
problems relating to the farm problem can be circumvented. Since
traditional products are in the main the order of the day the previously
disadvantaged communities will benefit most from this legislation. Draft
legislation will shortly be published for input by the public.

Agriculture in the Western Cape reaches out to new farmers, because we are
serious about our new agriculturalists being settled successfully. In this
respect we will lend our full support to the national Departments of
Agriculture and Land Affairs. We will also take our established new farmers
by the hand, assist them and train them in order to become profitable.

I want to appeal to the Government to make state land available to the
provinces so that we can settle emerging farmers as quickly as possible. I
want to thank the Minister for what she has just said. We should like to co-
operate with her in this regard.

Land claims must be processed and completed as quickly as possible. In the
last five years the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights has cost South
Africa almost R75 million. During this time 3 000 of the 63 400 claims have
been finalised. At this rate - Minister Didiza has accelerated this and
progress has improved - if one were to project this in respect of the
future it would take at least another 20 years to finalise. We will have to
accelerate this dramatically. We must not allow frustrations to arise
because the process is too slow. If land reform in South Africa takes place
too slowly agriculturalists cannot be accused, but the Government itself
will have to take the blame.

It is laudable to see how many initiatives are generated by
agriculturalists to empower their farmworkers. I am grateful for that and
proud of the agriculturalists of the Western Cape. They are not compelled
by legislation to do this, they do it of their own free will.

Farmworkers play an essential role in the country's economy. Let us
recognise the important work that they do. One may very well talk to them
more and talk about them less. One may very well do more for them and make
fewer laws about them.

I want to condemn the occupation of farms in Zimbabwe in the strongest
possible terms. If violent intimidation takes place we may not be wearing
blinkers. It is our duty to protect the government, its citizens and their
property. If we want to be responsible, promote development and investment
in our region we will have to break this ominous silence concerning events
in Zimbabwe. Let us also be the leader in Africa in this respect and give
our neighbours good advice, and in that way create confidence with
international investors and world leaders. President Mugabe is not only
gambling with the future of his own country, but also with the future of
the whole Southern Africa.

I want to appeal to President Mbeki to voice his opinion about this
publicly. Human rights may not be violated in this way. Let all of us co-
operate so that land reform in Southern Africa can take place in an orderly
fashion.]

In the spirit of the African renaissance, agriculture in the Western Cape
reaches out to Africa. In order to accelerate the settlement of new
farmers, I believe we should learn from the experience of other African
countries. To this end I have just returned from an investigation into the
settlement of small-scale farmers in Botswana, Kenya and Tanzania. I had
extensive discussions with the Ministers of agriculture of the three
countries, and visited various smallholder settlements in rural areas.

High-profile government leaders received this provinces' outreach
initiative to Africa with unexpected praise and support. As far as we
travelled, South Africa was seen as the measure for Africa. Failure in
South Africa spells failure for Africa, and by the same token, success in
South Africa spells success for Africa.

Six months ago I announced the development of the Doring River and Olifants
River Irrigation Scheme as a dream project for this province. It now has
the status of a provincial megaproject. I am proud to say that we have
progressed significantly with this project. Next month Cabinet will make a
decision on the allocation of R3 million towards the investigation of
further scenarios. The importance of this scheme lies in its enormous job-
creation potential for affected rural people and the settlement of new
farmers.

Voorsitter, ten slotte wil ek sê: Landbou wil uitreik en die hand uitsteek
na alle ander sektore van die ekonomie. Kom ons laat Suid-Afrika werk. Daar
is net een manier om dit te doen en dit is deur die moue op te rol, die
hand aan die ploeg te slaan, nuwe grond te breek en met geloof ons dagtaak
te verrig. Deur hard te werk, sal ons Suid-Afrika laat werk. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, in conclusion I want to say: Agriculture will reach out and
extend a hand to all other sectors of the economy. Come, let us make South
Africa work. There is only one way of doing this and that is by rolling up
our sleeves, taking up the plough, breaking new ground and doing our daily
task in faith. By working hard we will make South Africa work. [Applause.]]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs, and members - both special delegates from
provinces here present today and permanent delegates - the North West is
largely rural. It is within these rural parts of the province that
development has to take place. The majority of the indigenous people were
dispossessed of their land, even before 1913. Restoring the land back to
its rightful owners is therefore one of the main challenges to the new
democratic Government.

If one travels across the province, one becomes aware of the large number
of people who are homeless. They are homeless because they have been
landless for many years. This has impoverished the indigenous people of
that province. The ANC Freedom Charter states: ``The people shall share.''

This means that the people of South Africa shall share in the God-given
resources so that there shall be equity and a better life for all its
people. We are saying of the North West that if the haves are prepared to
share with the have-nots, there will be stability in the province. The
commitment of some people such as Mr Roger Roman, a white landowner in the
Hartebeespoort Dam area, is indicative of the goodwill among many white
South Africans, who are prepared to share with the have-nots. He decided to
give his land away, but had to embark on a six-week fast to convince
authorities to allow him to do so. He willingly signed over part of his 13
hectare small-holding to 11 families despite the protestation of his
neighbours and the Hartebeespoort Dam local council. His action should be a
challenge to local authorities and landowners across South Africa to
transfer land voluntarily to displaced communities in order to speed up
land reform.

Another significant occurrence in the North West was the ending of a 10-
year-old legal dispute between the royal Bafokeng nation and Impala
Platinum Mine Company. This settlement brings the curtain down on a dispute
that has been there for the last century. During the apartheid regime the
Bafokeng nation had running battles with the former Bophuthatswana leader,
Lucas Mangope, over this land and royalties from the mining houses. The
people of the North West want stability in their province and in the entire
country. However, the stability will only be long-lasting if the landless
people of the North West are given access to land and control over their
own land. Access to and control over land is extremely important for the
rural poor of the North West.

For them the land is not only a productive resource and a collateral for
bank credit, but it also builds the confidence of rural people. It converts
them from the status of vulnerable to potential actors who constitute an
integral part of a society and its development. In other words, land is
their very entry point to social and human development.

Opposition parties have argued in the past, and no doubt will do so again
in this Council today, that the department of Agriculture and Land Affairs
has not moved speedily enough to implement its land reform policies. This
budget, among other things, endeavours to address the backlog. To these
parties I just want to issue a friendly reminder that it was their immoral
policies, and support for these policies, that were responsible for the
large-scale dispossession and consequently extreme unequal distribution of
land in our country.

The minority government and its opposition parties understood that the
racial division of land in South Africa was a fundamental precondition for
the continuation of white privilege. They knew that white farmers would
eventually form one of the most important strata of support for successive
white minority governments and privilege. In return for their support,
white farmers received large acres of land and huge subsidies, which
facilitated the development of white-owned agriculture. This is the reason
we have so many evictions of farmworkers in the North West province, more
than ever before, by farmers fearing the laws enacted by this Parliament.

On the other hand, blacks were dispossessed of their land and black-owned
agriculture suffered years of neglect. A pattern emerged in which some
sectors of white-owned agriculture became highly commercialised and
productive, while most black-owned agriculture continued to use traditional
subsistence methods, which brought diminished returns. The tragic
consequences of this unequal distribution of land and agricultural
resources continue to haunt us to this very day.

I am not surprised at the opposition parties' response to the Government's
land reform programme. It is characteristic of their inability to
understand the enormous challenges facing our democratic Government to
transform the fundamentally inequal relations in our society with the
limited resources available at its disposal, and in particular the
challenges facing the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs in
implementing its land reform programme. Our land reform programme is not
just a question of giving land to people; rather it is linked to a more
strategic long-term objective, namely the development of the productive
potential of our rural population, which is a critical precondition for
sustainable poverty reduction in South Africa.

A further challenge is the commitment we have made to carry out our land
reform policies in a manner that will not compromise South Africa's
position as one of the leading nations in the area of agricultural
production. Adding to the above constraints is the fact that our democratic
Government, unlike the apartheid government, respects the rights to
property, which prevents it from embarking on a process of large-scale
expropriation. In their zeal to criticise Government and to score cheap
political points, opposition parties deliberately overlooked the many
positive steps taken by Government to implement its land and agricultural
reform policies. They do not tell their supporters that the ANC Government
has gone much further than any other South African government in
implementing a far-reaching programme of agricultural liberalisation. They
do not tell their supporters that, as a result of this programme, barriers
to market entry, both domestic as well as for export, have been removed,
price incentives have shifted towards high-value labour-intensive crops,
and land prices have declined dramatically.

It is indeed true that what is happening in Zimbabwe today should be a
learning process for us as well. We should look into ways and means of
approaching the question of land, and that is the reason I specifically
say:

Motho ke motho ka batho ba bang. [A person is a person because of other
people.]

When one recognises the co-existence of one's neighbour, that one's
neighbour should also live, then one is busy creating a stable futureÿ ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time
has expired.

Rev P MOATSHE: ... and that is extremely important. The Gospel also says:
``You must love your neighbour as you love yourself,'' and those who have
land in excess should be prepared to share it with the landless.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, your speaking time has
expired.

Rev P MOATSHE: By doing so we will avoid what is happening in Zimbabwe
today. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Your speaking time has
expired, hon member.

Rev P MOATSHE: Twenty years after they failed to address the issue, they
are being confronted by a violent situation.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time
has expired now. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mev A M VERSVELD: Mnr die Voorsitter, in teenstelling met die
veronderstelling van die voorsitter van hierdie komitee gaan ek hom vandag
baie teleurstel. Ek gaan nie probeer goedkoop politieke punte aanteken soos
wat hy nou net gedoen het nie.

Inteendeel, ek wil die Minister baie gelukwens met die dramatiese
verandering van rigting met betrekking tot die nuwe toetreders tot die
landbou van 'n toestand van bestaans- en oorlewingsboerdery na die
ontwikkeling van kommersiële swart boere.

Mnr Mpalata het tereg gesê swart boere wil nie net kleinboere bly nie;
hulle wil getel word onder die grootstes in Suid-Afrika, ook onder die
grootstes in die wêreld. Dit is moontlik as ons kyk na die landbougrond in
Suid-Afrika, wat oor die algemeen baie goed ontwikkel is. Selfs plekke soos
die Knersvlakte en Verneukpan is goed ontwikkel. Suid-Afrika hoef vir geen
land terug te staan nie!

Die DP is dankbaar dat die fokus van grondhervorming merkbaar verskuif het
van die aanteken van die aantal begunstigdes en hektaar uitgedeel na
grondhervormingspraktyke wat lewensvatbaar en finansieel volhoubaar is. Die
nuwe beleidsdirektiewe het gewys dat grondhermvorming nie kan slaag as dit
nie op 'n gekoördineerde en geïntegreerde wyse aangepak word nie.

Ek merk in die verslag van die direkteur-generaal dat hy sê:


  Herverdeling van grond kan bydra tot groter gelykheid en toenemende
  effektiwiteit in die landelike sektor.

Hy meld verder dat die toelaagstelsel voortgaan, maar dat dit hersien sal
word om toegang tot grond te verbeter volgens die kategorie waarvoor die
toelaag bestem is. Dit is egter nie waar dit ophou nie.

Wat my bekommer, is dat ek nêrens in die begroting merk dat daar
voorsiening gemaak word vir bestaansboere nie, en hulle bestaan wel. Hulle
is 'n gegewe, net soos die bestaansvisserman. Geen voorsiening is gemaak
vir die basiese behoeftes van landbou nie, en daar is geen voorsiening vir
basiese navorsing nie.

Ons neem met besorgdheid kennis van die feit dat daar 'n 15,9%-afname in
die beraamde besteding vir die boekjaar 2000-01 gaan wees. Ons kan dit by
herhaling sê: enige plek in die wêreld, enige tyd in die geskiedenis is die
hulp aan die armstes 'n welsynfunksie, maar dan moet die begroting
voldoende wees.

Met die fisieke aspek van hulp aan die armes kan landbou vir seker help,
maar ek glo as 'n mens iets aanpak, veral in die landbou, moet jy daarmee
deurdruk, maak nie saak waar die fondse vandaan kom nie. Indien 'n projek
nie deurgevoer word nie, het dit tot gevolg armlastiges op die platteland,
die vernietiging van die lewens van die mense, die vernietiging van die
bodem, en maatskaplike probleme wat geslagte gaan neem om te herstel.

Die oplossing lê dus nie by landbou of by grondsake nie, maar by die
vestiging, opleiding, ondersteuning en opvolging van mense. Ons kan nie net
mense vestig nie, alhoewel daar ongeveer 25 miljoen hektaar staatsgrond is.
Ons wil nie hê die grond moet ongebruik of onbewerk lê nie. Zimbabwe is 'n
voorbeeld van waar mense net gevestig is. Dr Dambaza het in 1992 gesê, toe
hy uitgevra is oor ondersteuningsprojekte en grondvestiging: ``Elke
Zimbabwiër weet hoe 'n mielie lyk en hoe 'n mielie geplant word,'' en kyk
hoe lyk Zimbabwe vandag! Staatsgrond moet benut word deur spesifieke en
gefokusde projekte.

Die Minister, kan ek sien, is ernstig oor samewerking en vennootskappe.
Boere en georganiseerde landbou is só begerig om betrokke te raak. Nampo is
byvoorbeeld betrokke by inisiatiewe in Transkei, die Vrystaat en Gauteng.
Die Landboubesigheidskamer het reeds 40 projekte onderneem, sommige kleiner
en ander aansienlik groter. Werkbare vennootskapsmodelle wat reeds
geïmplementeer word, is kontrakboerdery, satellietboerdery en
vennootskappe. Hulp word ook verleen by wyse van voorligting en bemarking.

Die waarde van die sekerheid van eiendom en die sekerheid van
transportaktes moet nie onderskat word nie, want dit bied sekuriteit en
bedingingsmag in die sin van lenings. Die Europese platteland was armlastig
tydens die feodale periode. Net kloosters het toe sekerheidsreg geniet. Toe
die feodale stelsel begin verkrummel, het mense eiendomsreg verkry en die
toestande op die platteland het drasties verbeter.

Daarom is dit baie belangrik om stelsels te ontwikkel, in samewerking met
die tradisionele owerhede, waarvolgens die een wat die risiko neem om die
grond te bewerk - nie noodwendig die persoon wat daar bly nie - die grond
kan huur, al is dit teen 'n huurpag van 30 jaar of 50 jaar, sodat hy dit
uiteindelik kan besit.

Daar is 'n groot bohaai oor Esta, en alhoewel daar mense ís wat verneuk
word - ek praat dit ook nie goed nie, ek dink dit is 'n skande - gaan dit
oor die reg van 'n beperkte aantal mense. Vir my is die werklike probleem
die miljoene mense wat afhanklik is van die bestaan op die grond, maar geen
wetlik afdwingbare reg het om die grond wat hulle bewerk te besit nie en
dit daarom ook nie kan ontwikkel nie. [Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs A M VERSVELD: Mr Chairman, in contrast with the supposition of the
chairperson of this committee, today I am going to disappoint him terribly.
I am not going to try to score cheap political points, as he has just done.

On the contrary, I want to congratulate the Minister on the dramatic change
of direction in respect of the new entrants to the agriculture from a
situation of subsistence and survival farming to the development of
commercial black farmers.

Mr Mpalata quite rightly said black farmers did not want to remain small
farmers; they wanted to be counted among the greatest in South Africa, also
among the greatest in the world. This is possible if we look at the
agricultural land in South Africa, which is very well developed in general.
Even places such as the Knersvlakte and Verneukpan are well developed.
South Africa need not take a back seat to any country!

The DP is grateful that the focus of land reform has visibly moved from the
noting of the number of beneficiaries and the hectares handed out to land
reform practices that are viable and financially sustainable. The new
policy directives have shown that land reform cannot succeed if it is not
tackled in a co-ordinated and integrated manner.

I notice that in the report of the director-general he says:


  Redistribution of land can contribute to greater equality and increasing
  effectiveness in the rural sector.

He furthermore says that the grant system will continue, but that it will
be reviewed to improve access to land according to the category for which
the grant is intended. This is not where it ends, however.

What concerns me is that I do not notice anywhere in the budget that
provision has been made for subsistence farmers, and they do in fact exist.
They are a given, just like the subsistence fishermen. No provision has
been made for the basic needs of agriculture, and no provision has been
made for basic research.

We take note, with concern, of the fact that there is going to be a 15,9%
decline in the estimated expenditure for the 2000-01 financial year. We can
say repeatedly: Any place in the world, any time in history, aid to the
poorest remains a welfare function, but then the budget should be adequate.

With the physical aspect of assistance to the poorest agriculture can
certainly help, but I believe that if one tackles anything, in agriculture
in particular, one should keep at it, no matter where the funds come from.
If a project is not followed through it results in indigence in the rural
areas, the destruction of the lives of people, the destruction of the earth
and social problems that would take generations to restore.

The solution therefore does not lie with agriculture or land affairs, but
the settlement, training, support and follow-up of people. We cannot just
settle people, although there are about 25 million hectares of state land.
We do not want the land to go unused or uncultivated. Zimbabwe is an
example of where people were only settled. Dr Dambaza said in 1992, when he
was asked about support projects and land settlement: ``Every Zimbabwean
knows what a mealie looks like and how a mealie must be planted,'' and look
at Zimbabwe today! State land must be utilised by way of specific and
focused projects.
The Minister, I can see, is serious about co-operation and partnerships.
Farmers and organised agriculture are so keen on becoming involved. Nampo,
for example, is involved in initiatives in the Transkei, the Free State and
Gauteng. The Agricultural Business Chamber has already undertaken 40
projects, some smaller and some considerably larger. Viable models for
partnerships that are already being implemented are contract farming,
satellite farming and partnerships. Assistance is also being rendered by
way of extension and marketing.

The value of the safety of property and the safety of title deeds should
not be underrated, because this offers security and bargaining power in the
sense of loans. The European rural areas were poverty-stricken during the
feudal period. Only convents had certainty of tenure at the time. When the
feudal system started crumbling people obtained property rights, and
conditions in the rural areas improved dramatically.

For that reason it is very important to develop systems, in co-operation
with the traditional authorities, according to which the one who takes the
risk of cultivating the land - not necessarily the one who lives there -
may hire the land, even if this is in terms of a 30-year or 50-year
leasehold, so that he may eventually own it.

A great fuss has arisen concerning Esta, and although there are people who
are being swindled - I am not defending this, I think it is a disgrace - it
is about the right of a limited number of people. To me the real problem
concerns the millions of people who depend on subsistence on the land, but
who have no legally enforceable right to own the land that they cultivate
and for that reason cannot develop it either. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr B TAABE (Mpumalanga): Chairperson, the hon the Minister for Agriculture
and Land Affairs, the Deputy Minister, hon members of the NCOP, special
delegates from various provinces, ladies and gentlemen, although I am not a
capitalist nor aspiring to become one, Adam Smith tells us the following,
and I quote:


  What improves the circumstances of the greater part can never be regarded
  as an inconvenience to the whole. No society can surely be flourishing
  and happy of which the far greater part of the members are poor and
  miserable.

When I look around me I see that it is there, the human misery that
afflicts my people, our people, the agony of hunger etched on our
children's faces, the look in the eyes of young people, the despair of time
and the bewilderment of people cast aside. All of these things are clearly
a reality to our people. All of these afflictions are consequences of the
racial prejudice and discrimination that our people must contend with
painfully on a day-to-day basis. All of these things are confirmed by a
villager in one of the most remote areas, in Badplaas in Mpumalanga, when
he observes that, and I quote: ``Land is a source of security. Access to
land must lead to a better life.''

Victims of past draconian laws which created serious problems of
landlessness are continuously watching with keen interest the response of
their elected public representatives with relation to land restitution and
the restoration of land to its rightful owners.

Our ongoing responsibility to improve the quality of the collective life of
our people compels us to find innovative and concrete ways by which we can
turn the miserable conditions into golden opportunities for the future.
This House therefore must note the gargantuan strides made by the hon the
Minister and her department to expedite, or rather accelerate, the process
of land restitution throughout the length and breadth of South Africa.
Equally pleasing is the approach by the hon the Minister and her department
to create a single authority and accountability for the department and the
Commission for Land Restitution. This integration, we believe, will
inevitably eliminate the complex and frustrating administrative processes
that in the past defeated the purpose for which land restitution and
restoration was created.

We are confident that these processes will now fast-track and radically
change the lives of our people in communities such as Doornkop,
Kaalfontein, Inkbos, Komatipoort, Kaapsehoop in Nelspruit and Mgendeni in
Barberton. These are all areas in Mpumalanga.

The recent floods that swept through many parts of Mpumalanga have
undoubtedly created immense agony which, to this very day, is still
reverberating in every corner of the province, further exacerbating our
problems. We must therefore, through this august House, engage proactively
with the hon the Minister to find innovative solutions to the problems
brought about by the disaster in our province. Likewise, we should begin to
seriously uplift black emerging small farmers who were hardest hit by the
floods to prepare them for their gradual yet systematic entry into the
formal commercial farming sector, through the provision of financial
assistance, the marketing of their products and the creation of a market
infrastructure to facilitate the market access of such isolated farmers.

The promotion of black and young entrants into agriculture, particularly
women, should lead to the development of successful small and medium-sized
agricultural enterprises in Mpumalanga. This must further contribute to
enhancing income from and job opportunities through the co-ordinated and
systematic use of state agricultural land. In this way we shall be sending
a ray of hope to ordinary prospective black farmers in the far-flung areas
of the Nkomaas region and areas such as Driekoppies and Kamhluhla. Then we
can boldly and unequivocally declare that we have indeed delivered and
bettered the lives of our people through none other than the glorious
progressive army of our people, the ANC.

The term of office for regional claims commissioners expires in June of
this year. In Mpumalanga we are worried about the pace of delivery in the
area of land restitution. It is our well-considered view that the
appointment of people rooted in our communities, who know and have a
clearer understanding of the sufferings of our people, particularly in
rural communities, should be expedited to ensure the fast-tracking of the
land restitution process in our province. We will monitor this process to
ensure that our people are not taken for a ride this time around.
Accordingly, we wish the present incumbent in the post well in her future
endeavours.

Equally worrying is the hypocrisy of certain sections of the white media
and right-wing politicians and parties such as the DP, who continuously
remind us, and the hon the President, of the situation in countries such as
Zimbabwe. However, they are dead silent about the persecution of black
farmers and dwellers in their own country.

The message we are sending to them is that they should clean their dirty
and stinking back yards first before pointing fingers at other people.

As a fitting tribute to the victims of land dispossession in South Africa,
South Africa's poetic and most prolific writer, Don Mattera, had something
to say to those whose struggles we are today celebrating. Failure to
recognise this would definitely be bordering on political hara-kiri on the
part of such right wing parties and politicians.

We are saying this to remind all of us that political freedom without
fundamentally redressing the inequities in land is meaningless to the
landless villager in Mbuzini, Mpumalanga. Don Mattera had this to say, and
I quote:


  Remember to call at my grave
  When freedom finally
  Walks the land
  So that I may rise
  To tread familiar paths
  To see broken chains
  Fallen prejudice
  Forgotten injury
  Pardoned pains
  And when my eyes have filled their sight
  Do not run away for fright
  If I crumble to dust again
  It will only be the bliss
  Of a long-awaited dream
  That bids me rest
  When freedom finally walks the land.

Mr U D MOILOA (Gauteng): Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister and hon members, Gauteng is known as the economic hub of South
Africa's industry, and therefore is somewhat irrelevant when speaking of
agriculture, or so many people say. I am going to be speaking about issues
which I think are important for us in tracing the footprints of our
forefathers and mothers.

Exactly 348 years and five days ago, human beings of another colour, length
of hair and physical shape arrived on the shores of this city, a few metres
from where we are sitting today. The colour and shape of their noses or
length of their hair had really nothing to do whether they were any
different from other human beings.

An adventurous spirit in the human species propelled these human beings'
needs to ensure their wellbeing and socioeconomic development. As if the
dawn of the African sun would later open the skies on that historic day for
human beings to discover themselves and their own kind for future peaceful
existence, the dream which never was, what began as a shipwreck facilitated
social interaction of human beings with each other in a manner not
consistent with the complete human culture and organisation of the society
which informed how the land was preserved as a collective resource and
asset for all to coexist in without social or political contradictions. The
social interactions unfortunately developed into 348 years of colonialism
and oppression of man by man and finally led to the forceful and violent
seizure of land by a few pitted against many.

They were warmly welcomed and introduced to the comfort of a complete
humanity and the socioeconomic organisation of the people they found there.
Yet what they did to people in this part of the earth has become a total
contradiction of that basic human quality called in the African languages
``ubuntu-botho''.

Off the shores, there was complete co-existence of man with himself, with
the habitat which fulfilled plenty of needs for the sharing of wealth which
nature has given to all the species which occupied this part of the earth.
There was peace and harmony, and human beings regarded each other as human
beings because of other human beings - motho ke motho ka batho. And so,
life continued and the belly of earth provided all and sundry with an
abundance of food, fruits, medicinal plants and the rest of the things
which we all need for our wellbeing and development.

The invaders failed to adjust themselves to an otherwise very scarce
quality of African humanity which they found amongst the stone-age Khoisan
people of the Western Cape, the Xhosas in the east, the Zulus on the Natal
Coast, the Tswanas in the north and many African groups in the far north.
From wherever they came, they brought their shameful greed, which drove the
indigenous people of our land from the fertile parts of our country into
barren and inhabitable small portions of land. Those who remained were
captured to be turned into slaves, whose sweat and sufferings built our
country to what it is today.

The culture of greed and individualism, as opposed to collective ownership
of land and the wealth it brings, is now part of the social system we are
struggling to transform. Many of our people continue to be victims of this
culture of greed, which stands as the very centre pillar of the social
system which this budget intends to change, at an even faster pace, and
they continue to be victimised by the legacy of apartheid colonialism in
many rural areas of our land.

The scourge of poverty and hunger in the land of plenty, which they
continue to suffer, justifies us gathering here this afternoon to map a way
forward in this fiscal year to advance the dawn of the African century. It
is only through the budget and the equitable distribution of the national
fiscus, in a manner consistent with our programme of reconstruction and
development, that we can indeed say that we are addressing the legacy of
apartheid colonialism.

Hardly a day passes in many parts of our country without farmworkers and
residents being evicted. Just on Sunday this week, Comrade Derek Hanekom
and I attended a meeting of farmworkers and residents in the area of
Broederstroom, in the north-west of Gauteng. For five hours we listened
with disappointment and anger, because we heard that even though this
honourable House had passed the Extension of Security of Tenure Act in
1997, three years later, white farmers were still evicting residents and
workers off the land. This is contrary to what Rev Moatshe of the North
West has just identified as a bad attitude demonstrated by one or two
farmers in that part of the country.
In the area of Gauteng a 68-year-old man was evicted from the farm he was
born on and worked on for his whole life.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Your time has
expired, hon member.

Mr U D MOILOA: Mr Chairperson, in conclusion I want to thank you for this
opportunity.

Mr M BHABHA: Chairperson, for the information of the House ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! On what point
are you rising, hon member?

Mr M BHABHA: It is a point of order and exigency.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! That is not a
point of order.

Ms Y BOTHA (Northern Cape): Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, hon
special delegates, just a point of correction, I am not Mrs Botha, I am
Miss Botha. It is indeed an honour to speak in this debate, that is the
review of policy of the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, and not
that of Zimbabwe as some members seem to think.

The Northern Cape has benefited enormously from the land restitution and
land reform processes initiated by this department. Communities robbed of
their ancestral land, such as the Riemvasmakers, the Basters form
Philandersbron, the Bathlaping from Schmidtsdrift and many others are
eternally grateful to our democratically elected Goverment for making it
possible to get back their land, taken away, of course, by the apartheid
masters.

The Riemvasmakers are today a vibrant community. Houses have been built and
the school is doing well. A few weeks ago, two young men who completed
their university studies, became the first two Riemvasmakers who graduated
since the return to their land in 1994. They are now studying for their
postgraduate degrees.

Looking at the further development of the land, our next focus should be
the development of the hectares of land at the mouth of the Molopo. This
land is most suitable for crop planting, especially the planting of table
grapes of export quality. We hope that, with the assistance of Land
Affairs, this will be possible.

Platfontein and Schmidtsdrift are rapidly moving towards the realisation of
our hopes. The development of infrastructure will be realised in this
financial year. Some political parties try to gain political mileage from
the restitution and development processes of these two areas. I would like
to urge all political parties to work together and be supportive of these
processes for establishing displaced communities.

The Mier community has acquired three farms through the land reform
process, but are unhappy because of one of these farms, Klein Mier 1.
People are alleging that the former owner, who is still living there, is
removing infrastructure from the farm. Built-in cupboards, as well as
fencing, have been reformed. No inventory list exists, although several
requests have been made. I humbly request the Minister to look into the
matter and assist us in eliminating all blockages or misunderstandings. The
emerging farmers want to occupy the farm but we have persuaded them not to
do so until we have taken the matter up.
In August 1999 the portfolio committee of the Northern Cape held public
hearings on the conditions of service of farmworkers in our province.
According to my knowledge - and I speak under correction - we were the
first province to do so. A copy of the committee's report has been sent to
the hon the Minister's office, as well as to the office of the Minister of
Labour.

During the public hearings several concerns were raised. Living conditions
and salaries in most areas were measly and shocking. We are in the process
of approaching the Human Rights Commission to investigate some of the
complaints we received. Some farmers and farmworkers have actually gone a
long way in developing their working relationship and having agreements on
the conditions of service. The implementation of the Extension of Security
of Tenure Act is widely welcomed in the Northern Cape.

The depopulation of the platteland is a concern in the Northern Cape.
Squatter camps in towns such as Keimoes and Kimberley are growing, mostly
populated by displaced farmworkers. Urgent attention needs to be given to
this phenomenon, and assistance to emerging farmers, especially women, will
stem the tide of the diaspora of our rural communities. Banks are closing
in towns such as Carnavon. Emerging farmers must become commercial farmers.
They should be nurtured in that direction in order to create jobs in rural
areas and revive these economies.

The provision of water, electricity and infrastructure such as roads are
factors that also need to be taken into consideration when addressing rural
economies. Intergovernmental planning is essential in that regard. I think
the hon the Minister has alluded to intergovernmental co-operation and
working together in her speech to this House. The Northern Cape is thankful
for the programmes and assistance to emerging farmers.

With the good rains the province has received, the Kalahari is green right
up to the Hantam. Stock farmers will especially benefit from the good veld
conditions. We did have some flood damage, but not to the extent that the
other provinces have suffered. We realise that we are lucky in that regard.
We would therefore like to support the Northern Province, Mpumalanga and
other provinces in rebuilding the huge damage to infrastructure and the
lives of our people.

When the Minister delivered her speech, she actually referred to the need
for electricity to boost agricultural development. We are in the process of
trying to see if we cannot get electricity to the Kalahari. The Minister is
a regular visitor to the Northern Cape, so she knows that there are no
roads, no electricity, and water is very scarce. If she could help us in
lobbying to light up the Kalahari from the Namibian to the Botswana border,
we would appreciate it very much. We would also appreciate it if we can get
the support of this House.

This is an opportunity I cannot let slip through my fingers in that regard.
[Laughter.] I am also very glad to hear that the power of attorney will be
transferred to provincial MECs of agriculture in the administration of
state land. That is indeed good news for us, which will also help emerging
farmers, especially women in our rural areas, to become farmers and
eventually become commercial farmers and participate in the market economy.
[Applause.]

Mr H NKETU (Free State): Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister,
members of the House, the Free State remains a leader in agriculture thus
contributing significantly to food production and job creation. With these
significant changes in the policy formulation, we hope that the input of
4,1% of gross domestic product and 13% of employment will change
drastically.

The Free State has a dual agricultural economy consisting of a well-
developed commercial sector which is predominantly white and very
conservative, and a subsistence-oriented sector in the rural areas which is
predominantly rural and African. The national department's mission of
ensuring the achievement of sustainable, equitable and efficient
agricultural development in which Government will facilitate and encourage
the development of the small farm sector and encourage a more diverse
support system for farmers has, in my view, not yielded the desired
results. We should ensure that we expedite the process to include the
settlement of women and youth.

Let us refer back to the background of agriculture in the South African
context. Agriculture has been designed to benefit a small group of white
conservatives. It ensured perpetual enslavement of poor African peasants
through meagre wages and unfavourable working conditions. Yes, we agree to
the gradual eradication of this legacy, but the patience of the African
peasants on the platteland of our country is gradually diminishing. In our
provincial scenario, the budget that has been allocated to the department
will not be able to change this setup as the largest share is directed
towards addressing personnel matters, while the training of emerging
farmers will receive less of the budget than anticipated.

I agree that the Government of the day did, indeed, succeed in effecting
some changes to agricultural sector policies, but they have not brought
about the desired changes in the agricultural sector. After five years
commercial farming is still dominated by whites, while small agricultural
farming is predominantly made up of African farmers who cannot access
finance from the Land Bank and who are still refused membership of co-
operatives which are dominated by white farmers. And, owing to budget cuts
in our province, technical assistance to the emerging agricultural sector
has been dealt a severe blow.

The Minister in her Budget Vote did concede to the fact that agriculture
was designed on a racial basis and that we should assist in deracialising
the sector. This can only be changed through policies that are very radical
in nature and form. There are farmers in the Free State who have indeed
brought about some changes to the lives of their workers by providing them
with houses and sanitation, but this is still not enough. Serious efforts
have been made by the Department of Agriculture in the Free State to
facilitate the establishment of agrivillages, and this is seen as the only
way to curb the level of evictions in our province.

This will also help to curb migration from farms to so-called townships
where the levels of crime are very high and where the levels of those
lacking housing are very high.

The process of land restitution is very slow. Where it is applicable in our
province, mainly in Bloemfontein and Odendaalsrus, it has created a lot of
problems, such as overcrowding, and has not provided any solution to land
problems.

In the province the land restitution programme of the Department of Land
Affairs is very independent, but as a province we would like to see more
synergy and improvement in relationships.

Globalisation and mechanisation are areas that need to be looked into
seriously. Owing to a fear of the Extension of Security of Tenure Act, most
white farmers have resorted to mechanisation as an alternative to
supplementing their workforce.

In regard to globalisation, South Africa, as an exporting country, has to
comply with importing conditions of other countries which are at times not
favourable to our situation.

In April 1999 the department came out with what was called a ``setup
scheme'', and this programme was intended to create a framework in terms of
which emerging farmers would be able to borrow money from financial
institutions. However, the money that this scheme provided was not enough
to address problems in the emerging agricultural sector.

The main objective of the land redistribution programme was to provide the
poor with land for residential and agricultural purposes. The beneficiaries
included the poor, land tenants, farmworkers, women and emerging farmers,
but the programme did not meet the desired objectives.

As previous speakers have mentioned, we are still today, as the Free State,
faced with the serious problem of evictions. Recently our province embarked
on a programme to establish the conditions of farmworkers. It was noted
that the most common problem in our province was the unlawful evictions in
which farmers were able to evict farmworkers without authorised eviction
orders from the courts.

In conclusion, the Government must take reasonable legislative and other
measures within its available resources to create an enabling climate which
would ensure access to land on an equitable basis. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I now call
upon the hon the Deputy Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs to
address the House. He will probably tell us how to take light to the
Kalahari. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I doubt
that I can really take light there. I want to link up with the excellent
problem-based speech Mr Nketu has made and with what the hon the Minister
said towards the end of her speech on agriculture, and that is the need to
continually reflect on, prioritise and co-ordinate the budgets and
activities of the national department, the provincial departments and
parastatals.

I believe that is really at the heart of the problem which we must address
in the NCOP, that is, the extreme pressure at the moment on agriculture
budgets in this country as a whole, especially in the provinces. We are
aware of the problem. It is a very complex situation, because this extreme
pressure on agriculture budgets, especially in the provinces, flows from
the macroeconomic demands which are being made on the Government at the
moment. Let me give hon members two examples.

Just recently the MEC for agriculture in the Eastern Cape sent me a copy of
an agricultural development Act which the Eastern Cape government has
passed. The people from the Eastern Cape will most probably be aware of
that Act. That is exactly the type of thing we want provinces to do,
because that is the type of agricultural development which should take
place at provincial level. But what is the problem? We have a beautiful,
well-thought-through Act in the province, but we do not have the money to
fund that Act. What must we do?
We have other problems as well. We have problems in respect of veterinary
services, which is a Schedule 5 function, that is, an exclusive function of
provinces, with the exception of the regulation of the function. That
Schedule of the Constitution was written by the likes of the Willie
Hofmeyrs, the Bulelani Ngcukas and the Dirk du Toits of this world. At that
stage, when they wrote it, they did not know a thing about agriculture. Now
we discover the problems one encounters with this Schedule, because animal
diseases do not occur in one province only. Diseases do not know provincial
borders. Also when dealing with international trade and animal and plant
diseases, one discovers that diseases do not know borders of countries.
Therefore, this is a matter which is not restricted to a province as such.

What happens is that when money is scarce, when there is not enough money
to go around, this type of pressure starts building up. Experience
internationally shows that the only solution is to step up the level of
intergovernmental interaction the moment there is this type of pressure on
a budget. The fact of the matter is that a province cannot undertake large,
ambitious agricultural schemes at a time when there is macroeconomic
pressure, because then macroeconomic management takes precedence for the
country's growth as a whole.

One then sits with the problem of the harmonisation of social conflicts,
about which we have heard a lot in this Chamber today. These problems one
could have solved if one had a lot of money. But perhaps it is a good thing
that we do not have that type of money and that we have to look for real
solutions. It is actually a pity that the MEC for agriculture in the
Western Cape had to leave. I presume he left for Zimbabwe to have
negotiations with the Zimbabwean agriculture Minister, and we therefore do
not mind recusing him.

The provincial MECs have to deal with big problems, and a lot of those are
structural in nature. As I have said, the nature of animal and plant
diseases and the nature of South Africa's international obligations are
such that there can be no doubt that things such as veterinary services are
matters of national interest. We cannot simply say that it is the problem
of the provinces that by August of this year veterinarians do not have
petrol to put in their bakkies to go out into the country to look after the
animals, because there is no money left. That concerns the national level
as well. The only way in which we can start addressing this problem is if
we work together very closely, far more closely than we are doing today. I
think that should be a concern of this honourable Council.

In other words, the main constraint for agriculture in this country, from a
public finance point of view, is the way in which agricultural funds are
being allocated in the provinces for the different services that have to be
delivered. As one would say in Afrikaans: ``Landbou suig aan die
agterspeen.'' In other words, agriculture gets too little in comparison to
the other major services which have to be rendered by the provinces.

Any agricultural strategy that we develop in this country has to work in
this context. It will stand or fall by the answers we find to these
budgetary constraints. I was wondering whether we are doing the right thing
by depending on the equitable share of provinces to deliver agricultural
services in the provinces. Will that suffice? When one thinks about the
problems of maintaining veterinary services in the provinces, should one
then not rather start thinking - I am asking this as a point of debate -
about making use of conditional grants? Then we would know that this money
would go towards agriculture or veterinary services or towards extension
services that one wants to do, or towards a soil resource conservation
programme. Then we would know that this money would go to the province for
that, and the province knows best how to go and spend that money, because
it is near to the problems.

In other words, should we not rather work in terms of section 214(1)(c) of
the Constitution in the sense that we work according to these programmes
and that we negotiate, on a co-operative basis, what type of programmes we
are going to implement and thus channel the money in that way? In other
words, I am asking whether it has not become necessary for us to use
another mechanism for farming services in the provinces, such as extension
or veterinary services, namely through constitutional allocations or
conditional grants.

The point is that both national and provincial governments are in this boat
together. We cannot escape it. Our objective should be to maximise the
scope that we have for economic growth and for minimising inefficiencies.
We can only do that if we maximise the capacities that we do have and make
full use of them. One of the ways in which to maximise capacities is to
ensure that they do not stand idle. It does not make economic sense if a
provincial capacity stands idle, because then one is wasting money. The
money could be used to activate a service, otherwise one should get rid of
a service that one cannot fund in any way whatsoever.

One does not maximise capacities if we do not get the provinces to do what
they should do. They must be able to do that. In other words, what I am
saying is that there are two basic requirements if we want to get a
comprehensive agricultural strategy going, as the hon the Minister has
explained.

Firstly, there should be development of capacity within each provincial
government in terms of educated staff, using and controlling financial
resources correctly and, applying technological facilities in order to
address agricultural development and maintenance effectively in a system of
intergovernmental interaction. We will be coming with that Bill to hon
members first. That is the type of system or structure that we envisage,
which will be done, for example, in the Meat Safety Bill. We hope to get
hon members' agreement on it. That is the type of intergovernmental system
that we will try to develop here.

Secondly, we can only be saved in agricultural government by effective
intergovernmental co-operation and co-ordination. This may happen through
statutory provisions, indeed, but it must also happen - and that is the
most important part - through practice and convention. To reach our goals
of effective co-operation, the first requirement is the establishment of a
political culture of co-operation, mutual respect and trust. Those words
stand in the Constitution, but those words do not mean a thing if they
merely stand in a law or constitution. They must be effectuated by
individuals working in this sphere, specifically the agricultural sphere.

That is our challenge. This political culture of co-operation is far more
important than legal structures, procedures and technicalities provided for
by laws. To develop a sense of trust requires a sense of tolerance from the
side of the provinces towards national Government and from the side of
national Government towards provinces. If one does not create this trust,
it will lead to distrust. It will engender pressures for legislative detail
that then again become straitjackets of inflexibility.

I believe that in the field of veterinary services, for example, and the
field of extension services, we are heading for doom if we do not work in
this co-operative way. I think we are not doing too badly at the moment. We
have elements of assistance that co-ordinate, for example, veterinary
activities.

What needs to happen - that is the place where it should happen first,
apart from at the level of leadership provided by hon members and
politicians - is that intergovernmental co-operation - this is the most
important thing I want to say to the House - must expand into bureaucratic
bargaining processes and systems because there the co-operation happens
with low visibility. As the House knows, politicians always want high
visibility, and then a lot of things are messed up in all the big shows
that are created. If the intergovernmental relations are really happening
at the level of our officials and if they are interacting without
bargaining, then we begin to expect results. That is being done at the
moment.

I also went overseas as the hon MEC for the Western Cape did. My Minister
allowed and instructed me to do so! [Laughter.] I just take orders, as hon
members can see! I went overseas to look into the issue of BSE, which
stands bovine spongiform encephalopathy. It is a disease that affects the
brain and nervous system of cows.

I want hon members to know that, in South Africa, we cannot handle a crisis
like that. We just do not have the capacity. If we experience a crisis of
that nature, it would be too big for us to handle. If we were to have an
outbreak of BSE in South Africa, we would simply lose our red meat
producing capacity in this country. This is big stuff.

What we must do is prevent it. We must see to it that our systems are in
order, that our services are running, because if they go wrong, they go
wrong in a big way. Then one has to destroy a lot of cattle. We have to be
quite wary about this. We do have elements of a system to co-ordinate
veterinary affairs, in spite of what is written in the Constitution. We
have to do that. It does exist on the basis of mutual trust.

We must develop business plans together in the agricultural sector. It is
difficult to execute, because one always needs the capacitation for
intergovernmental relations. We need experts to help with intergovernmental
relations of that kind, and really do it well.

The best would probably be to implement the suggestion that we organise
ourselves around sectors in agriculture. In other words, if we, for
example, have to co-ordinate some veterinary services, then we would do it
around the red meat industry or the industry around pigs, we would do it
around poultry, we would do it around the small stock industry in those
sectors, and try and co-ordinate our actions.

What must be done? I believe that, for agriculture we must develop
intergovernmental relations of a special kind. Agriculture is special.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr E A CONROY: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister and
colleagues, man and beast need three basic elements to survive. The first
two are - if not indiscriminately wasted and polluted - provided free and
in abundance by the good Creator, namely air in the form of oxygen and
water in the form of oxygen and hydrogen. The third man has to toil for,
namely the food that the earth will produce with the sweat of his brow.

Mother Earth is the source of life, and for those who are prepared to till
it, he who is prepared to sow will be allowed to reap. The people who work
the land, be it in the form of sowing and reaping or the rearing of cattle,
commonly known as farmers, are the providers of food.

The world economy, with its ever-growing population, is totally dependent
on farming, which is the primary source of raw materials for the production
of basic and sophisticated foodstuffs for humans and feedstuffs for
animals, for the production of textiles from cotton and wool and for the
production of plant oils and rubber.

As a matter of fact, the world would come to a standstill were it not for
the farmers, big and small, or commercial farmers on the one extreme and
subsistence farmers on the other. A country with a vision for the future
will therefore cherish its farmers and farming communities by providing
well for them in the resources that it makes available in its budget, in
the realisation that one can only reap that which one has sown.

Daarom steun die Nuwe NP die begroting wat deur die agb Minister voorgelê
is.

Een van die Departement van Landbou se gestelde beleidsdoelwitte is 'n
doeltreffende en internasionaal mededingende landbousektor wat die opkoms
van 'n swart landbousektor onderskraag. Anders gestel: bo en behalwe eie
binnelandse voedselbehoeftes wat bevredig moet word, moet die landbousektor
ook produkte van 'n hoë en aanvaarbare gehalte produseer wat met die wêreld
se beste op die internasionale mark kan meeding om sodoende belangrike
valuta vir die land te verdien en te help om Suid-Afrika se betalingsbalans
op 'n gesonde voet te hou. Kennis en ondervinding wat in die proses van
groeiende doeltreffendheid en verbeterde mededingendheid opgebou en op
internasionale vlak uitgeruil word, word met vrug in die opkomende swart
landbousektor teruggeploeg.

Dit is om hierdie rede dat ek graag twee punte van bekommernis wil uitlig:
eerstens, dat die begrotingstoewysing aan die Landbounavorsingsraad
moontlik nie voldoende is nie. Sonder voldoende en doeltreffende
landbounavorsing sal ons letterlik agteruit boer en nie internasionaal kan
meeding nie. Dit sal 'n jammerlike dag wees as Suid-Afrika, wat as een van
die voorste lande op landbounavorsingsgebied beskou word en sy kennis oor
die jare ook aan die res van Afrika oorgedra het, nou weens onvoldoende
fondse die agterste gestoeltes moet begin inneem of om die woorde van die
Adjunkminister te gebruik, begin ``om aan die agterspeen te suig.'' Om die
vrugte van 'n versiende beleid in die toekoms te pluk, moet die brood nou
reeds in die vorm van 'n verhoogde navorsingsbegroting op die waters gewerp
word.

Tweedens is dit vreemd dat die departement nie met meer, sê maar
entoesiasme, om dit sagkens te stel, sy produsente se belange by die Raad
op Tariewe en Handel verdedig wanneer dit by die bepaling van invoerregte
op produkte van landboukundige oorsprong kom nie.

Na verneem word, moet onder andere die suiwelbedryf en die produsente van
plantaardige olies met een hand agter die rug vasgemaak teen die ingevoerde
produkte baklei om te oorleef omdat die buitelandse produk weens
landbousubsidies in verskeie vorme die speelveld totaal ongelyk maak en
toegelaat word om teen onrealistiese lae tariewe die land te oorspoel.

Daar word erkenning gegee aan die beginsel dat voedsel op die mees
ekonomiese manier aan die bevolking voorsien moet word en dat, indien die
ingevoerde produk in daardie behoefte kan voorsien, daar daarvan gebruik
gemaak moet word. So 'n situasie sal gewoonlik as 'n kopersmark bestempel
word. Indien dit die rede vir lae invoertariewe is, sal 'n vroegtydige
waarskuwing teen so 'n kortsigtige beleid nie onvanpas wees nie, naamlik
dat, indien die plaaslike produsente vernietig word omdat hulle nie langer
met die goedkoop gesubsidieerde ingevoerde produk kan meeding nie, die mark
vir die besondere produk as gevolg van die beginsel van vraag en aanbod in
'n verkopersmark omskep sal word, en die prys van die oorwegend beskikbare,
en in sommige gevalle die enigste beskikbare, ingevoerde produk uit die
aard van die saak sal styg.

'n Mens besef egter dat invoertariewe die gevolg van internasionale
ooreenkomste en onderhandelings is, maar jy wonder soms of dit werklik vir
Suid-Afrika nodig is om, soos dit voorkom, altyd op die voorpunt by die
nakoming van sulke ooreenkomste te wees. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The New NP therefore supports the budget as submitted by the hon the
Minister.

One of the Department of Agriculture's stated policy objectives is an
efficient and internationally competitive agricultural sector which
supports the emergence of a black agricultural sector. Differently stated:
above and beyond own domestic food needs which have to be met, the
agricultural sector must also produce products of a high and acceptable
quality which can compete with the world's best on the international market
and in this way earn valuable currency for the country and assist in
keeping South Africa's balance of payments on a sound footing. Knowledge
and experience which is accumulated in the process of increasing efficiency
and improving competitiveness and which is exchanged at an international
level is ploughed back into the emerging black agricultural sector
fruitfully.

It is for this reason that I want to highlight two points of concern:
firstly, that the budgetary allocation to the Agricultural Research Council
may be insufficient. Without adequate and efficient agricultural research
we will literally farm at a loss and not be able to compete
internationally. It will be a sorry day if South Africa, which is
considered one of the foremost countries with regard to agricultural
research and has over the years also conveyed its expertise to the rest of
Africa, now as a result of insufficient funding has to begin occupying the
back benches or, to use the words of the Deputy Minister, begin ``om aan
die agterspeen te suig'' [to draw the short end of the stick.] To reap the
fruits of a far-sighted policy in future, the bread must now already be
cast upon the waters in the form of an increased research budget.

Secondly, it is strange that the department does not defend its producers'
interests with more, let us say enthusiasm, to put it mildly, with the
Board on Tariffs and Trade when it comes to the determination of import
rights on products of agricultural origin.

As it is understood, the dairy industry and the producers of vegetable oils
have to battle with one hand tied behind their backs against the imported
products in order to survive because the foreign products make the playing
field totally uneven as a result of agricultural subsidies in various
forms, and are allowed to flood the country at unrealistically low tariffs.

Recognition is given to the principle that food should be provided to the
population in the most economical manner possible and that, if the imported
product can meet that need it should be utilised. Such a situation would
usually be labelled a buyer's market. If this is the reason for low import
tariffs, an early warning against such a short-sighted policy would not be
inappropriate, namely that, if the local producers are destroyed because
they can no longer compete with the cheap subsidised imported product, the
market for the product in question will be transformed into a seller's
market as a result of the principle of supply and demand, and the price of
the predominantly available, and in some cases the only available, imported
product will naturally rise.

However, one realises that import tariffs are the result of international
agreements and negotiations, but one sometimes wonders if it is really
necessary for South Africa, as it would seem, always to be at the forefront
of adherence to such agreements.]
Land Affairs is the other leg of the Minister's portfolio. The basic
reasons for the existence of Land Affairs are the redistribution of land,
restitution, land tenure reform, state land management, etc.

In a policy statement of the Minister during February of this year, it was
mentioned that the South African state is the major landowner in the
country. Although this is a generally known fact, it was interesting to
learn that the state owns approximately 32 million hectares, or
approximately 25% of the total land surface. This total figure comprises
land which is privately owned by the state, state-owned land which is
leased mainly to white commercial farmers and companies and state-owned
land which is settled or occupied by tribal groupings and communities.

Although the Government does not, according to the Minister's policy
statement, have a coherent policy on state land disposal, it is admitted
that the department is not favourably disposed towards the illegal
occupation of unutilised land, and that it has not favourably responded to
requests and demands by tribes and communities that state land, which has
been occupied by them, be transferred to them as tribes and communities.
I agree with the Minister that the people who should benefit from an
organised and well-managed system of land distribution, and especially
disposal of underutilised or unutilised state land, are the people who,
through previous disadvantage suffered both socially and economically. The
disposal of state land should be the key to the improvement of their
quality of life. The New NP would therefore urge the Minister to do
everything in her power to finalise the policy formulation in this regard
and to speed up a well-organised and strategically managed system of
sustainable land redistribution.

From the already mentioned figures it would appear that sufficient state-
owned land is still available for this purpose. It is the more affordable
option for making land available for redistribution. The buzz word should,
however, be ``sustainability''.

In conclusion, I will briefly refer to restitution, which causes a great
deal of uncertainty and concern to claimants and those landownersÿ.ÿ.ÿ.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Chairperson, hon Minister and fellow comrades, it is a
pity that Mr Van Rensburg has just left. I was going to remind him that, 15
years ago, his party, as the apartheid government, went to my place in
Mogopa, bulldozed the churches, bulldozed the people's houses, bulldozed
the schools and took away the land of the people at the point of a gun.
Today he has the audacity to come and tell us what to do for Zimbabwe.
[Interjections.] He was there.

The contribution of agriculture to the national economy is said to be
around 6%. However, according to international research the contribution by
agriculture could increase substantially if a sustainable small-scale
emerging farming community is developed. Since small-scale farmers are an
important component of our constituency and constitute a viable instrument
for growth in the agricultural sector, in this debate I will raise serious
concerns for their promotion and development.

In the previous financial year, R20 million was made available for
production loans to previously disadvantaged farmers. How much is currently
awarded for this farming sector? Could we have a breakdown according to
provinces? Previously about R150 million was made available for emerging
farmers by the financial intermediaries. These financial intermediaries
administered production loans to beginners and small farmers at an interest
rate of 14%. The national Department of Agriculture covered the operational
costs, transaction costs and the provisioning fees. Since the repo rate has
declined, what is the current rate of interest on loans awarded to small
farmers? The loans to small farmers are granted in terms of the
Agricultural Credit Act of 1996. Currently what kind of assistance is
available to the small emerging farmers?

Production loans for emerging and small food producers have been separated
from grants for project assistance. Grants for this special project have
been paid into the National Revenue Account. In the past a preliminary
maximum amount of R6 million per province was allocated for these projects.
What is the current situation with regard to these special grants for the
emerging farmers? Do we have the allocation as per province? More
importantly, what kind of financial relief was awarded to the emerging and
small farmers adversely affected by the recent floods?

The purchasing of land by emerging farmers is most troublesome under
certain conditions. The Agricultural Credit Board finances the purchasing
of the land. The purchasing of the land is absolutely central to the
establishment of this subsector. The reason for the inability to provide
loans is, among others, the inadequate capital of applicants and the high
market value of agricultural land. The beginner and small farmer find it
difficult to bridge the gap between market value and the loan value that
the credit board is willing to grant. The present measure of the credit
board is therefore not enough to address the problem effectively.

Extensive research has shown that if the state wants to settle farmers in
this manner and solve the problem, the Government's total involvement in
the purchasing of land for beginner and small farmers must be reviewed. The
question is: What measures are being taken by the Department of Agriculture
to address this difficult experience by the small farmers?

The trends towards a more liberated economy and greater exposure to market
forces in the rest of the world may limit the Government's ability and
potential to intervene in the marketing of agricultural products. What
steps or measures have been taken to ensure that the output of the emerging
farming communities receives an adequate share of the export market in
spite of the global trend? Moreover, what share of the small farmer output
is exported to the Southern Africa Development Community and the European
Community? [Applause.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, I have just learned
recently from the Minister that there are 3 000 claims that have been
settled up to now, apparently, out of 11 000 which we discovered in the
records of the land claims commissioner last year. I am referring to the
Northern Province and Mpumalanga. I wish to commend the department for this
improvement, because we were labouring under the impression that only four
applications had been settled.

I would like also to share my sentiments on this issue of the ill-treatment
of farmworkers that have been staying on the farms for quite a long time.
In the Northern Province we have observed a situation in the area called
Messina, and the farming community is called Maswiriboerdery. There it was
a funny situation because about 200 farm residents were ill-treated and
threatened with eviction. But, at the end of the day, it appeared that the
magistrate and the prosecutors sort of aligned themselves with the
intention to evict these people completely. This aroused very great
suspicion, because, really, the magistrate and prosecutors are public
functionaries who, we believe, are also law enforcers. We noted that with
dismay.

In November 1999 I happened to be in the team of those who went out to
observe land claims restitution and the progress taking place. I must
inform this House that the response we got from the people we met there was
not quite pleasing. They seemed to be very despondent and complained that
the process was taking too long. I think it would be fair for us,
especially for me, to report to this House that the people who have lodged
claims with the department are quite unhappy. The Minister should please
take note of that.

Another observation I have made concerns the issue of willing seller and
willing buyer. The process has good intentions especially because it
assures a bottom-up approach to land redistribution. We realised that
emerging farmers were being exploited, because most of the farmers who sold
their farms to emerging farmers charged exorbitant prices. The poor
emerging farmers, who have never been in the field of farming, are easily
exploited.
Usually the Land Bank assists emerging farmers. But, as we know, the Land
Bank's main intention or incentive is to maximise its profit.

We are calling upon the department to intervene and look into the
possibility of assisting emerging farmers who intend to buy farms from
white people.

Members should note that there is an omission in the sense that a
feasibility study of such farms has never been undertaken to find out if
emerging farmers are able to produce enough products and are able to market
them and run their farms as businesses and maintain them. [Time expired.]

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I have been formally mandated by my
beautiful and evergreen Northern Province to participate in this debate.
[Laughter.]

This debate takes place against the background of the fiasco that is
happening over land in one of our neighbouring countries. I would like to
thank our Government for addressing the question of land systematically so
that, unlike what is happening in that country, we do not have the same
problem.

I would like, again, to thank the Minister and her department for doing
everything in their power to implement this Government's land reform
programme. This is evident from the number of positive pieces of
legislation passed by this Government.

Having said that, however, the Government now needs backup machinery to
implement this programme. We need loyal, committed, dedicated, thinking and
unselfish people to implement the Government's policies.

On 30 October 1999, a delegation of the Select Committee on Agriculture and
Land Affairs visited Mpumalanga to find out if, and how, the land reform
programme was being implemented. The committee also visited the Northern
Province on 12 November of the same year. We met Government officials,
traditional leaders, business communities, community leaders and NGOs, and
MECs from both provinces were in attendance.

During these visits, the committee discovered that many people had lodged
claims for their land. They submitted all relevant documents to the
regional Land Claims Commission, they undertook follow-ups with the said
office and asked for meetings with the land claims commissioner, but all in
vain. Aspirant or earmarked beneficiaries are not informed of the latest
developments. There is no regular communication between claimants and the
regional office of the Land Claims Commission. Claimants in both provinces
categorically state that they have completely lost confidence in the
regional land claims commissioner.

The Northern Province Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Environment and
Land Affairs met on 6 March this year to look into the question of land
redistribution and restoration. It was discovered that, for the past five
years, out of 5 000 claims lodged only three had been successful. The pace
is very slow. Only 0.004% of land claims had been successfully handled.
What a shame! The attitude of some of these officials who are responsible
for implementing these policies is questionable. It is now clear that one
commissioner cannot afford to serve these two provinces. It was again
questioned why the Northern Province and Mpumalanga are served from Gauteng
province. I say to the hon the Minister: Enough is enough, and it cannot be
more than enough!

This brings me to the following questions. What is to be done if officials
in a particular section in the Minister's department are not committed to
their task? What if an official has a negative attitude towards the
Government's land policies? Some of these officials are operating from
their offices which are more than 400 kilometres away from the people they
purport to serve. I ask the Minister: Are we going to keep them even if
they are failing the Minister? Are we, with our caps in our hands, going to
beg them to change their attitudes? As regards those who are contracted to
the Minister's department: Are we going to wait until their contracts
expire? The relevant person to deal decisively with these questions is my
loyal and reliable Minister.

The Northern Province had no room for someone who had run out of ideas.
[Laughter.] As the Northern Province, we are saying that the time for
communities to get their land back is now. This can be done without causing
any row. We cannot tolerate that there are unmilked holy cows. The question
to be answered by all of us is how we should deal with the matter. Some of
the officials' actions are questionable, and their attitude towards our
people is deplorable. Their behaviour when dealing with our people is
unacceptable. This Government's commitment to land reform and their
attitudes are irreconcilable.

My province wants to bring to the attention of the Minister the strained
relationship between the provincial department of land affairs and
officials attached to the national department. There is a ``we-and-them''
attitude between them. My Minister is urged to iron out this problem before
it escalates. Again, there is no proper co-ordination between the
provincial department of land affairs and the office of the regional land
claims commissioner. The sooner this bickering is stopped the better,
because while it is continuing, claimants are the ones who are bearing the
brunt.

It is shocking and sad to know that there are still some farmers who refuse
their farmworkers the right to bury their dead on their farms, even though
they have worked on those farms for more than 25 years. Some were born on
those farms. One family had to travel more than 70 km to bury their dead;
another had to bury theirs at the roadside. What a pity, what a shame.

Are we going to allow our people to be exploited in this way? The answer is
no. It is shocking to notice that these people are only interested in our
labour. Their barbaric action is abhorrent and cannot be tolerated. In
Northern Sotho we have a saying:

Mošutelelwa ga a nabe. [Beggars cannot be choosers.]

My province will support the hon the Minister in her endeavours to better
the lives of our people.

Montshepetša bošego ke mo leboga bo sele. [Legofsi.] [The one who brought
me up while I was young will be thanked when I am a grown-up. [Applause.]]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Minister for Agriculture and Land
Affairs, hon members, people must know that land and agriculture are very
important for our lives and are inseparable.

The Budget Vote of the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs is geared
to improving the living standards of individuals through the support it
proposes to give for instance, the amendment of section 10 of the Deeds
Registries Act of 1937 will empower the board to make regulations which,
when implemented, will lead to the recovery of arrears owed by people.

It is also geared towards safeguarding, empowering and protecting community
members at all levels and to ensuring that they are treated with fairness
and justice. Some people were hard hit by their forced removal from their
areas of residence, but the Ministry for Agriculture and Land Affairs is in
the process of correcting these errors of the past by giving land back to
the people who were dispossessed. However, people should know that all
services catering for their needs in the community have to be sustained,
maintained and supported by all consumers concerned.

A number of sections of the Land Affairs General Amendment Act are aimed at
achieving fairness and justice for all.

Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo nomKhandlu wonke, siyethemba ukuthi umbhidlango
neqhaza elibanjwa nguNgqongqoshe wezemiHlaba nezoLimo ekubhekeleni
inhlalakahle kubo bonke abantu abakhele leli zwe, uzosiza kakhulu. Siyazi
sonke ukuthi umhlaba, noma ngabe owokwakha noma owokulima, ubaluleke
kakhulu ezimpilweni zethu. Abantu bazoluthokozela kakhulu uhlelo lokubasiza
babuyele ezindaweni zabo. Labo abaziphilisa ngokulima, uHulumeni kudingeka
abaxhase ngezidingo zokusebenza.

Siyazi ukuthi abantu abaningi baswele imisebenzi. Abaningi baphila
ngenhlabathi, ikakhulu emakhaya. UmNyango wezoLimo nezemiHlaba usinika
ithemba uma uthi uzobhekela futhi ubambisane nezinhlangano zabalimi noma
ngabe bakuliphi izinga.

Esifundeni engiphuma kuso, KwaZulu-Natali, abantu bakhona ikakhulukazi
abasemakhaya. Bawukhonzile umhlabathi. Indawo yakhona yinhle. Ikhipha lokho
okutshalile, ngaphandle uma kube neshwa likazamcolo nokunye okwenzekayo
ukukhinyabeza izitshalo noma isivuno.

Siyacela impela kumhlonishwa wezoLimo ukuba alekelele ngokuthuthukisa bonke
laba abadinga usizo. Siyacela futhi emNyangweni wezoLimo ukuba abeluleki
kwezolimo babhidlange bafundise abantu ukudweba imithethosisekelo
yezinhlangano zabo nendlela abazoqhuba ngayo izinhlangano zabo, phecelezi,
ibusiness plans.

Kusuka kube kubi kakhulu emphakathini ukuzwa ukuthi kanti naleyo mali esuke
ikhishelwe ukubasiza ibuyela emuva ingasize muntu. Ngithi kumhlonishwa
oyiPhini likaNgqongoshe walo mnyango nakuNgqongqoshe womnyango mabaphuthume
ngoba kubi lapha phandle. Ikati lilele eziko. (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson and honourable House, we hope that the campaign and the role
played by the hon the Minister for Agriculture and of Land Affairs in
ensuring the well-being of all citizens of this country, is important. We
all know that land, whether it is for cultivating or building purposes, is
very important in our lives. People will be pleased with land
redistribution. The Government should ensure that those who are engaged in
subsistence farming are assisted with tools.

We know that many people are unemployed, which means that most of our
people, especially the rural people, are depending on subsistence farming.
Words of hope have been given to us by the Department of Agriculture and
Land Affairs which has promised to provide and work co-operatively with all
kinds of farmers, irrespective of their status.

In the province of KwaZulu-Natal, where I come from, many people are living
in the rural areas. They are people of the soil. Their land is fertile. It
produces what one has sown, except if there was heavy rain or anything that
could affect the harvest.

We appeal to the hon the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs to
assist those who are in dire need. We also appeal to the Department of
Agriculture and Land Affairs to encourage agricultural advisers to teach
people how to draw up constitutions of their organisations as well as their
business plans.

It is bad, especially for our communities, to learn that the money that was
allocated for their needs has not been used. I appeal to the hon the
Minister and her Deputy to speed up the process. Things are getting worse.
People are living in abject poverty.]
The department and committees serving in this portfolio expressed their
concern about the recent floods by visiting the disaster areas. Flood
victims received assistance from the department and other donors around the
country, which made a tremendous contribution to their plight. The IFP
views this aid as promoting the fight against poverty. [Applause.]

Ms B N DLULANE: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon
members, in response to the concern raised by Mr Van Rensburg with regard
to the Zimbabwean land issue, I would like to remind him of a phrase in our
Constitution. I quote:


  We, the people of South Africa,
  Recognise the injustices of our past ...

While we are concerned about what is happening elsewhere, we should also
ask ourselves what we should do to give real meaning to the phrase I
quoted.

Agriculture in the Eastern Cape is characterised by the dominance of two
systems, that is, the commercial land and developing sectors. The use of a
geographic information system together with zoning have made it possible to
identify the agricultural and farming potential across the province.
Amongst other things, the data generated from this is specific, and in
response to the particular environment, the following programmes have been
made possible as a result of this system.

Firstly, we have the integrated livestock and crop development programme.
This is a community development programme that promotes land care through
natural resource conservation and the improvement of rural livelihoods. The
strategy towards the survival and success of this programme focuses on co-
operative work among farmers through their commodity groups, the provincial
and national departments of agriculture, the private sector and research
institutions.

Secondly, we have the Eastern Cape meat production and marketing strategy.
This programme has been put in place solely for the purpose of addressing
the problems faced by meat producers in the province. This programme is
aimed at creating an environment where farmers have a reliable market with
competitive prices, while at the same time providing a continuous supply to
both local and international meat markets, thereby uplifting developing
farmers in the process. The key to this programme is the provision of a
marketing strategy that will benefit the producer and consumer
simultaneously.

Thirdly, there is a co-operative movement in the province. A strong farmer
organisation is the key to successful farming among developing farmers of
the province. Development through agriculture is impossible if farmers are
not organised. A small farmer registration unit was established in 1998 to
organise the farmers into legal entities which include co-operatives and
trusts.

The following indicates the number of co-operative movements that have been
formed and registered so far in the different regions. In the central
region, we have seven, in the eastern region of the Eastern Cape, there are
six, in the East Griqualand region, there are two, and in the northern
region, there are four.

Fourthly, there is a rapid impact programme. The status of this programme
is geared towards infrastructure provision, poverty alleviation and job
creation and production efficiency amongst the developing farmers.
The following statistics are applicable across the province, as follows:
poultry, 253 projects; communal gardens, 140; irrigation projects, 21;
mixed projects, 3; piggeries, 83; and fencing, 11. This totals up to 521
projects. The strategy towards survival and the success of this programme
lies in the co-operative work between farmers through their commodity
groups, the provincial and national Departments of Agriculture, the private
sector and research institutions.

The fifth programme is the Döhne Agriculture Development Institute. Its
main function is to provide appropriate technology to the farming
communities in the province through a back-up system to the extension
officers. The institute is supposed to address practical problems facing
both the developing and commercial farmers in this province through
research works. It could be achieved through the use of farm demonstrations
that respond to the community needs and problems. This programme serves as
a technical resource centre for agriculture information.

The last programme, but not least, is the integration of extension and
research. This extension service is the delivery wing of the department,
because the successes and failure of the department are measured there. On
its own, the directorate is toothless, as it strongly depends on the
researched work. Its main function is to translate researched work into a
form usable to farmers.

Malunga nekamva lamafama asakhasayo, iMpuma Koloni ibe nethamsanqa lokuthi
iphumelele kukhuphiswano lwenkqubela-phambili yamafama asezilalini.
Iphumelele phambili kubathabathi-nxaxheba abebengamakhulu amathathu. Loo
mpumelelo yenze ukuba sinikwe izigidi ezingamakhulu amane, anamawaka
amathathu, eerandi nguzwelonke ukuze kuncediswe ngayo kwinkqubela yamafama.
Yonke loo nto iza kwenziwa ngomhla we-18 kuCanzibe eNgqushwa. Ndiqinisekile
ukuba uMphathiswa uya kuba yinxalenye yaloonto. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Concerning the future of emerging farmers, the Eastern Cape was fortunate
to receive an award for the most improved village farmers. It came first
out of 300 competitors. The award brought with it R400 003 000 from
national Government to aid farming programmes. All that will happen on 18
May in Peddie. I am sure the Minister will be there.]

In conclusion, I would like to deal with the interesting question of the
restitution programme. The following data has been provided by the
Department of Land Affairs: We settled eight of the land claims we received
in 1999. The land claims which are pending for 1999-2000 are 847. The land
claims targeted for the year 2000 involve 25 different communities. The
programme of land redistribution has been put on hold since the appointment
of the new Minister, due to a policy shift in this programme.

As a result, a moratorium was in place, and is likely to be lifted towards
the end of April, when the new policy will be in place. We are commending
the new commissioner in the Eastern Cape, Mr Gwanya. In a short space of
time he has taken some huge strides, hoping for the best.

We are also happy that the West Bank communities are starting to enjoy the
fruits borne by the freedom achieved through their struggle to regain the
land which was taken from them through the barrel of a gun, or through the
Forced Removal Act of 1913. [Applause.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister and the hon
House, thank you very much for this opportunity to participate in these
debates. According to the land restitution process, persons and communities
who had been dispossessed of their land after 19 June 1913, as a result of
discriminatory laws and practices, are being given back that land.

Out of a total of 600 claims that were resolved a year ago, 380 were in
favour of their claimants. The amount of land transferred to the claimants
was approximately 264 000 ha at the cost of R53 million.

In my candid opinion this process of land restitution would save this
country from falling into the same tragic situation into which our northern
neighbours have fallen.

In the North West province research has shown that people were removed from
land of high-potential soil and better rainfall to land of low-potential
soil and less rainfall. This has resulted in those disadvantaged
communities getting more disadvantaged through engaging in arable farming
on land that was not suited for growing crops, but is being encroached upon
by the Kgalagadi desert.

Our people are not only yearning for the restoration of their ancestral
land, but are yearning to have land under their own title. The previously
disadvantaged farmers are constantly being reminded that land for which
they are yearning, would, if available, be sold at market-related prices.
This is a matter of great concern for the emerging farmers. They contend
that competing for land against their commercial colleagues in the open
market would place them at a disadvantage and consequently the land would
then continue to remain concentrated in the hands of their commercial
colleagues.

The general trend of thought of the emerging crop farmers in the North West
province is that all state land should be placed on sale to them,
especially land that has been leased by black farmers for a number of
years. The Government should then enable or empower them to purchase such
land by means of an empowerment subsidy or some form of discount on the
market-related price. This step would ensure an equal distribution of land
to all the country's citizens.

The return of land to its rightful owners and occupants is not without
problems and hitches. Many families who had been forcefully removed had
built houses and spent their lifelong savings in those areas. Now the long-
expected time of return to their ancestral land has dawned, but they are
hesitant and wonder how they will manage to rebuild those houses in the new
land of their forefathers. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms B THOMSON: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister and hon members,
the land reform programme is an enormous task for all of us. Land
dispossession has been institutionalised over decades. Remedial measures
have to be understood in the context of reconciliation, perseverance and
understanding. I repeat that it is an enormous task for victims,
perpetrators, support organisations, as well as Government as a
facilitator.

In the process of land dispossession the beneficiaries unjustly enriched
themselves substantially. Even up to this very day their generations live
off the fruits of that unscrupulousness. It is said time and again by
various stakeholders in KwaZulu-Natal that the land reform process,
particularly restitution, has been a very slow process. However, one does
understand that, if handled callously, restitution could cause serious
tension. It should be understood clearly that this Government is committed
to assisting in the redress of the imbalances of the past.

Those who planted the seeds of dispossession are also contributing to the
slow pace by failing to negotiate reasonable prices for land. The
Department of Land Affairs is faced with the problem of having to
facilitate this lengthy process. People on the ground fail to understand
the complexities of land reform.

For the purpose of my speech I will focus on the restitution claims on
rural land as it affects the poorest of the poor, particularly women in
Natal who have to work the land. We must admit that restitution has been a
slow process. The Ministry has recognised this fact and appropriate
mechanisms are being put in place. The process has been changed to follow
the administrative route, rather than relying too much on the legal route.

We, as Government, appreciate the work of progressive nongovernmental
organisations with the support of communities on the ground. At the same
time, we must understand that the process cannot be expedited at the
expense of the quality of the service, otherwise restitution will be seen
as some sort of rural dumping without development opportunities. I know
that understanding this is an emotive issue.

State services and infrastructure need to be put in place and the
traditional leadership engaged. The return of the land to the people faces
many challenges, namely land, new sustainable development, provision of
basic services and community organisation. We need social harmony if
restitution is to achieve its desired purpose. We cannot afford to have a
situation in which there are oppressive social relations and an emerging
class struggle. If restitution is handled carelessly, there is a likelihood
of tension emerging.

Our Government is conscious of the fact that the views of the affected
people are indispensable and acknowledges their suffering and pain. The
national land committee task group has made a project proposal for the
establishment of a body called the Community-Driven Restitution Initiative.
It is aimed at informing claiming communities about the process that the
Department of Land Affairs, and the commission on the restitution of land
rights, has put in place in an attempt to speed up the process, to ensure
that the claiming communities are centrally involved in the process and
that they make informed decisions. This project will ensure closer working
relations among the Department of Land Affairs and the national land
committee, the commission on the restitution of land rights and restitution-
claiming communities. The proposal, if accepted, will go a long way towards
speeding up the process.

Having said that, it must be borne in mind that restitution does not come
cheaply. It is an expensive process. It is estimated that for KwaZulu-Natal
alone R37 million will be needed for the financial year 1999-2000 to settle
only seven rural claims. This has serious implications for post-settlement
support. I think that the current market value of land concept needs to be
revisited. How on earth does one take so much money and compensate people
for land that was unfairly acquired? One is leaving the recipient of the
compensation in an even better financial position than before. The bulk of
the money should rather be spent on improving the livelihood of the
returning communities.

This brings us to the issue of emerging farmers. Land dominates the assets
structure of the farm. Therefore if land is managed properly it should
yield returns to infinity. That is precisely why post-settlement support in
terms of provision of basic services, such as extensions, becomes
important. In addition, subsistence farming is a business, therefore it is
necessary to provide emerging farmers with skills that they need so that
they can make informed decisions. These farmers need to prosper from the
returns provided by agriculture. Extension workers need to provide
effective agricultural facilitation and assistance to enable communities to
realise a livelihood from agriculture.

The farming community needs to organise itself into local community
structures. More often than not, the common problem faced by communities is
that of poor leadership structures. There is often inefficiency within
local community structures. Land is sometimes left uncropped and this leads
to exploitation of natural resources, to environmental degradation and
decreasing returns in agriculture.

In conclusion, we commend the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs for
introducing the new grant aimed at redistributing at least 15% of
agricultural land over a five-year period to emerging black farmers. We
also commend her for her support for the rights of women with regard to
land and her commitment to addressing tenure issues. This is, indeed,
encouraging. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Mr Chairperson, hon members,
I must say that the quality of the debate has been very interesting and
encouraging. It shows that hon members have really been doing their
constituency work and have brought up issues that come from constituencies.
I think that would help us go a long way, as a department, in responding to
the needs of the communities that we have to serve.

Maybe if one could comment briefly on the issues raised by hon members, I
would like to say that some of them, indeed, were an affirmation of our
stated policy. Some members came with views and proposals regarding what we
can do to improve the work that we have to undertake, that of land
redistribution and agricultural development. But others, I must say, were a
bit disappointing.

I would like to respond to the points raised by the hon MEC Van Rensburg
concerning the commitment that he said the Western Cape government has made
towards improving the lot of emerging farmers in the Western Cape. I think
one of the measures for me that would determine how far we have to go in
the Western Cape is to what extent, in terms of our farmer settlement
programme, we would be able to establish black wine producers, wine makers
and exporters. I think that would be a challenge.

If one looks at the cost and at the potential that exists in the Western
Cape in this industry, it, indeed, would have been a well-spent expense if
we were able to introduce emerging farmers into this industry. I must say
that our contribution to this will remain that of ensuring that we
facilitate access to our markets, which is part of our responsibility as
the national department, and that we work with provinces in order to
support those who are entering this sphere.

In this instance I must say that I am pleased to announce that we are
looking forward to signing a mutual agreement on the SPS measures during
the impending visit by the Chinese President, which should go a long way
towards facilitating access to the world's sought-after market of China.
For me, even if we could get access to just one market in one of the
provinces of China for our products, we would have done very well indeed.
[Interjections.]

I would also like to comment again on the issues raised by hon Versveld.
Owing to insufficient time, I may have spoken very fast and there may have
been confusion regarding the food security programme and other programmes
that we are undertaking as a department. The issue might not have been made
clear enough.

One of our commitments, also in terms of our policy, is to make sure that
household and national food security remain our core objective as a
department. However, in order for us to maximise our resources, we need to
work together with the various line function departments which also have an
interest in household food security. It is not that we are saying that
issues of welfare do not concern us, but we are saying that welfare issues,
nutrition issues which fall under health and the community gardens
programme, which is encouraged by the community public works programme,
contain elements which are very important for agriculture, when it comes to
providing for household food security. For that reason, we as Government
will remain committed to that programme.
I must say that the issue raised by hon Taabe around the situation in which
we find ourselves, particularly in areas of Mpumalanga, concerning labour
tenants, points to the importance of dealing with the issue of land reform
in South Africa. If I may remind hon members, the legislation on labour
tenancy and the Extension of Security of Tenure Act seek to create
certainty in terms of the security of tenure of people who have been
working on farms for a long time, as well as those who, when those farms
were bought by their owners, were found already living there and turned
into labourers.

It is a sad situation, particularly in areas of the Free State, Mpumalanga,
KwaZulu-Natal and the Northern Cape, to find that there is collusion
between the security forces, the commandos and the justice system, and that
these groups are not willing to ensure that they adhere to the legislation
that these two Houses have passed. We continue to find that evictions
occur. I must say that this is a cause for concern, because it continues to
remind us of our land dispossession history, which we are seeking to
change.

Apart from introducing legislation, the department has embarked on a
programme to educate the current magistrates and judges, so that they may
understand what they need to do when they adjudicate on matters of labour
tenancy and extension of security of tenure. However, the long-term issue
that we need to deal with is that of creating permanency on the security of
tenure of farmworkers and farm dwellers.

I think we need to revisit the issue raised by Comrade Barbara Thomson,
namely that of land prices in South Africa, particularly in respect of
current owners. In a number of instances the reason we are having
difficulties acquiring land in order to assist farmworkers and residents is
because of the price attached to that land.

With regard to the cases which the Rev Moatshe has raised about restitution
in the North West, part of the reason we are not able to settle some of the
claims is because the prices have been pitched so high. If we were to deal
with only a few of those claims, it would take up the entire restitution
budget. This is a matter that we have to revisit. I think all of us as
public representatives will have to come to a determination of what is just
and equitable. This will call for sensitivity and understanding from those
who are current occupiers of that land. If we deal with this situation, we
will go a long way in fast-tracking the pace of the restitution process.

I heard the hon Conroy say that at the pace at which we are working - I am
sorry, I am not sure whether it was him or the hon Van Rensburg - it will
take us 20 years to complete the process. I do not think that is really a
goal we should set ourselves. Perhaps it could be through circumstances,
but if we actually extend the period in which we will settle our
restitution process, we will encounter problems. We will never be able to
deal with issues of tension such as we are raising today, something we seek
to avoid. The more the others are waiting and seeing their land being put
to productive use by those from whom the land needs to change hands, the
more problems we will encounter. I think it is a matter to which we should
all be committed. This is one of the programmes that, where possible, we
need to fast-track.

With regard to the issue around import tariffs, it is maybe important to
indicate the following to the hon member concerned. The National Marketing
Council, as well as the department, have been working with the BTT, which
is the Board on Tariffs and Trade. All of them have been working together
with the Department of Trade and Industry in order to ensure that the kind
of tariffs that are introduced are, firstly, in line with our WTO
commitments, but at the same time are not just used as a barrier to trade
with other countries, because this is what we are fighting for with our
competitors in their countries as well.

Surely, in our work we have always been mindful that some of the countries
that we trade with are still overly subsidised in terms of their
production, which then creates some form of distortion. My own view is that
we must continue through this world system to fight for the reduction and
actually complete elimination of subsidies in those countries, so that we
can all participate on the same playing field. It is a matter that we are
continuing to work at, but it also means that we have to sharpen our
instruments. For example, how do we deal with dumping, as well as put in
place countervailing measures to protect our producers? It is a matter that
we are looking at.

The issue of the ARC budget may not have been raised in either my speech or
that of the Deputy Minister. However, we share the concern about that. What
is important for me, is to determine to what extent we are using the
limited budget the ARC has in order to promote the public good. It is
challenge, not only for the Ministry but also for this House, to look at
what amount of the budget of the ARC goes towards achieving our national
objectives, taking into consideration that the ARC legislation does allow
it to leverage other resources from the private sector if they have to do
work for private individuals. The question is: Are they costing correctly?
Do they count what they do? Are they overstretched? Do we need to refine
our institutions of the ARC in order to get maximum benefit for the current
resources?

However, for me the larger question is the budget of the science councils
in South Africa that we need to look at. The ARC is just one part of that.
If hon members will remember, the ARC budget appears on our budget as a
transfer from the Ministry of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology. I
think the challenge that we face is how to re-examine the entire science
budget in South Africa, in other words that of the ARC, the CSIR and other
science institutes, especially when taking into consideration the role that
science and technology will play in this century. I think that it is a
matter we would need to look at.

There are issues which I think Mama Ndzanga correctly raised, which one may
unfortunately not be able to deal with in detail. However, some of those
issues actually relate to old programmes that were dealt with in the past
five years, such as the R62 million grant which was not actually a
production loan, but assistance in respect of infrastructure development
for emerging farmers.

With regard to other questions, I would actually appeal to hon members and
ask whether it is possible for them to give me some of those questions so
that we can respond, not just for their province, but also for the benefit
of their constituency, in order to be able to deal with some of these
matters of concern.

The other issue that I think one would need to respond to is the issue of
synergy between provincial departments of land affairs and agriculture.
This is a matter which has been dealt with in the meeting of the MECs for
Agriculture and Land Affairs. We are working towards an institutional
framework which will ensure that there is alignment between these bodies.

I would also like to come back to the issue of state land. I think that for
the past three weeks, if I am correct, I have heard so many figures being
bandied around, 25 million, 35 million and 32 million, that I am now
equally confused as to how much state land we have in South Africa. Perhaps
we need to put the issue of state land into context without putting any
figure forward or saying that this one is wrong and that one is right.

State land in South Africa is categorised in different ways. We have state
land that is used for domestic purposes, where one has army bases,
hospitals and schools. That is state land. It is not the type of land that
one can use for redistribution. It is land that is being used by the state
for the welfare of society. I am saying that when we look at available
state land, we should be mindful of what we are talking about.

The other state land we are talking about is the land where we have the old
SADT irrigation scheme - the Taung schemes, the Lisbon estate in the
Northern Province, Magwatt in the Eastern Cape, Nyoka, Makatini flats and
so on. Some of the land is the type of land where we have said, as
Government, that through working with the provincial MECS, we will be
disposing of it to people who will pass the criteria.

I am saying ``pass the criteria'' deliberately, because when we look at the
disposal of this state land, we take into consideration, firstly, that some
of the current people who have been lessees on that land are in serious
debt to the state. When we deal with the disposal issue, we will take that
into consideration. Secondly, we will also take into consideration the
matter that has been raised by an hon member here where people had a lease
with an option to buy. What was done in those areas such as Mpofu District
in the Eastern Cape is that we have already publicised that land for
ownership with the first option to buy by the current lessees. Those who
will be able to purchase will purchase. That is one form of disposal. We
are also recognising the fact that in areas of the North-West, around the
Bala farms, which is getting our urgent attention at the moment, some of
the current lessees may not be able to afford the prices. We are saying
that for those people, we will extend the lease period in order to ensure
that we do not put those people into debt right from the beginning. As part
of our programme, as Government, we want to exit from farming.
The third category of state land that we are referring to is land that is
already occupied. Hon members will remember that, earlier in my speech, I
indicated that Government remains the nominal trustee for some of these
areas. This applies to a number of areas of tribal land such as the Ninga
land and so on. Even though that land belongs to a tribe, in statutory
terms, it is state land. So, in looking at issues of redistribution, one
needs to be mindful when making statements about why state land is not
being used for redistribution that the actual land available for
redistribution is very minimal.

I was talking to the officials today and saying that we would come back to
this House and the National Assembly to actually make an analysis of how
much state land is occupied, the purpose for which it is occupied and how
much is available for redistribution, so that we remove this cloud about
why Government is not redistributing the 24 million hectares, because this
24 million does not exist.

The other issue that I wanted to refer to is the question which was raised
by hon member Versveld around the issue of statutory rights in communal
areas. We do have constitutionally enforceable rights in land for those
communities. As a democratic government, in the past five years, we have
enacted legislation which protects land rights in those areas. We have an
Act known as the Interim Protection of Informal Land Rights Act, and
through the Minister acting as the trustee, we have been able to ensure
that economic development does take place even in those rural places.

Here again a case in point is the Mhinga Trust in the Northern Province
where we were able to alienate the land for housing development for that
tribe. They have also come back to us for the alienation of another piece
of land for ecotourism in that area.

I am saying that it is not all doom and gloom, but that there are
challenges all of us have to face. We, as the department, the forerunners,
will do everything in our power to ensure that we respond to the challenges
that this House has thrown at us and to the concerns that we need to deal
with. We will rely on the support of this House in the way in which we
interact with members as they raise the issues of their constituencies,
while at the same time working with us to ensure that we improve the
budgetary situation of Agriculture, both in the provinces and nationally.

I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for the way in which he dealt
with the issue of how we need to manage our provincial and national
resources in order to ensure that we are able to drive our transformation
agenda. This is not an easy thing, because sometimes, as we sit here, we
look mainly at the national budget, and forget that Agriculture is a
concurrent function. A lot of implementation occurs at a provincial level.
If we have to make a change, particularly for those of us who are here as
provincial representatives, it is very important to see how we actually
look at the way in which our provincial agricultural budgets are structured
in order to deliver services.

Where does money go in our provincial agricultural budgets? We are all
talking about the improvement of extension. Extension offices are not at
national level, but at provincial level. That is where they have to work.
We will do everything in order to give support, but I think the
responsibility of ensuring that those advisory services are well and alive
lies with the provincial government. These are the things that we would
need to look at again, because I think the system of governance that we
have allows for co-operation, but, at the same time, allocates particular
responsibilities to different spheres of government. This is a
responsibility that all of us have to share. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! That concludes
the debate on this Vote and I take this opportunity to thank the hon the
Minister and her deputy for this lively debate and the information that has
been imparted to this House. We look forward to seeing her again in the
House.

Debate concluded.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES - CENTRAL
                               DRUG AUTHORITY

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 17:05.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          WEDNESDAY, 15 MARCH 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:


     Joint Standing Committee on Defence:


     Appointment: Nqakula, N N.
     Discharged: Maziya, A M.

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and Select Committee on Education and Recreation:


         (a)     Report of the Department of Education for 1998-99 [RP 62-
              2000].


         (b)     Government Notice No 1398 published in the Government
              Gazette No 20650 dated 19 November 1999, Notification that the
              President has assented to the Education Laws Amendment Act,
              1999 (Act No 48 of 1999).


         (c)     Government Notice No 1399 published in the Government
              Gazette No 20651 dated 19 November 1999, Notification that the
              President has assented to the Higher Education Amendment Act,
              1999 (Act No 55 of 1999)


         (d)     Government Notice No 1400 published in the Government
              Gazette No 20652 dated 19 November 1999, Notification that the
              President has assented to the National Student Financial Aid
              Scheme Act, 1999 (Act No 56 of 1999).


         (e)     Government Notice No 1422 published in the Government
              Gazette No 20666 dated 25 November 1999, Appointment of
              persons to serve as members of the South African
              Qualifications Authority made in terms of the South African
              Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of 1995).


         (f)     Government Notice No 1423 published in the Government
              Gazette No 20669 dated 10 December 1999, Transfer of funds and
              other moveable assets of the State to the public schools made
              in terms of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of
              1996).


         (g)     Government Notice No 1473 published in the Government
              Gazette No 20692 dated 10 December 1999, National policy
              regarding instructional time for school instructional
              offerings made in terms of the National Education Policy Act,
              1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (h)     Government Notice No 82 published in the Government
              Gazette No 20844 dated 4 February 1999, Norms and standards
              for educators made in terms of the National Education Policy
              Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (1)    Financial Statements of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
         for 1998-99 [RP 38-2000];


     (2)    Liquidation Account of the Tobacco Board for the period 1
         January 1997 to 31 March 1999 [RP 202-2000];


     (3)    Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance Fund for 1996
         [RP 37-2000];


     (4)    Financial Statements of the Mines and Works Compensation Fund
         for 1998-99 [RP 195-99].

2.    The Minister of Labour:


     Report of the Department of Labour for 1998-99 [RP 61-2000].

                           THURSDAY, 16 MARCH 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Labour on 15 March 2000 submitted a draft of the
         Unemployment Insurance Bill 2000, and a memorandum explaining the
         objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Labour and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(1)(a)
         and (b).


     (2)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Truth and Reconciliation Commission for 1998-99 [RP 38-2000].


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Select Committee
         on Land and Environmental Affairs for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Liquidation Account of the
         Tobacco Board for the period 1 January 1997 to 31 March 1999 [RP
         202-2000].


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Labour and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises for information:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Unemployment Insurance Fund for 1996 [RP 37-2000].


         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Mines and Works Compensation Fund for 1998-99 [RP 195-
              99].


         (c)     Report of the Department of Labour for 1998-99 [RP 61-
              2000].

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Reports of the Board on Tariffs and Trade on the -


     (a)    Rebate of duty on biaxially oriented polypropulene film used in
         the manufacture of self-adhesive tape, Report No 3873;


     (b)    Rebate of the duty on textile fabrics impregnated, coated,
         covered or laminated with polyurethane, for fishing, Report No
         3874;


     (c)    Reduction in the rate of duty on "Agarbatti" other odiriferous
         preparations which operate by burning, Report No 3875;


     (d)    Withdrawal of items under rebate items 307.04 of Schedule 3 to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, Report No 3877;
     (e)    Withdrawal of the provision under rebate item
         313.04/26.10.01.00, Report No 3878;


     (f)    Rebate of full duty on vinyl, chloridevinyl acetate copolymers,
         for the manufacture of floor coverings, Report No 3880.

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Report of the Department of Agriculture for 1999 [RP 59-2000].


COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation (National
     Council of Provinces) on visits to the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal,
     dated 3 March 2000:


     Two delegations from the Portfolio Committee on Education (National
     Assembly) and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation
     (National Council of Provinces) conducted visits to Eastern Cape and
     KwaZulu-Natal schools on 2, 3 and 4 November 1999, with the following
     mandates:


     A. Objectives:


     In a meeting on 13 October 1999, it was unanimously agreed to and
     envisaged that two delegations from the Committees visit the Eastern
     Cape and KwaZulu-Natal provinces simultaneously during the constituency
     week primarily in the most disadvantaged rural communities, with the
     following objectives:


     (i)    to co-operatively examine along with the provincial Education
           Standing Committees, the capacity of the provinces in dealing
           with the demands set by national Acts, regulations and policies,
           and other challenges as spelt out in the first priority of
           Minister Asmal's Call to Action document which intends to make
           our provincial systems work by making co-operative government
           work;


     (ii)   to examine conditions of physical degradation in schools in
           areas listed by, and according to the objectives of the
           President's rural strategy programme;


     (iii)  to investigate the implementation of the funding norms and
           standards emanating from the South African Schools Act;


     (iv)   to examine ways and means of effecting greater synergy between
           education at provincial and national level in the respective
           provinces;


     (v)    to construct a co-operative relationship between the national
           parliamentary Education Portfolio Committee, the NCOP Select
           Committee and Standing Committees on Education and Culture in
           the provincial legislatures, in order to deal co-operatively
           with challenges constraining the effective development of our
           education system;


     (vi)   to develop a rural development strategy with regard to building
           and renovations of schools, and the provision of resources like
           textbooks and teaching aids in rural schools in both provinces;
           and
     (vii)  to address the challenges of the allocations and management of
           the provincial budget as it relates to education in both
           provinces.


     In view of the fact that the Committees play a vital role in promoting
     co-operative governance between the provinces and central government
     and in improving the quality of life of every citizen on the ground,
     the delegations focused on all affected educational infrastructure
     which were damaged and destroyed by the tornadoes and also on assessing
     a need for repairs and renovations in all of those  schools visited.


     Tirisano


     The Education Portfolio and Select Committee delegations based their
     study tours to the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal provinces on the
     "Call to Action" (-"Tirisano") of the Minister of Education, Prof K
     Asmal. The document outlining the objectives of the "Call to Action"
     was distributed by the national education department to members of the
     provincial legislatures, Education Directors, school principals and the
     media.
     The delegations emphasised that since the "Tirisano" document was based
     on an extensive consultation of the Minister with a large variety of
     stakeholders, that there was no need to re-invent the wheel by
     searching for other criteria on which to base the visit of the
     delegations to the provinces.


     In particular, the first priority identified in "Tirisano" (Call to
     Action) - "to make our provincial system work by making co-operative
     government work" - was clearly in line with the purpose of the visits
     of the delegations to the provinces. The Minister, Prof K Asmal pointed
     out in "Tirisano" that the three largest provinces, KwaZulu-Natal,
     Eastern Cape and the Northern Province were the poorest provinces with
     the largest backlogs of school buildings and services. It was for this
     reason that the delegations have identified these three provinces for a
     study tour.


     Other issues identified by Tirisano were -


     a)     the inability of many provincial education departments to manage
         education efficiently;


     b)     the empowerment of provincial departments to fulfil its
         statutory responsibilities; and


     c)     dealing effectively with challenges in respect of the allocation
         and management of provincial budgets.


     A rural development strategy


     The delegations also emphasised the importance of establishing rural
     development strategy for vastly rural provinces such as the Eastern
     Cape and KwaZulu-Natal. The resourcing of schools in the rural areas
     with regard to establishing classrooms conducive to learning, the
     adequate provision of textbooks, teaching aids and other learning
     materials must become a priority.


     In their visit to deep rural schools in the provinces, the delegations
     identified vandalised school buildings, destruction of school property
     and absence of textbooks, toilets, proper sanitation and libraries as
     the main problems relating to rural education. However, it appeared as
     if effective management or lack of effective management by principals
     has a major impact on the success or lack of success of rural schools
     in cultivating an atmosphere conducive to learning and teaching.


     Culture of teaching and learning


     There were some poverty-stricken rural schools visited by the
     delegations which had good discipline, where teachers were actively
     teaching and students were actively learning. There were virtually no
     broken windows and vandalised furniture. Although the schools did not
     have enough textbooks, school governing bodies were encouraged to raise
     funds for learner-teaching materials. Many of these poor rural schools
     maintained a matric pass rate in excess of 60% through the positive
     attitude of the principals and teachers, and generally have neat and
     clean premises.


     There were also rural schools where principals had many complaints
     while doing very little themselves to improve the situation. Such
     schools were generally vandalised, desks were either broken or stolen,
     textbooks in class were virtually non-existent and there was poor
     attendance of teachers and learners. At such schools there were also no
     good relationship between the principal, teachers, parents and
     students. These schools maintained a matric pass rate of less than 10%.


     The management capacity of principals has to be urgently investigated
     at rural schools, while those many principals who are
     doing a good job under trying conditions, have to be strongly
     supported.


     Delegations


     The Eastern Cape delegation under the leadership of Prof S M Mayatula
     included Mrs M A A Njobe, Ms P K Mothoagae, Prof L M Mbadi, Mr L Suka
     (NCOP member), Mr P G Qokweni (NCOP member), Mrs J Witbooi (NCOP
     member), Ms N C Manjezi (Committee Secretary) and Ms L Carelse
     (Committee Assistant).


     The KwaZulu-Natal delegation under the leadership of Mr R P Z van den
     Heever included Mr L M Kgwele, Ms P N Mnandi, Mr R Ntuli, Mr A M
     Mpontshane, Adv A H Gaum, Mr A Myeni (Committee Secretary) and Mr J
     Rossouw (Committee Assistant). Adv A H Gaum left the delegation after
     the first day due to pressing engagement in Parliament and in his
     constituency.


     Due to prior commitments and apologies, Mr N M Raju (NCOP member) and
     Mr T D Lee were unable to join the delegations.


     The delegation in the Eastern Cape province was accompanied by
     delegates from the Provincial Standing Committee on Education, which
     included the Chairperson, Mr S Mancotywa and Ms N Mahlawe. The
     delegation in KwaZulu-Natal was accompanied by delegates from the
     Provincial Standing Committee on Education and Culture, which included
     the Chairperson, Mr S Ngidi, Mr Z Nzuza (Committee Secretary), Mr L N
     Mjadu (Personal Secretary: MEC for Education) and Regional Directors of
     Education.


     An attempt was made to obtain a balanced view with input from both the
     departmental official sources, and from school principals. Main
     problems were highlighted and where possible, solutions were
     recommended.
     B. VISIT TO EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE


     1. Visit to the Department of Education - Bisho


     Official view: Department of Education Management


     The Eastern Cape province is one of the three provinces identified by
     President Thabo Mbeki as the poorest and needed extra financial
     assistance. On the first day the delegation was warmly welcomed by the
     MEC for Education Mr Stone Sizani, and had open and constructive
     discussion with top management led by the Superintendent-General, Mr J
     Gordon. The following are some of the areas covered.


     The Eastern Cape Department of Education has inherited six different
     education departments with two of them located within two former
     homelands, namely, Ciskei and Transkei. The department serves 6 447
     schools of which almost 60% are rural and farm schools. According to
     the records of the department, the survey of the needs done in 1996 has
     revealed that it is worst off when it comes to physical infrastructure,
     as the majority of the rural schools are mud structures with no toilets
     or sanitation, fencing, water and electricity. The survey revealed the
     following statistics for the province:


     1 487 (25%) schools have no toilets; 2 931 (49%) schools have no
     sportsfield; 5 528 (93%) schools have no libraries; 5 578 (94%) schools
     have no laboratories; 622 (10%) schools are in need of major repairs;
     and 206 (3%) schools are totally unfit for education and learning.


     The province is often hit by tornadoes, which have caused extensive
     damage to hundreds of schools particularly in the rural areas. This has
     increased the backlog from 15 000 to about 23 000 classrooms and the
     provincial department needs R92 million to rebuild and renovate schools
     damaged by natural disasters. According to Mr Hecther, physical
     infrastructure in the province is the worst in all provinces and an
     emergency fund will be necessary to address disasters and other
     critical matters.


     The Department of Education's capital works programme commenced late in
     1995 with an allocation of R355 million (RDP funded) in the 1995/1996
     departmental budget. This was subsequently extended with the capital
     works allocation of R365 million (RDP funded) from the 1996/97 budget.
     The 1997/98 budget provided R108 million for capital works, but this
     was cut back to R53,9 million when the financial position of the
     Department became evident. In 1998/99 and 1999/2000 budgets, no funding
     has been set aside for any capital programmes.


     To address the classrooms backlog in the province, the department will
     need approximately R600 million per annum over a period of five years
     or approximately R450 million per annum over a period of ten years.
     These substantial allocations can enable the Department to embark on an
     ambitious multi-dimensional programme to address the
     shortage of classrooms in the province.


     (i)    School building programme


     The schools in the Eastern Cape province are reaching shocking levels
     of degradation. In certain instances the building authorities maintain
     that a number of classrooms in several schools should in fact be
     condemned. All these schools are government assets and it is clear
     that, the lack of funding for emergency renovations has reached
     unacceptable proportions.


     In the extreme cases, there exists the danger of a total mess of these
     assets. These assets have deteriorated to such an extent that in many
     cases, they have become a health hazard.


     Although the construction of new schools is of prior importance, major
     capital injection is urgently required in order to restore the existing
     buildings to safer working environments. Funds are desperately needed
     for three primary aims, namely -


     - day-to-day maintenance to cut down expenditure on major repairs and
         renovations and to maintain reasonable standards in all schools;
     - to repair the existing major damage to the loss of valuable assets;
         and
     - to allow for emergency repairs and renovations on a ten-year basis.


     These funds will alleviate the deterioration of the schools, and it is
     obvious that once a regular flow of funding is made available for
     regular maintenance, future excessive capital outlay will then be
     minimised. But it is vital that the current state of general
     degradation is addressed as soon as possible.


     Although the Department has identified the causes of damage in most
     instances and will address the necessary methods of prevention in the
     near future, the following current conditions should be noted to
     necessitate appeal for funds.


     (ii)   General interiors and exteriors


     The walls are worn out resulting to further damage to the structures.
     These walls urgently require major repairs and resurfacing, as they are
     in danger of collapsing and structural damage shows, which needs
     immediate attention.


     A problem which is rife in all schools is that of damaged windows,
     window-panes and frames. An attempt to prevent the theft of window-
     panes by individuals has failed. To date, the only relatively
     successful method of protecting windows against theft and vandalism, is
     the installation of galvanised frames.


     Another hazard facing pupils in most schools is unsafe electrical
     fittings. Inadequate electrical supply in most schools which caters for
     domestic science has rendered these services unusable.


     The structural problems within the schools continue and a number of
     classrooms suffer from damaged ceilings due to leaking roofs.


     Many schools have no toilets, sanitation and ablution facilities. The
     students must have access to these facilities. The systems have long
     been broken, yet the students must continue to use the facilities,
     creating more sanitary health risk. The children who are subjected to
     these shocking conditions are pupils in all Grades as well as teachers.
     The dilemma of vandalism grows daily. It is understood that most
     schools in general make every effort to prevent damage to the
     buildings. Funds are therefore required to institute increased security
     measures in order to protect the government assets. Many schools in
     general have no furniture, libraries, equipment, school halls and
     sporting facilities.


     (iii)  Background on budgets


     The province needs R900 million per annum for non-personnel expenditure
     and for the department to function normally, i.e for normal repairs to
     be carried out. In 1998, the department was allocated R500 million and
     in 1999 it was cut to R200 million. In 1999, the department requested
     R20 million, but for the first time in three years, the department only
     managed to receive R5 million for 6 400 schools for maintenance and for
     emergency repairs. More funding is needed  repair and renovate all the
     damaged schools in the province.


     (iv)   Facilities and personnel in farm schools


     There are various types of farm schools which are operating on the
     property of the farmers. The department provides personnel and material
     resources. Farmers have given the land to the department and it is for
     the department to provide material and human resources to the schools.


     In the majority of cases the department is still experiencing problems
     with regard to scholar transport due to budget cuts. There is provision
     for hostel facilities and the department provides subsidies for
     children residing in those hostels.


     Since 1996, many farm schools were amalgamated because of the current
     staff provisioning norms which stipulate that there must be a minimum
     number of learners in the school has been efficient in terms of human
     resources, curriculum engagements and provisioning various services in
     those schools.


     In the past, farm schools were marginalised. Presently the department
     is doing something in terms of meeting the needs of those farm schools;
     viz: Many programmes are specifically servicing those farm schools,
     many donors and non-governmental organisations, in conjunction with the
     department, have programmes targeting those farm schools, and good work
     is in progress in the majority of those schools.
     The department has received a positive response from donors like
     Vusisizwe Trust and Micro Projects which have donated most of the
     schools that have been built in the farming areas. The help from all
     these donors is assisting the department to make meaningful investments
     in the upliftment of the impoverished communities of the Eastern Cape
     province and the donations are regarded as a truly humane effort to
     improve the impoverished communities.


     (v)    Intergovernmental approach on infrastructure


     On the Department's intergovernmental approach on infrastructure, there
     is a good relationship with government departments, such as the
     department of public works as well as non-governmental organisations.


     The Department of Education meets with local Transitional Local
     Councils (TLCs) on a regional basis to look at the integrated plan,
     linking water, electricity, building and the roads to a particular
     programme, and such programmes are presented in their meetings with the
     TLCs.


     (vi)   Learners support materials


     Learner support materials include textbooks, stationery, science
     materials, equipment as well as consumables. Due to financial
     constraints of the Eastern Cape, this has led the department to
     concentrate on textbooks and stationery only as learner support
     materials. The department is now in the process of issuing stationery
     to Grade 1-9, but for textbooks, the department will prioritise those
     Grades that are in curriculum 2005 (Grade 1, 2 and 3) and later to
     Grade 7, that will start the curriculum next year as well. The supply
     for Grade 12 will only be concentrated to those schools that have had a
     new Grade 12 class since 1997, 1998 and 1999, because those schools
     were not issued any textbooks and stationery.


     In respect of Grade 7, the department has indicated that it will need
     about R42 million, but the department is not so sure whether they will
     receive the full R42 million requested. During the capturing of the
     requisition from the regions, it became clear that R42 million will not
     be adequate to cover all the learning areas in Grade 7.
     With regard to scientific equipment, the department need to get
     assistance in terms of funding in order to make sure that it delivers
     the necessary requirements with the requested budget.


     The crisis the department is facing at present, is that there is a
     backlog of non-payment of both suppliers and employees. The department
     is still experiencing problems with old debts from all sorts of
     suppliers who have not been paid. Again, the department is still having
     outstanding benefits for teachers. This creates a lot of problems with
     regard to finance staff attending to volumes of queries from unions,
     courts and lawyers, etc.


     (vii)  Consumables and provisioning


     To date, the department was unable to make any deliveries. Presently,
     the department is in a process of finalising the orders with the
     publishers.


     There were few schools which received donations to enable them to
     perform their daily school work, but there was very little funding.
     (viii) Financial management


     The department needs other initiatives to assist with the improvement
     of the financial management, e.g. closing of books done by Deloitte &
     Touche, provisioning and payment projects, where training is continuing
     again (also the stock-taking the department is preparing).


     There are a number of projects that have already been started which are
     actually assisting with the financial management. At present, there is
     too much that is demanding of the financial staff, and it is envisaged
     that if the staff can get through that, the department will definitely
     see its way clear to implement the existing projects to assist the
     finance section with the workload.


     2. Visit to Eastern Cape Legislature, Bisho


     The delegation was welcomed by the Provincial Standing Committee on
     Education, chaired by Mr S Mancotywa. The leader of the delegation,
     Prof S M Mayatula, gave a brief overview and objectives of the visits
     to the province.


     3. Visit to King William's Town Examination Centre


     Official view:


     (i) 1999 examinations


     When the delegation visited the examination centre, the province was
     already halfway through the examinations for 1999. No problems, no
     leaking of papers, have been experienced, except the shortage of
     examination papers. Everything within the province is scheduled as
     planned and work is running smoothly and up to standard. The
     examination result will be released by 30 December 1999 for Y2K effect.
     All the necessary tests on the Y2K problem have been running up until
     September 1999 to make sure that their system is Y2K compliant. Reports
     have been made and everything has been cleared.


     The standard of matric results is seen to be the same as there was no
     significant change (from 45% to 47%) in the previous year.
     (ii)  Supplementary examinations


     All the supplementary examinations have been arranged, work has been
     done twelve months in advance.


     (iii) Readiness of markers


     4 600 markers, including the senior markers, have been appointed on the
     basis of experience and qualification. Through the entire province
     there will be five marking centres. All markers will be paid their
     salaries before the end of February 2000.


     (iv)  Outstanding payments


     There is still a backlog of 800 people which have not been paid by the
     department. The department is still struggling with the non-payment of
     people, which include markers, examiners, moderators and examination
     assistants. All the claims were verified and submitted to the
     department on 26 January 1999.


     4. Visit to Phakamani Senior Seconday School: Butterworth
     Official view:


     Phakamani Senior Secondary School has an enrolment figure of 1 005
     learners and 27 educators. The school occupies a disused factory, a
     corrugated iron structure. The entire structure is delapitated and does
     not need any extensive repairs but needs to be closed down. The school
     should be declared a very dangerous health risk. The school has a site
     at Ibika which is few kilometres away and has been there for more than
     five years, awaiting a new building to be erected.


     The classrooms still have huge factory ventilation, which make the
     students always suffer from respiratory diseases, asthma, bronchitis,
     etc. On top of this, there is poor electrical lighting, which damages
     the eyes of the students. Chemicals that were used in the factory were
     never thoroughly cleaned.


     Toilets create another dangerous hazard as they are terribly filthy,
     very dirty and uncleaned yet they are still in use. For more than 1 000
     students as well as teachers to utilise such toilets is a serious
     health risk. In 1999 alone, there were four reported deaths of students
     from the school while others were suffering from rheumatism.


     The school at the former factory is situated far from the township and
     near a growing slum area. This exposes the pupils to rapes and attacks.
     Crime in the school is very high.


     None of the school toilets flush. The students and teachers must have
     access to and continue to use these facilities which are subjected to
     shocking levels of terrible smells, which are creating more sanitary
     health risks. The systems have long been broken due to the leakage of
     drainage pipes. This has caused further damage to the books stored in
     an unusable and damaged library.


     There is also a problem of overcrowding in the school. It has been
     noted that one of the Grade 10 classes in the school has an enrolment
     figure of 123 students. Although the Phakamani community realises that
     there are serious financial constraints with the provincial department
     of education, the school has certainly made great strides in
     establishing the culture of learning. In view of this fact, the
     community deserves a new brick structure and a decent school.


     5. Visit to Esingeni Junior Secondary School: Idutywa


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 308 learners and 9 educators. The
     entire school consisted of 10 classrooms of a prefabricated structure.
     Approximately 98% of the entire structure was extensively damaged and
     flattened by the tornado on 16 December 1997.


     Up to now, there has been no intervention by the provincial
     legislature, the department and Idutywa district to help the community
     to alleviate the situation, except for provision of 5 tents to be used
     as classrooms. Even these are not of a good standard for teaching and
     learning.


     At present, there are no toilets/sanitation, no electricity and no
     fence. During the rainy days and bad weather the school does not
     operate at all. It is located not far from the river bank, and some
     pupils have to cross the river on their way to school. When the river
     is full they do not attend the school at all. The school is controlled
     by weather and not by the principal.


     As the clearing of site was not done by the people in the community,
     during the sunny days pupils and teachers are commonly exposed into
     poisonous snakes, which are seen to be dangerous and which may result
     in death to pupils and teachers. Most children have left this school
     due to these appalling conditions.


     There is an urgent need for financial assistance to build a proper
     shelter or a new school in the area by the year 2000.


     6. Visit to St John's College: Umtata


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 1 400 learners, 42 educators and
     18 general assistants. The entire school building consist of a brick
     structure, partly prefabricated. Approximately 40% of the entire
     structure has been extensively damaged by the tornado. The school has
     louvre windows in some classrooms and most of the windows are broken
     and need urgent repairs. Due to unavailability of laboratories in the
     school, other classrooms are converted into laboratories, which has led
     to additional shortages of classrooms. During the rainy days, learners
     are cramped together in classrooms which were not affected and this
     again results in overcrowding.


     Although the school building is very old and strong (121 years old), it
     needs major maintenance, constant repairs and renovations. Drainage
     problems, filthy toilets and bathrooms, leaking taps and pipes, are a
     health hazard to pupil and teachers. To repair the entire damages, R3
     million is needed to overhaul the conditions.


     Vandalism in the school is rife and is caused by students themselves.
     In the boys' hostel, the empty dormitories which were damaged, have
     been converted by students themselves to consume alcohol and to smoke
     dagga. There is no furniture in the dining halls.


     7. Visit to James Kobi Junior Secondary School: Umtata


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 520 learners and 18 educators.
     The entire school building consists of a brick structure. Only one
     classroom was damaged by fire and destroyed by the tornado. As there is
     no fence around the school premises there is stealing and vandalism of
     the school property, i.e. copper wires, pipe fittings, furniture and
     doors. The school managed to hire security, who are unarmed, to secure
     the entire school building and to safeguard the government property.


     The school was built in 1985. There is no electricity and the school
     maintenance has been non-existent. They have themselves managed to
     raise R20 000 through donors and sponsors to repair the damaged toilets
     and to improve standard conducive for learning.


     8. Visit to E W Pearce Junior Secondary School: Umtata


     Official view:
     The school has an enrolment figure of 900 learners and 23 educators,
     with 2 educators are awaiting redeployment. The school consist of a
     prefabricated structure which has been extensively damaged by the
     storm.


     Approximately 60% of the entire structure, including roofs and floors,
     have been extensively damaged. Most of the windows are broken and some
     of the classroom floors are in a state of collapse, which may result in
     injury to pupils and teachers. Urgent repairs and renovations are
     needed at the school.


     9. Visit to Nyangilizwe Senior Secondary School: Libode


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 544 learners and 15 educators.
     The school consist of a brick structure which was damaged by the storm.
     Only 4 classrooms and the school fence were damaged by the tornado,
     which took place on 15 December 1998.


     As there were no repairs and renovations yet done in the school, the
     children in Grade 8 (280) are cramped together in the hall, which
     results in difficulty for the educator to attend to each individual
     student, due to overcrowding. Urgent repairs and renovations are needed
     at the school.


     10. Visit to Tsolo Residency Junior Secondary School: Tsolo


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 1 134 learners and 18 educators.
     The school consist of a prefabricated structure, with only 10
     classrooms. Some classes are taking place outside the school premises
     due to the problem of overcrowding. This overcrowding has been causing
     a disastrous and low grasping of learners that may led to havoc because
     of improper involvement of individual attendance, from the teacher to
     the learner.


     As the school is known for its excellent continuous results and is
     located in the centre of town, overcrowding may be one of the factors
     that affect enrolment increments.


     The school urgently need 6 more classrooms to be put in place to ensure
     that proper education is continuing in the school.


     11. Visit to Jongilizwe Senior Secondary School: Tsolo


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 390 learners and 21 educators.
     The school consists of brick structure which is extremely delapitated.
     The school was established in 1967 as a public school and was and still
     is attended only by the sons of the Chiefs in the former Transkei
     regime, even before its independence.


     Vandalism in the school building and to property is rife. There is a
     high rate of crime still taking place on school grounds, as a result of
     which deaths have been reported. None of the people in the neighbouring
     communities want to take ownership of the school because of its history
     of being attended by the sons of the Chiefs.


     The school used to be a boarding school, but due to constant violence,
     theft of laboratory equipment, vandalism and uncleanliness, the hostels
     were closed down. The school is seen to be dangerous, day and night.
     Urgent repairs and renovations need to be effected in the school.


     There is no electricity, no fence, no proper sanitation and the toilets
     have long been unused and causing health hazards. Almost all broken
     windows have been damaged by the students themselves.


     As the school principal, Mr S Mnyekentu, needs the education in this
     school to continue, regardless of the appalling circumstances, he needs
     trained armed security guards and proper fencing to curb the vandals
     from entering the premises.


     According to the principal, the quantity surveyors have visited the
     school 4 months ago to assess the material needed to repair and
     renovate the school.
     12. Visit to Petros Jozana Junior Primary School: Umzimkulu


     Official view:


     This school has an enrolment figure of 320 learners and 9 educators.
     The school building consists of 5 classrooms of a brick structure and
     three semi-delapitated classrooms that are not in use. It become
     difficult for the school to function during the rainy days and bad
     weather due to the openness of the roofs and walls. Almost all windows
     are broken. The school received R19 000 from the provincial department
     of education and this fund helped the community to build 2 more
     classrooms of a brick structure.


     As this school is a community-built school, the community has certainly
     made great strides in donating R50,00 per household, with the intention
     to build 4 more classrooms. It has also been envisaged by the people in
     the community that it will take other 5 years to build another 4
     classrooms due to insufficient funding. This school is experiencing
     problems of overcrowding.


     There is no electricity, no sanitation, no fencing, no furniture and
     learning materials, e.g. writing boards, in the school. Funds are
     needed urgently to improve the quality of the infrastructure, which is
     presently not conducive to teaching and learning.


     13. Visit to Vumazonke Junior Secondary School: Umzimkulu


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 215 learners and 4 educators. The
     entire school building consist of a mud structure which is extensively
     damaged. The leaking roofs and all broken windows need urgent repairs
     and renovations. The roof is likely to collapse any time and may cause
     injuries to learners and teachers.


     There are no desks and other educational facilities in the school.
     Learner support material for Grade 2 were received, but none of the
     Grade 1 material was distributed to the school. There is an intention
     to open Grade 5 next year but there are no facilities and classrooms to
     effect that.


     The initiative to open the school in 1996 was envisaged by the people
     in the community, seeing the danger of the nearby national road, a few
     kilometres away from the area. As there was no school in the area prior
     to 1996, the children had to cross the national road, which is very
     dangerous, to attend school in other neighbouring villages. The
     community noted with concern the number of road accidents on the nearby
     national road, which have killed many children from the community.


     Again, the new settlement of Sisulu area also gave birth to this
     community-built school.


     There is no electricity, no toilets and sanitation, and no fencing. The
     people in the community need intervention of the government to support
     the school in terms of furniture, learner support material, educational
     facilities and proper decent school.


     14. Visit to Kheswa Junior Secondary School: Umzimkulu
     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 500 learners and 9 educators. The
     school building partly consists of a mud structure. There has been
     damage to the structure's walls, doors, windows and roofs.
     Approximately 80% of the entire structure has been extensively damaged,
     delapitated and flattened by the tornado, both in 1997 and 1998.


     The efforts to build the school were made by the community itself. The
     community received R20 000 from the provincial department of education
     (MEC's R18 million project) to build more classrooms. As the building
     is likely to collapse at any time, funds are needed to rebuild a proper
     school with bricks.


     15. Visit to Govalele Junior Senior Secondary School: Umzimkulu


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 414 learners and 11 educators.
     The school building consists of a brick structure and partly of a mud
     structure. This school is also one of the schools which benefitted from
     the MEC's R18 million project. The school received R19 000, which was
     used to build three classrooms of a brick structure. The other part of
     the school, which is of a mud structure and which is not up to proper
     standard, is also used to accommodate Grade 1 and 2, as there is still
     shortage of classrooms.


     16. Visit to Zwelitsha Senior Secondary School: Mount Ayliff


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 169 learners and 7 educators
     (Grade 10 - 12). The school was established in 1999 and the building
     consists of a wooden structure which was donated by Sawmill.


     Due to unavailability of classrooms in this school, junior secondary
     school is accommodated in another nearby school. As this was a
     community-driven project, the school governing body contributed by
     assisting the school in building the structure. There was no financial
     assistance from the government for building the school and its
     maintenance. There is no fencing, no electricity, no security, no
     toilets, no water in the school. Vandalism and theft in the area is
     rife.


     17. Visit to Sigagane Junior Secondary School: Mount Ayliff


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 366 learners and 8 educators. The
     school building consists of a newly built brick structure and an
     extensively damaged mud structure.


     Part of the new brick structure was built from the local funds (R36
     000) donated by Gold Mines. Presently, there is no water and
     electricity, no sanitation/toilets, no fencing and no furniture. As
     part of the school is of a mud structure, there are no doors, no
     windows and proper walls, and it is in a state of collapse.


     Many attempts have been made, to the circuit office, to build new and
     additional classrooms, but nothing has been done. No financial
     assistance has been received as promised from the provincial government
     to build a new school. Children are exposed to cold and "flu", and some
     have no accommodation due to these appalling conditions at the school.
     Urgent attention is needed to repair and renovate the school.


     18. Visit to Mhluzini Junior Secondary School: Mount Ayliff


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment of 270 learners and 4 educators, of whom 2
     educators are awaiting redeployment. The school consists of only 2
     classrooms made of a mud structure. Accommodation in this school is
     regarded as a major problem because 2 classes are accommodated in
     another school in the nearby area.


     Previously the children were accommodated in the tents but due to
     attempts by the community, a structure was built (not yet completed)
     with their own assistance and efforts.


     The school has no furniture, no windows, no ceiling, no toilets, no
     water and electricity and no fencing. As there is no water available,
     the learners themselves do daily routine of bringing water for cleaning
     (using cow dung) and maintenance of the school floors and walls.


     As this is a well-managed and -controlled school, funding is needed to
     effect some of the community-driven initiatives which are aimed at
     maintaining the school in a proper environment conducive to learning
     and teaching.


     19. Visit to Ntshamanzi Senior Primary School: Ntabankulu


     Official view:


     The school has an enrolment figure of 114 learners and 5 educators, of
     whom one educator is awaiting redeployment. The school consists partly
     of a brick and partly of a mud structure. Approximately 50% of the
     school was damaged by the tornado on 18 January 1999. The roof and
     broken windows were blown away by the wind during the storm.


     There are no toilets, no water and electricity and no fencing. None of
     the classrooms have ceilings.


     The community, out of their funds and efforts, has already started to
     repair and rebuild the damaged classrooms which are of a brick
     structure. Funding is needed to complete the initiative taken by the
     community in respect of their school. There is a need for 3 more
     classrooms as there is a backlog of shortage of classrooms.


     The delegation could not visit the Mount Frere schools, Bethlehem S.P.
     School, Nganu J.S School and Mpungutyana J.P School because of time
     constraints. The delegation apologised to these communities.


     C. VISIT TO KWAZULU-NATAL PROVINCE


     The delegation's visit to KwaZulu-Natal coincided with a period of
     simmering political tension in the province caused by the assassination
     that had taken place. This event therefore delayed the starting date of
     the delegation's visit from 2 November 1999 to the next day, 3 November
     1999.


     The committees met on 3 November 1999, and a very cordial meeting was
     held, which was characterised by general goodwill and co-operation. The
     meeting held with the MEC for Education and Culture, Ms E E N kaNkosi
     Shandu, in Ulundi, similarly took place in a very cordial atmosphere.


     1. Establishing a co-operative relationship


     The success of the study tour, despite the prevailing tensions, was
     largely due to the mature and conciliatory manner of the chairperson of
     the provincial committee on education and culture, Mr S Ngidi, who
     accompanied the tour throughout the province. In addition to this, the
     parliamentary delegation assured their hosts that they did not come to
     the province on a fault-finding mission, but that they were eager to
     establish a co-operative relationship with the provincial standing
     committee on education to address the many challenges that constrained
     education in the province. This message was well accepted by the
     provincial committee, who agreed to pursuing such a co-operative
     relationship with the delegation from the Portfolio and Select
     Committees.


     Two members of the Education Portfolio Committee, Ms P N Mnandi and Mr
     A M Mpontshane, were identified as the KwaZulu-Natal-based MPs who
     would serve as a link between the KZN provincial committee on Education
     and Culture and the parliamentary education portfolio committee.


     Implementation of adherence to national legislation, e.g. the South
     African School Act, in terms of abolishing corporal punishment is
     problematic. It came to the observation of the delegation that corporal
     punishment is rife in many schools in the province.


     2. Visit to Maritzburg College


     Official view:


     In this school, a meeting was held with the principal, Mr K Elliot.
     This school is a former model C school. It was mentioned that the
     process of transformation and integration of pupils was moving at a
     slow pace, e.g. enrolment of pupils from other racial groups was
     minimal, and the staff was predominantly from one race group. The
     infrastructure and recreational facilities are in good condition.


     3.  Visit to Sobantu High School


     Official view:


     This is a disadvantaged inner-city public school. In this school there
     is a large staff turnover, and teacher redeployment has affected the
     teachers' performance. The school lacks recreational facilities and has
     limited facilities, e.g. a library with very few books.


     Most of the windows are broken, some part of the building has been
     extensively vandalised, and there is poor sanitation.


     4.  Visit to Charles Sabelo High School: Umbumbulu, Natal Midlands


     Official view:


     This is a disadvantaged rural school. In this school the physical
     structure is decaying. The school principal had made a request to the
     provincial department of education to renovate the school.


     Vandalism to school property is rife in the area. The school needs to
     be fenced so as to prevent vandals from entering the school premises.
     The school work together with the community police forum in trying to
     curb vandalism in the school.


     There is a shortage of books and furniture in the school.


     5. Visit to Amanzimtoti Primary School: Amanzimtoti


     Official view:


     This is a former Model C school. In this school, there is a good
     physical structure with good facilities, which include a library and
     computer laboratory. There is a good working relationship with the
     school governing body. The programme of fundraising is in place and has
     a great impact on the school. The integration of pupils is moving very
     slowly. It was noted that the entire staff is predominantly of one race
     and one gender.


     6. Visit to Keats Drift Primary School: Greytown


     Official view:


     This school is a disadvantaged rural school. The school has water and a
     telephone line. The school governing body in this school still need to
     be trained on certain issues pertaining to the management of the school
     and its activities. Awareness on the need for fundraising is necessary.


     7. Visit to Cabangokuhle High School: Umsinga


     Official view:
     This school is a disadvantaged deep rural school. The school lacks
     various facilities, namely a library, books, a science laboratory and
     furniture. There is a serious furniture shortage which needs urgent
     attention.


     8. Visit to Bathembu Secondary School: Umsinga


     Official view:


     This school is a disadvantaged rural school located at Umsinga. It was
     noted that the conditions at the school were very poor, and extensive
     repairs and renovations are needed to bring the school up to proper
     standard. Vandalism is high on the property of the school, e.g. on
     furniture and windows.


     9. Visit to Ekudubekeni High School: Mahlabathini


     Official view:


     This is a disadvantaged rural school located at Mahlabathini. The
     school received funding from the Indian Religious Group based in Durban
     to build the school. The school offers streams of teaching subjects,
     namely science, trade, commerce and performing art.


     Although the school is situated in a rural community, for the past five
     years, it has had an excellent continuous pass rate of 90%.


     10. Visit to KwaZulu-Natal Legislature: Ulundi


     Official view: MEC for Education & Culture, Ms E E N kaNkosi-Shandu


     The rural schools need extra educational facilities. Discipline is
     maximal in most of the schools. The relationship between the teachers'
     union and the MEC has improved. The schools in the rural communities
     lack capacity in terms of finance. The Netherlands is assisting the
     province in Science and English subjects.


     RECOMMENDATIONS:


     Areas that need urgent attention:


     a)     major repairs and renovations are required in most schools;
     b)     need to improve and upgrade all the existing libraries and
        development of mobile libraries;
     c)     need to implement effective school management in most schools;
     d)     apacity-building of school governing bodies in financial
        management and school governance in most schools;
     e)     need for electricity, sanitation and clean running water;
     f)     co-operative relationship with provincial standing committee;
     g)     provincial departments of education should monitor adherence to
        national legislations, e.g. abolishing of corporal punishment;
     h)     need to inculcate a sense of ownership of schools by
        communities;
     i)     need to encourage co-operation between previously advantaged and
        disadvantaged schools;
     j)     need to develop a rural strategy educational plan based on these
        visits and in accordance with the President's integrated rural
        strategy programme;
     k)     special budgetary provisions which have to be made in order to
        attend both to backlogs and current need and inadequacies.
        Furthermore, provision has to be made to meet needs caused by
        natural disasters; and
     l)     the study tour report should be assessed within the broader
        context of the national schools' survey of needs.


     D. CONCLUSION


     The Committees are satisfied that it attained most of the objectives
     identified for the study tours to the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal
     provinces.


     The delegations managed to lay the basis for a very constructive co-
     operative relationship with provincial governance structures. In both
     the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, open and constructive discussions
     took place between the respective MECs, the top management of the
     Department and the delegations from Parliament.


     The visits also succeeded in highlighting the principles of Tirisano,
     the Minister's Call to Action to provincial structures. Tirisano
     booklets were distributed as far as the delegation toured, and the
     vision of the Minister in assisting "provincial education departments
     to manage education efficiently" was emphasised.


     The delegations examined conditions of physical degradation in the
     poorest rural areas according to the objectives of the tour. It found
     conditions of immense poverty, dilapidated schools and a lack of basic
     facilities at educational institutions. However, even under the poorest
     conditions in schools, the delegations found that the dedication,
     discipline and hard work of teachers in class had a greater influence
     on good examination results than that which the physical conditions in
     schools could bring about.


     The information gained by the delegations during the study tours have
     created a firm basis on which an integrated rural strategy could be
     based.


     The Committees are therefore satisfied that a solid start has been made
     in the creation of co-operative relationship between national and
     provincial governments through the visits undertaken to the Eastern
     Cape and KwaZulu-Natal on 2,3 and 4 November 1999.


     E. LIST OF PARTICIPANTS


     1.     MECs for Education and Culture: Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.
     2.     Provincial Department of Education: Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-
        Natal.
     3.     Provincial Standing Committees on Education & Culture: Eastern
        Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.
     4.     Chairpersons of Standing Committees on Education: Eastern Cape
        (Mr S Mancotywa) and KwaZulu-Natal (Mr S Ngidi).
     5.     All principals and management of all schools visited.
     6.     Various communities, including school governing bodies.
     7.     Regional, district and circuit managers.
     8.     All communities visited.


     Report to be considered.

                            MONDAY, 20 MARCH 2000
ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 16 March 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     South African Communications Regulatory Authority Bill [B
              14 - 2000] ((National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio
              Committee on Communications - National Assembly).

                          WEDNESDAY, 22 MARCH 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (1)    Financial Statements of the South African Medical Research
         Council for 1998-99 [RP 43-2000];


     (2)    Financial Statements of the South African Diamond Board for 1998-
         99 [RP 42-2000];


     (3)    Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency for 1997-98
         [RP 46-2000];


     (4)    Financial Statements of Vote 35 - Transport for 1998-99 [RP 159-
         1999];


     (5)    Financial Statements of Vote 34 - Trade and Industry for 1998-99
         [RP 158-1999].

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Report of the Council for Geoscience for 1998-99 including the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements.

                           THURSDAY, 23 MARCH 2000
ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (a)     South African Airways Unallocatable Debt Bill [B 1 - 2000]
               - Act No 7 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on
               16 March 2000);


         (b)     Tourism Amendment Bill [B 3 - 2000] - Act No 8 of 2000
               (assented to and signed by President on 15 March 2000); and


         (c)     Lotteries Amendment Bill [B 13B - 2000] - Act No 10 of
               2000 (assented to and signed by President on 16 March 2000).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:
     (1)    The following private member's legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Chairperson on 1 March 2000, in accordance with
         Rule 178:


         (i)     Promotion of Multilingualism Bill (Mr A E van Niekerk).


         The legislative proposal has been referred to the Select Committee
         on Members' and Provincial Legislative Proposals by the
         Chairperson, in accordance with Rule 179.
          - ]

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Report of the Department of Land Affairs for 1999-2000 [RP 51-2000].

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter,
         dated 3 March 2000, to the Chairperson  of the National Council of
         Provinces, informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996, of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in terms of section 201(2)(c) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


         REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996) ON THE EMPLOYMENT
         OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR SERVICES RELATED
         TO FLOODS IN THE GAZA, MAPUTO AND SOFALA PROVINCES.


         This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
         authorised the employment of the South African National Defence
         Force (SANDF) personnel and equipment in the Provinces. This
         employment is extended from 25 February 2000 to 17 March 2000.


         This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
         of section 82(4)(b)(ii) read with section 227(1)(d) of the
         Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act No 200 of
         1993), [which sections continue to be in force in terms of Item
         24(1) of Schedule 6 to the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996)], read further with section
         3(2)(a)(v) of the Defence Act, 1957 (Act No 44 of 1957).


         A request was received by the Department of Foreign Affairs from
         the Government of the Republic of Mozambique to render
         humanitarian assistance in the location and relocation of people
         trapped by the flooding, and to assist in distributing and
         delivering emergency supplies to the affected areas. In line with
         our international obligations to render such assistance, the
         deployment was authorised.


         The deployment consisted of 88 personnel, 5 X Oryx helicopters, 2
         X BK117 helicopters, 1 X Casa 212 and 3 X Cessna 208 light
         aircraft. The personnel and equipment were deployed to Beira and
         Maputo for the duration of the effort. Other support aircraft
         which were used for the deployment of equipment and support
         personnel to the two locations were 2 X C130 transport aircraft.


         Financial implications


         - The estimated total cost of this deployment will be R10 267 528-
           00.


         - I have consulted the Minister of Finance who will make the
           necessary funds available through the Department of Foreign
           Affairs and Defence.


         I will also communicate this report to the National Assembly, and
         wish to request that you bring the contents of this report to the
         notice of Members of the National Council of Provinces.


         Referred to the Joint Standing Committee on Defence.

                            MONDAY, 27 MARCH 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (a)    Financial Statements on Vote 4 - Agriculture for 1998-99 [RP 129-
         1999].


     (b)    Financial Statements on Vote 23 - Land Affairs and the
         Registration of Deeds Trading Account for 1998-99 [RP 147-1999].

                           TUESDAY, 28 MARCH 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


         (a)     Deposit Account Administered by the Department of Justice
              for 1997-98 [RP 196-99].


         (b)     Certain Transport-Related Agencies, Authorities and Funds
              [RP 60-2000].


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
         Unit for 1998-99 including Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements.

2.    Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Report of the Public Service Commission on Evaluation of Departments'
     Annual Reports as an Accountability Mechanism [RP 193-1999].

                          WEDNESDAY, 29 MARCH 2000
ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs:


         (a)     Report of the Department of Agriculture for 1999-2000 [RP
              59-2000];


         (b)     Report of the Department of Land Affairs for 1999-2000 [RP
              51-2000].
     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Health and the Select Committee on Social Services
         for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         South African Medical Research Council for 1998-99 [RP 43-2000].


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on
         Economic Affairs for information:


2.    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
    South African Diamond Board for 1998-99 [RP 42-2000].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Universal Service Agency for 1998-99 [RP 46-2000].


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services
         for information:
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         35 - Transport for 1998-99 [RP 159-1999].


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on
         Economic Affairs for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         34 - Trade and Industry for 1998-99 [RP 158-1999].


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         Report of the Council for Geoscience for 1998-99 including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements.


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating Unit
         for 1998-99 including Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements.


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing
         Subcommittee on Accountability for consideration and report and to
         all portfolio committees and select committees and the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         Report of the Public Service Commission on Evaluation of
         Departments' Annual Reports as an Accountability Mechanism [RP 193-
         1999].


     (10) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Select Committee
         on Land and Environmental Affairs for information:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              on Vote 4 - Agriculture for 1998-99 [RP 129-1999].


         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              on Vote 23 - Land Affairs and the Registration of Deeds
              Trading Account for 1998-99 [RP 147-1999].

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Report of the Public Service Commission for 1999 [RP 44-2000].

                            FRIDAY, 31 MARCH 2000
ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Public Works on 28 March 2000 submitted drafts
         of the following Bills, and memorandums explaining the objects of
         the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in
         terms of Joint Rule 159:


            Council for the Built Environment Bill, 2000


            Engineering Profession Bill, 2000


            Architectural Profession Bill, 2000
            Landscape Architectural Profession Bill, 2000


            Property Valuers Profession Bill, 2000


            Quantity Surveying Profession Bill, 2000


            Project and Construction Management Professions Bill, 2000


         The drafts have been referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson
         to the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and the Select
         Committee on Public Services, respectively, in accordance with
         Joint Rule 159(1)(a) and (b).



2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bill:


        Land Affairs General Amendment Bill [B 64D - 99] - Act No 11 of
        2000 (assented to and signed by President on 22 March 2000).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on Central Drug
     Authority, dated 25 February 2000:


         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         request of the Council to make recommendations for the appointment
         of additional members to the Central Drug Authority, referred to
         it, recommends that the Minister for Welfare and Population
         Development, in terms of section 2(3)(b) of the Prevention and
         Treatment of Drug Dependency Act, 1992 (Act No. 20 of 1992), be
         advised to appoint the following persons:


              Bayever, D N; Da Rocha-Silva, L; Fredericks, T J; Hoekstra, M
              C; Jardine, G F; Malaka, D W; Mathe, S V; Moleko, A S;
              Moodliar, D C; Mynhardt, D C; Parry, C D H; Rataemane, S.


     Report to be considered.

                            MONDAY, 3 APRIL 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration and the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration:


         Report of the Public Service Commission for 1999 [RP 44-2000].


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs and the Select Committee on Social Services:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication Board
         for 1998-99.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 16 March 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (1)    Competition Amendment Bill [B 10B - 2000] (National Assembly -
         sec 75) - (Select Committee on Economic Affairs - National Council
         of Provinces).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Report of the Public Service Commission on the Investigation into
     Dismissals as a result of Misconduct [RP 199-99].


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
     Administration and the Select Committee on Local Government and
     Administration.

                            TUESDAY, 4 APRIL 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Transport:


     (1)    Letter of Notification of Association with the International
         COSPAS/SASAT Programme as a Ground Segment Provider, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Letter of Association with the
         International COSPAS/SASAT Programme as a Ground Segment Provider.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


    Reports of the Board on Tariffs and Trade on the -


     (a)    Application for a reduction in the rate of duty on certain
         frozen and canned berries and fruit, Report No 3882;


     (b)    Application for increase in the rate of duty on plastic pipes,
         Report No 3883;


     (c)    Application for rebate of the duty on frozen, mechanically
         deboned meat of bovine animals for the manufacture of sausage,
         Report No 3884;


     (d)    Application for increase in the rate of duty on industrial
         gloves and application for rebate of duty on synthetic rubber
         latex used in the manufacture of industrial gloves, Report No
         3886;


     (e)    Rebate of duty on anti-oxidants classifiable under tariff
         subheading 3812.30.10, Report No 3887;


     (f)    Application for a reduction in the rate of duty on anti-oxidants
         and accelerators, Report No 3888;


     (g)    Increase in the duty on thin sheets (voiles) of glass fibre,
         Report No 3893;


     (h)    Reduction in the rate of duty on other extracted oleoresins
         obtained from extraction of natural raw plant material classified
         under tariff subheading 3301.90.70, Report No 3895.

                           WEDNESDAY, 5 APRIL 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 5 April 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


         (i)     National House of Traditional Leaders Amendment Bill [B 15
              - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government - National Assembly).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the Human
     Resources Fund for 1998-99 [RP 55-2000].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


    Reports of the Board on Tariffs and Trade on the -


     (1)    Increase in the rate of duty on other pigments and preparations
         based on titanium dioxide, Report No 3889;


     (2)    Increase in the rate of duty on alkyd resins, Report No 3894.

                           THURSDAY, 6 APRIL 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         6 April 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


        (i)      Council for the Built Environment Bill [B 16 - 2000]
               (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
               Public Works - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of
               Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
               Government Gazette No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]


        (ii)     Architectural Profession Bill [B 17 - 2000] (National
               Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Works -
               National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
               notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
               No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]


         (iii)   Landscape Architectural Profession Bill [B 18 - 2000]
               (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
               Public Works - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of
               Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
               Government Gazette No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]


          (iv)    Engineering Profession Bill [B 19 - 2000] (National
               Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Works -
               National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
               notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
               No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]


          (v)     Property Valuers Profession Bill [B 20 - 2000] (National
               Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Works -
               National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
               notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
               No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]


          (vi)    Project and Construction Management Professions Bill [B 21
               - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee
               on Public Works - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of
               Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
               Government Gazette No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]


          (vii)Quantity Surveying Profession Bill [B 22 - 2000] (National
               Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Works -
               National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
               notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
               No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]


TABLINGS:
National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter, dated 28
     March 2000, to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
     informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(2) of the Constitution,
     1996, of the employment of the South African National Defence Force in
     terms of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution, 1996.


     REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC
     OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996), ON THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH
     AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(2)(c) OF THE
     CONSTITUTION, 1996, IN THE FULFILLMENT OF AN INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATION
     IN THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE


     1.     This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
         authorised the extension of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force (SANDF) personnel and aircraft, in the
         Republic of Mozambique, in fulfillment of an international
         obligation. This employment was authorised in accordance with the
         provisions of Section 82(4)(b)(ii) read with Section 227(1)(b) of
         the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act No 200
         of 1993), [which sections continue to be in force in terms of Item
         24(1) of Schedule 6 of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996)], read with Section 3(2)(a)(iv)
         of the Defence Act, 1957 (Act No 44 of 1957).


     2.     This employment is in compliance with the Republic of South
         Africa's regional support, to the Government of the People's
         Republic of Mozambique, for humanitarian assistance in the
         preservation of life, health, and property, resulting from the
         current widespread rains having caused extensive and serious
         flooding in Mozambique. Due to the necessity for the continued
         support and distribution of aid to Mozambican citizens adversely
         affected by the severe flooding, and due to the deterioration of
         the situation, an extension of the deployment was requested.


     3.     The deployment has been extended from 17 March 2000 to 07 April
         2000.


     4.     The deployment will consist of 60 personnel, three Oryx
         helicopters, two BK 117 helicopters, two Casa-212 transport
         aircraft and two light aircraft.


     5.     The estimated total cost for the extended period is R6 077 232 -
         00.


     6.     I will communicate this report to the Members of the National
         Assembly and wish to request that you bring it to the notice of
         the Members of the National Council of Provinces.


     Regards




     TM MBEKI

                            FRIDAY, 7 APRIL 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 7 April 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (a)    Nonprofit Organisations Amendment Bill [B 9 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Select Committee on Social Services -
         National Council of Provinces).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Report of the Public Service Commission on the Management of
     Remunerated Overtime in the Public Service [RP 171-99].

                            MONDAY, 10 APRIL 2000

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence on Appointment
     of Inspector-General, dated 3 April 2000:


         The Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, having considered
         and examined nominations for the position of Inspector-General of
         Intelligence, nominates, in terms of section 7 of the Intelligence
         Services Control Act, 1994, the following person for appointment
         as Inspector-General:


              Randera, M F.


     Report to be considered.

                           TUESDAY, 11 APRIL 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     1.     The Minister for Provincial and Local Government on 10 April
         2000 submitted a draft of the Local Government: Municipal Systems
         Bill, 2000 and a memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government and the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule
         159(2).


     2.     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant committees as mentioned below:
         (1)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Trade and Industry and to the Select Committee on
              Economic Affairs:


              Reports of the Board on Tariffs and Trade on the -


              (a) Rebate of duty on biaxially oriented polypropulene film
                  used in the manufacture of self-adhesive tape, Report No
                  3873;


              (b) Rebate of the duty on textile fabrics impregnated, coated,
                  covered or laminated with polyurethane, for fishing,
                  Report No 3874;


              (c) Reduction in the rate of duty on "Agarbatti" other
                  odiriferous preparations which operate by burning, Report
                  No 3875;


              (d) Withdrawal of items under rebate items 307.04 of Schedule
                  3 to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, Report No 3877;


              (e) Withdrawal of the provision under rebate item
                  313.04/26.10.01.00, Report No 3878;


              (f) Rebate of full duty on vinyl, chloridevinyl acetate
                  copolymers, for the manufacture of floor coverings,
                  Report No 3880.


         (2)     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee
              on Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred for information to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
              and Constitutional Development and to the Select Committee on
              Security and Constitutional Affairs:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Deposit Account
              Administered by the Department of Justice for 1997-98 [RP 196-
              99].


         (3)     The following paper is referred to Standing Committee on
              Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred for information to the Portfolio Committee on
              Transport and to the Select Committee on Public Services:


              Report of the Auditor-General on certain Transport-Related
              Agencies, Authorities and Funds [RP 60-2000].


         (4)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Transport and to the Select Committee on Public
              Services for consideration:


              (a) Letter of Notification of Association with the
                  International COSPAS/SASAT Programme as a Ground Segment
                  Provider, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
                  Constitution, 1996.
              (b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Letter of Association with
                  the International COSPAS/SASAT Programme as a Ground
                  Segment Provider.


         (5)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Trade and Industry and to the Select Committee on
              Economic Affairs:


              Reports of the Board on Tariffs and Trade on the -


              (a) Application for a reduction in the rate of duty on certain
                  frozen and canned berries and fruit, Report No 3882;


              (b) Application for increase in the rate of duty on plastic
                  pipes, Report No 3883;


              (c) Application for rebate of the duty on frozen, mechanically
                  deboned meat of bovine animals for the manufacture of
                  sausage, Report No 3884;


              (d) Application for increase in the rate of duty on industrial
                  gloves and application for rebate of duty on synthetic
                  rubber latex used in the manufacture of industrial
                  gloves, Report No 3886;


              (e) Rebate of duty on anti-oxidants classifiable under tariff
                  subheading 3812.30.10' Report No 3887;


              (f) Application for a reduction in the rate of duty on anti-
                  oxidants and accelerators, Report No 3888;


              (g) Increase in the duty on thin sheets (voiles) of glass
                  fibre, Report No 3893;


              (h) Reduction in the rate of duty on other extracted
                  oleoresins obtained from extraction of natural raw plant
                  material classified under tariff subheading 3301.90.70,
                  Report No 3895;


              (i) Increase in the rate of duty on other pigments and
                  preparations based on titanium dioxide, Report No 3889;


              (j) Increase in the rate of duty on alkyd resins, Report No
                  3894.


         (6)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Public Service and Administration and to the Select
              Committee on Local Government and Administration for
              consideration and report. It is also referred for information
              to the Portfolio Committee on Labour and to the Select
              Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises:


              Report of the Public Service Commission on the Management of
              Remunerated Overtime in the Public Service [RP 171-99].


         (7)     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee
              on Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications and to
              the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises for
              information:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              the Human Resources Fund for 1998-99 [RP 55-2000].


         (8)     The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing
              Committee on Defence:


              The letter from the President of the Republic, dated 28 March
              2000, informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996, of the employment of the South African
              National Defence Force in terms of section 201(2)(c) of the
              Constitution, 1996.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


         (a)     Financial Statements of Vote 36 - Water Affairs and
              Forestry and related accounts for 1998-99 [RP 160-99];


         (b)     Financial Statements of Vote 21 - Justice for 1998-99.


     (2)    A summary of issues for possible consideration in any review of
         the current framework setting out the powers and privileges of
         Parliament prepared by Professor N R L Haysom.


         Memorandum for Committee on Powers and Privileges of Parliament


         Introduction


         1. Professor Haysom was asked to summarise some of the issues for
              possible consideration in any review of the current framework
              setting out the powers and privileges of Parliament.


         2. The report of the consultants who were commissioned to
              investigate the above matters strongly recommends that a new
              statute be enacted to deal with the powers and privileges of
              Parliament. In any event the Constitution of the Republic of
              South Africa Act, 1996, (the Constitution) contemplates such a
              stature (see Section 58(2)).


              The reasons offered by the consultants are persuasive and
              include the following:
              (1) The act is a malaise of amendments dating back more than
                  three decades. The treatment of the subject is
                  unsystematic and dated.


              (2) The framework for dealing with powers and privileges needs
                  to be reviewed against the requirements of the new
                  Constitution and an interrogation of the practices
                  consonant with a new parliamentary culture and tradition.


         Privileges


         3. The question of privileges is currently dealt with by the
              Constitution (see 58(1) and (2)), the Powers and Privileges of
              Parliament Act, 1963, (the Act) and, indirectly, the rules of
              Parliament. It is necessary at the outset to determine what
              the concept 'privileges' embraces, or should embrace. As the
              consultants point out, the international trend is to move away
              from the elastic concept of 'privileges' and to use the term
              'immunities'. The Committee may wish to follow this trend for
              the same reasons, In either event it may help to set out the
              purposes for which the immunities are to be created.


         4. The historical development of both the powers and the
              privileges of Parliament indicates that they derive from the
              need to protect and promote the functioning of the
              legislature, originally in the face of threats or persecution
              of legislators by the monarch or the executive, and
              subsequently from interference from other sources such as the
              judiciary and civil society, which would undermine the
              functioning of the legislature. The rationale behind
              conferring special privileges and powers on the legislature
              can best be understood in the light of the doctrine of the
              separation of powers: that is that Parliament should regulate
              its affairs independantly of the other arms of government.
              Immunities or privileges generally fall within the following
              three categories.


         5. Freedom of Speech Immunity


              While the Freedom of speech Immunity, contained for example in
              section 58(1) of the Constitution, may have had its origins in
              the desire to protect legislators from the monarch, it now has
              a much broader rationale - the promotion of open debate and
              the immunity offered is expected to prevent what the courts
              elsewhere have called the 'chilling' effect of defamation law.
              It is the pre-eminent immunity but it is not absolute and may
              be subject to manner and form requirements agreed by
              Parliament. The privilege is also contained in the Act, but
              this is probably unnecessary. The present act also explicitly
              extends the immunity offered to members so as to include
              petitions and resolutions brought by a member. This is
              nonetheless an aspect of the freedom of speech privilege (see
              Section 8 of the Act).


         6. 'Immunities' relating to civic obligations or criminal
              proceedings.


              Immunities, taking various forms, have arisen to protect
              legislators from certain criminal or civil proceedings. Again,
              their origins lay in the need to protect legislators from
              political persecuton, and later from harassment which
              indirectly might prevent a legislator from performing his
              duties. Such immunities might once have taken the form of an
              absolute immunity from judicial process, but this has given
              way to procedural protections which require, for example, in
              certain countries that criminal proceedings against
              legislators be brought only in higher courts, or that such
              proceedings be subject to certain delays. The trend is to move
              away from granting any immunity from civil or criminal
              liability, even of a temporary nature, to members of the
              Executive or of the Legislature, Our Constitution reflects
              this trend. The remnants of this form granting any immmunity
              are still in existence in the Act.(see Section 7 of the Act)


         7. The privileges of Parliament.


              The third of privileges are those that attach to Parliament
              itself. These exist for the purpose of enhancing Parliament's
              status, dignity and proper functioning. As the consultants
              point out it is not clear which of the inherited common-law
              privileges survive and the continued existence of some common
              law offences may be questionable. Furthermore it may be that
              there is an overlap between the privileges of Parliament, and
              the powers of Parliament in this regard. The following issues
              serve to illustrate the more general proposition that
              Parliament is entitled to have its status protected.


              (1) Should Parliament be protected from actions and statements
                  that undermine it as an institution (not mere criticism
                  of its members or its functioning). It may be that the
                  answer lies within the ambit of security legislation.
                  However a very recent incident in Nigeria is relevant. A
                  senator, allegedly called for the restoration of military
                  rule, in turn prompting public pressure on Parliament to
                  protect itself against the sentiments expressed by the
                  senator, and raising the question of Parliament's duty to
                  assert this privilege.


              (2) Should Parliament be able to assert its financial
                  requirements. Section 31 of the Act suggests it should be
                  able to do so. In Kenya, this month, members of
                  Parliament have called for legislation to limit the power
                  of the President's office to unilaterally set the budget
                  for Parliament. Once again this may be a question which
                  is broader than the question of Parliamentary privilege.


              (3) There may be other 'privileges' a Parliament can claim so
                  as to protect its status and functioning. For example, in
                  Switzerland the police may not enter the precincts of
                  Parliament. The current Act allows, or allowed,
                  Parliament to bar a court from inquiring or pronouncing
                  upon a matter involving parliamentary privilege. This
                  provision has been found to be unconstitutional in a
                  recent high court decision.


         8. The question arises whether there are any other types of
              privilege which require to be afforded to Parliament or its
              members? The entitlement to Parliamentary privileges is always
              founded on the need for the effective performance of the
              legislative function.


         9. Powers of Parliament


              Parliament's power to make its own rules and orders and to
              regulate its business derives from section 57 of the
              Constitution. This power includes the power to enforce its
              rules and punish infraction of them.


         10.     Since the enactment of the 1993 Constitution, Parliament
              has no powers other than those conferred upon it by the
              Constitution and law. The question arises as to how Parliament
              should enforce its rules?


         11.     Parliament has wide powers to ensure that it functions in
              a proper and orderly manner. In this regard the power of the
              Speaker to ensure orderly debate, enforce compliance with her
              rulings and orders, and to use force to remove the disorderly,
              are constitutionally wide. The Act, in addition, confers all
              the powers of a court of law on Parliament to punish those
              guilty of contempt, including the imposition of prison
              sentences (see Section 10). Parliaments' powers to punish, as
              opposed to enforcing orderly debate, are more circumscribed
              under the Constitution.


         12.     The first question arises as to whether Parliament, or the
              Speaker, should have the power to punish infractions of the
              rules by non-members (ie. members of the public). The
              Committee must consider what powers it needs to give the
              speaker or Parliament in this regard. In regard to penalising
              contempt or unruly behaviour, consideration could be given to
              drawing a distinction between members and non-members,
              specifying the criminal offences which need to be created and
              providing for the referral of breaches of these to the public
              prosecution service.
         13.     With regard to members of Parliament a number of issues
              require to be dealt with.


              13.1     The right of freedom of speech is subject to the
                       rules and orders of Parliament. Those rules and
                       orders might prescribe the manner, the time the
                       venue, the language, in which freedom of speech can
                       be exercised. Content based prescriptions on freedom
                       of speech will need to be carefully evaluated, having
                       regard to recent judicial pronouncements. (see
                       Speaker v Patricia De Lille 1999 (11) BCLR 1339 SCA)


              13.2     Parliament is required to establish the conditions
                       and circumstances in which absence from the assembly
                       can lead to loss of membership (see Section 47(3) of
                       the Constitution).


              13.3     Parliament may wish to consider the ways and means by
                       which its codes of conduct and its disclosure
                       requirements regarding benefits and gifts and similar
                       matters can be enforced. Note that the current Act
                       makes voting upon any matter in which a member has a
                       pecuniary interest as a criminal offence under the
                       Act (see Section 11 of the Act).


              13.4     Parliament may have to consider codifying behaviour
                       which is 'unparliamentary'. This may not require an
                       exhaustive list, but it may require at least
                       establishing guidelines. This may be necessary both
                       for the purposes of ensuring good order as well as
                       penalising infractions. (see the comments of Mahomed
                       CJ in Speaker v Patricia De Lille)


              13.5     Parliament may need to draw a clear distinction
                       between those Acts it will deal with under its own
                       disciplinary process and those that are to be
                       referred to criminal or civil courts - even in
                       respect of members. Regard should be had to the grey
                       areas such as filing incorrect expense claims or
                       removing property from Parliament. The current Act
                       allows parliament, by way of resolution to exercise a
                       choice. (see Section 33 of the Act)


              13.6     It is doubtful whether Parliament has the right to
                       permanently expel a member other than in the
                       circumstances set out in Section 47(3) of the
                       Constitution. It may be necessary however to consider
                       the appropriateness and necessity of other
                       punishments where a clear breach of rules, or a
                       repeated violation of the rules may justify it. Such
                       punishments may include censure, and fines. The power
                       to imprison in the Parliamentary dungeons, if it has
                       survived the 20th Century, is unlikely to meet the
                       test of Constitutional compliance. Suspension may be
                       Constitutional, but needs careful consideration, and
                       certainly there would be limitations. Both in respect
                       of the duration and in respect of the nature of the
                       conduct being punished.


         14.     The Committee must consider the establishment of an
              appropriate procedure and structure to adjudicate on
              misconduct or disciplinary matters. Such matters may range
              from very minor technical infringements to serious cases. In
              either event the requirements of a fair and impartial process
              must be met. An ad hoc approach may not be appropriate.


         15.     Finally, the Committee must consider what matters require
              to be dealt with, or are more appropriately contained in
              statute and what is required to be dealt with in the rules of
              Parliament. The matters referred to in 47(3) and 58(1) must be
              dealt with in the rules. Other privileges must be prescribed
              by national legislation.


     Referred to the Joint Subcommittee on Powers and Privileges.

2.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Report and Financial Statement of the South African Management
     Development Institute for 1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on Vote 30 - South African Management Development Institute.


