---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 28 January 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-01-28
---

FRIDAY, 28 JANUARY 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 10:06.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Does any
member wish to give notice of a motion?

Mr L G LEVER: Mr Chairperson, is this notice of a motion?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Yes.

Mr L G LEVER: In that case, Mr Chairperson, I wish to give notice of a
motion:


  That the Council -
  (1) notes the startling double standard in morality displayed by the ANC
       when the DP enters into a co-operation agreement with the UCDP, when
       one takes into account ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! That is not a
notice of motion, hon member. That is a motion without notice.

Mr L G LEVER: I wish to give notice of a motion and I wish to move that,
with notice.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Do you
understand the distinction between a motion without notice and a notice of
motion?

Mr L G LEVER: Yes, Mr Chairperson, that is why I asked in the first
instance whether you were calling for motions with notice. Is this without?
I apologise, then, Mr Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I called for
notices of motion. I called for any member who wished to give notice of a
motion. Is there any member wishing to do that? Does any member wish to
move a motion without notice?

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                           (The Late Mr S Naidoo)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with deep regret the passing away of Shoots Naidoo, the chief
       executive officer of Salga, the SA Local Government Association, who
       passed away this morning as a result of two severe heart attacks;


  (2) further notes that Shoots Naidoo was a dedicated, diligent and
       competent CEO, who assisted the association tremendously, and that
       his passing away has really touched members of this Council and Salga
       in particular; and


  (3) conveys its sincere condolences to the family of Shoots Naidoo,
       especially his wife and two children.

Mr J P GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): Mr Chairperson ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! The hon member
has moved a motion. Is that an objection?

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, we do not object to what the Chief Whip has
said, but we want to add to what he has said. That is why my colleague from
the Western Cape rose.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! If the motion
is agreed to, and parties wish to say something on that, he can do so. Do
you want to move an amendment, or do you want to say something? The motion
is before the House. If parties are agreed, let them agree, and if parties
want to say something and the Chief Whip agrees, I will have no objection
to giving parties the opportunity to do so. Is there any objection to the
motion? Chief Whip, are you prepared to allow other parties to say
something?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, we have no objection
whatsoever. The appropriate way would have been to apply for the amendment
of the motion by adding certain sentiments which the party wishes to raise.
But we have no difficulty at all if anything is added to that.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Any party
wishing to express some sentiments on the motion is free to do so.

Mnr J P GELDERBLOM (Wes-Kaap): Mnr die Voorsitter, ons wil net van die Wes-
Kaap se kant sê dat ons verneem het van die tragiese heengaan van mnr
Shoots Naidoo. Ons dink hy het baie vir plaaslike regering beteken, nie net
vir plaaslike regering alleen nie, maar vir die sfeer van regeringsvlak, en
ons betuig ons innige simpatie met sy familie.(Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mr J P GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): Mr Chairperson, we would just like to
say from our side in the Western Cape that we have learnt of the tragic
passing of Mr Shoots Naidoo. We believe he meant a great deal to local
government, and not only to local government, but also to the wider sphere
of government, and we express our sincere sympathy with his family.]

                       LANGUAGE POLICY FOR PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek stel voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem dat


       (a)  die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika erkenning gee aan 11 amptelike
           tale, die uitbou daarvan, sowel as die beskerming van dié tale,
           en die ander tale in Suid-Afrika, teen diskriminasie;


       (b)  Pansat in die lewe geroep is om bogenoemde te help doen; en


       (c)  taalrade besig is om hul voete te vind in die provinsies, maar
           dat die Parlement van Suid-Afrika nog nie 'n taalbeleid het nie;
           en
  (2) die Reëlskomitee maan om onmiddellik hieraan aandag te skenk.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, I move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that


       (a)  the Constitution of South Africa gives recognition to  11
           official languages, the promotion thereof, as well as the
           protection of these languages, and the other languages in South
           Africa, against discrimination;


       (b)  PanSALB has been formed to assist in achieving the above-
           mentioned; and


       (c)  language boards are finding their feet in the provinces, but
           that the Parliament of South Africa is still without a language
           policy; and


  (2) urges the Rules Committee to give immediate attention to this.]

Ms S N NTLABATI: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: This is the second
time we are having this motion. We also had it three months ago.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Are you
objecting to the motion?

Ms S N NTLABATI: I am objecting, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I am advised
that the objection is that this motion has already been moved before this
House. We will have to check the records to establish whether indeed this
motion was ever moved during this session of Parliament. If so, we will
deal with the matter at that stage.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, this means if it has not been moved, it
will be accepted if there is no other objection?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Then we will
put the question before the House.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: It will again be put before the House?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Yes.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Thank you, Chairperson.

                      DOUBLE STANDARDS DISPLAYED BY ANC

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr L G LEVER: Mr Chairperson, if I may put my motion now?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Yes, hon member.

Mr L G LEVER: Mr Chairperson, I move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the startling double standards in morality displayed by the ANC
       when the DP enters into a co-operation agreement with the UCDP; and


  (2) further notes that the ANC has a close relationship with the Minority
       Front of Mr Rajbansi, who was declared by the James Commission to be
       unfit to hold public office.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: We object to the motion, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! There is an
objection to the motion and it therefore becomes a notice of motion.

                      CONGRATULATIONS TO BAFANA BAFANA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move:
  That the Council congratulates Bafana Bafana on their victory last night,
  27 January 2000, and the fact that they have now qualified for the
  quarterfinals.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson: I move:


  That precedence be given to Order No 2.

The effect of this will be that the Preferential Procurement Policy
Framework Bill and the report will be dealt with first, before Order No 1.

While I have the floor, Chairperson, may I also draw the attention of those
in the gallery and the media to this. They may have come here early on the
basis of the order as it is printed on the Order Paper. I can indicate to
them that it is anticipated that the Promotion of Equality and Prevention
of Unfair Discrimination Bill will be dealt with in this House at
approximately 11:30. We regret any inconvenience occasioned by this. I have
consulted with the other political parties.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

               PREFERENTIAL PROCUREMENT POLICY FRAMEWORK BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Mr Chairperson and members of the NCOP, I
must say that this is the first opportunity for me to address this august
House and I welcome the opportunity.

The debate we are having in this House today provides us with a unique
opportunity as political parties, as members of the House and society
broadly, to reflect on the achievements, progress, difficulties and
challenges of present-day South Africa. It is an opportunity for us to take
pride in, because we are a constitutional democracy whose Constitution
provides an anchor for the actions, activities, rights and interactions of
all actors in our society, be they individuals, groups, institutions or
organisations.

Furthermore, we are fortunate to have a Constitution which was not drawn up
as an academic exercise in boardrooms, but one which is firmly rooted in
our society, and as such, recognises some of the anomalies and distortions
that characterise our society.

So that, while section 217(1) of the Constitution says that organs of
state, when contracting for goods and services, must do so in a manner
which is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective,
section 217(2) states that subsection (1) does not prevent the
implementation of a procurement policy which provides for categories of
preference in the allocation of contracts and the protection or advancement
of persons, or categories of persons disadvantaged by unfair
discrimination.

In saying all these things, I want to make it clear that the Bill before
the House is firmly rooted in the Constitution, as it fulfils the
requirements of section 217(3) of the Constitution which says that any
preferential procurement policy must apply within a framework prescribed by
national legislation. It is certainly not a product of arbitrariness by a
rampant majority party.

The Bill and the debate also remind us that our society has unique problems
which in turn require unique solutions, that our history and its legacy of
disparity, inequality and distortions cannot be left to chance to correct,
but that we shall have to take very deliberate steps to correct it. None
among us, including those who have expressed the view that this Bill will
lead to discrimination against young whites or small businesses of white
people, should fear preference being given or affirmative action being
taken.

In this regard, it must also be stated that discrimination and affirmative
action are not only a racial phenomenon, as they also relate to geographic
disparities, gender, disability and the urban-rural divide.

Having said that, this Bill is firmly rooted in our Constitution, and goes
further in that it provides us with an instrument which enables us to deal
with some of the realities of our country.
One of the major challenges that face our country today is that of economic
growth and job creation. In seeking solutions to these problems, we have
identified the development of small, medium and micro enterprises as having
potential to create many jobs and thus spur economic growth.

In an environment such as exists in South Africa, characterised by a lack
of finance, and with Government being the largest consumer of goods and
services, this Bill will give us an opportunity more vigorously to pursue
the objective of small, medium and micro-enterprise development through the
Government procurement system.

The Bill also has the necessary flexibility in that it provides for smaller
and bigger contracts through the ratios 80/20 and 90/10, respectively, in
terms of the determination of a formula and amounts to be stipulated in
regulations. It is also flexible in that it enables exclusions, where
necessary, from the provisions of this Bill.

I must say that the Bill also creates the opportunity for meaningful
partnerships. I am saying this because one of the provisions in the Bill
deals with a very negative phenomenon in South Africa, that of fronting,
where either big businesses or white-owned businesses participate in this
practice called ``rent a black''. This is why one of the provisions of the
Bill makes the submission of false information so as to win tenders
illegal.

Further work still needs to be done in order to give potency to this Bill,
namely the drafting and promulgation of regulations that will provide
details which it would not have been wise for us to include in legislation.
Furthermore, departments will have to pay closer attention to
specifications for tenders. We need to speed up the process of the wider
and more comprehensive reform of the state procurement system which, as we
speak, I assure members, is work in progress.

Finally, the fact that there is broad consensus on this Bill is yet more
proof that consultation is the best route for us in dealing with the
multifaceted problems facing our country. We must, as we begin this debate,
acknowledge the hard work that members put into processing this Bill and
the co-operative effort between the National Assembly and the National
Council of Provinces, particularly the role of the chairs of the finance
committees of both Houses, Ms Barbara Hogan in the National Assembly and Ms
Dorothy Mahlangu in the National Council of Provinces, in taking the Bill
through the requisite stages and processes. I therefore commend this Bill
for adoption by the National Council of Provinces. [Applause.]

Ms Q D MAHLANGU: Chairperson, Deputy Minister and hon members, I wish to
thank the chairpersons of provincial standing committees and the NCOP
permanent members of the Select Committee on Finance for their excellent co-
operation in shaping the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill and
their unconditional support throughout. We had continuous interaction and
intense contact during our deliberations on this Bill. It was not easy.
There was a festive season and holidays but we tried our best.

I recently came across an article by Bernard Hoekman, a World Bank
economist, which said that South Africa was the only country in the world
that constitutionally required a framework on procurement. This is a first
of its kind for our young democracy and that is as a result of ANC action.

Clause 2 of the Bill was a source of major concern and dissatisfaction.

There was a considerable debate on the usage of the word ``must'' or
``may'' to include other goals not specified in the Bill. Finally, the word
``may'' was retained to allow scope for the inclusion of other goals, such
as skills transfer and others, depending on the type of goods tendered for.
The Bill is intended to empower the historically disadvantaged, and we owe
no apology to anyone for that.

However, we still need to take extra measures to ensure that the objectives
of the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill are met. At present,
access to tender information and the tender bidding processes themselves
are cumbersome and complicated. We need to ensure that the tender documents
are simplified so that emerging entrepreneurs can complete them accurately
and thereby not jeopardise their chances by submitting incomplete
documents.

The key outcome of passing this Bill before us is that obstacles preventing
informal township entrepreneurs, such as panel beaters, machinists and
upholsterers, from tendering for Government goods and services have been
removed. Clause 2 of the Bill distinguishes between large procurement
transactions and smaller transactions by cost thresholds. Clause 2 makes a
distinction between small contracts and large contracts by way of being
equal to, less than or exceeding a prescribed amount.

A maximum of 20 points of the preference system are allocated to smaller
contracts while only 10 points are allocated to larger contracts on the
preference points system. The 10 or 20 points difference ensures that the
emerging entrepreneurs are not out-competed by the well-established larger
companies when tendering for small Government contracts.

This is a long-overdue measure to ensure the participation of the black
local entrepreneur in local tenders. The Bill improves the access of small,
medium and micro enterprises to the procurement process, which could lead
to the speedy formalisation of the previously informal sector of the
economy. The latter would increase the population of tax-paying citizens,
because all bid documents require that successful tenders be awarded to
persons in good standing with the Receiver of Revenue.

In addition, clause 3(a) allows the Minister, on request, to exempt an
organ of state from any or all of the provisions of this Bill, if the
likely tenderers are international suppliers. This particular amendment
makes the Bill before us commensurate with the World Trade Organisation's
government procurement agreement and other procurement directives.

The empowerment of small or emerging contractors and entrepreneurs should
not negate other constitutional goals such as equity, transparency,
competition and cost-effectiveness. Women and black entrepreneurs can
deliver timeously and inexpensively because of low input and overhead
costs. The orthodox assumption that a preferential route always results in
a premium and slow delivery is unfounded.

Research conducted for Ntsika entitled An Assessment of Procurement to
SMMEs in Local Government indicated that a company owned by black women
offered a lower cost for almost thrice the output of deliverables offered
by well-established companies.

In respect of women's empowerment, this Bill will go a long way to uplift
them. They can, through partnership and joint ventures, obtain tenders,
create jobs and transfer skills. Companies owned by women, or which have
women in decision-making positions, are also listed as contracting persons
historically disadvantaged and to whom preference may be given. Black women
have not had the same access to education, training, credit and loan
facilities and are thus placed in a position of relative powerlessness in
obtaining tenders. ``You educate a woman, you educate a nation. You educate
a man, you educate an individual!'' [Laughter.]

Black people have been used in the past to secure tenders. However, this
Bill addresses the issue of false disclosure of company ownership when
tender documents are submitted. The Bill provides for penalties, which an
organ of state may deem necessary to apply.

I am pleased to announce that all parties and provinces in the joint
committee found the Bill desirable. I see no reason why anybody should
oppose this Bill. This Bill seeks to redress the imbalances of the past.

I wish to thank the Minister of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel, who is not with
us today; his Deputy, Mr Mandisi Mpahlwa; Ms Barbara Hogan, the chairperson
of the National Assembly portfolio committee, and the officials of the
Department of Finance and State Expenditure. Lastly, I want to thank the
Chief Whip of the NCOP, Mr Enver Surty, and all political parties for their
understanding when called during the holiday period. [Applause.]

Ms P C P MAJODINA: Chairperson, Deputy Minister of Finance, A! Mthembu, if
these walls had ways and means of staging a protest action, they would have
done so long ago as result of the bombardment they are forced to absorb day
in and day out, from expressions such as:


  We in the DP, or we in the New NP, support the principle or the essence
  of the Bill, but cannot vote in favour of this Bill because of this or
  that reason.

Translated, it simply means that they cannot vote for the Bill because it
is not to the advantage of their constituency, their rich constituency, ie
the rich, but favours the other constituency which they do not respect,
namely the majority, which falls under the class of the historically
disadvantaged.

The opposition is sensitive and extremely allergic to the mention of the
words ``historically disadvantaged''. We, however, cannot easily forget or
be so irresponsible as to forget where we came from.

This Bill will empower an ordinary MaNdlangisa and MQwathi from the remote
rural village of Macacuma in the northern part of the Eastern Cape. It will
protect these poor men from being used as window-dressing by certain
individuals in order to secure preferential points. This Bill establishes
the parameters of the preferences and defines both beneficiaries and
objectives of such preferences.

Ndivumele ndigoduke, ndiwele iGqili, ndiwele iNciba, ndiwuwele noMbhashe.
Sanele ngooSambuntsuntsu, ooSiswana-sibomvana, oohlohlesakhe abamfimfitha
abantu bakowethu besenza uqhogwano olungunomgogwana kuba bejonge inzuzo
nengeniso, bathi bakugqiba babalahle njengezikhoko. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)
[Let me cast my eye across the Orange, Kei and Bashee rivers. We have had
it with people pursuing self-interest, who form partnerships with our
people under false pretences and then leave them in the lurch. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon members,
allow me to take this opportunity to welcome our special delegates,
including members of Salga, to this Chamber.

Mr A MNGUNI (Free State): Chairperson, Deputy Minister and hon members, the
objective of this Bill is to empower the historically disadvantaged
majority.

For the past 40 years or so this majority has been ruthlessly dispossessed
of its economic and political rights. This Bill is one of the instruments
that will make sure that the majority is given its economic rights.

Let me sketch the situation in the Free State for hon members. Most of the
people are in rural areas and the province itself is rural. With the
continuing illegal evictions, most of the people are moving to urban areas.
These people are illiterate and they do not have any skills. How does one
expect these people to survive unless we make the Bill mandatory, even at
local level? Farming was the only means of survival that they knew. If
these people are kicked off the farms, how are they going to adapt in an
urban situation?

In the urban areas most of the towns depend on the mines. The dwindling of
reserves and the depreciating gold price make it impossible for these
people, irrespective of whether they are white or black, to earn a living
because the mines are closing down. If we make this Bill mandatory, even at
council level, the very same white people who cannot make a living any
other way will be enabled to tender and they will be able to remain in the
economic mainstream.

Regarding the 90:10 and 80:20 formulae, the Opposition says that, if we
apply the 80:20 formula, 11% fewer houses will be built and if we apply the
90:10 formula, 25% fewer houses will be built. Then either 11% or 25% less
delivery will take place.

In my view it will be worthwhile for the state to ensure economic
development for the majority at the cost of 11% less delivery. This will
ensure the upliftment of the majority that are still outside the mainstream
of the economy. If the state pays a premium of either 11% in terms of the
90:10 formula, or 25% in terms of the 80:20 formula, I believe this will be
worthwhile as it will mean including the majority of the people into the
mainstream of the economy.

The Bill is not discriminatory because anybody can tender. Providing that
his or her tender is acceptable, he or she will get a contract. Most white
companies today are still getting ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Order!
[Laughter.]

Mr A MNGUNI (Free State): A lot of companies today, white companies for
that matter, are still getting state tenders. They were empowered by the NP
government and today they are still empowered under this Government,
because they have managed to crowd out the SMMEs through the tendering
system. It is time for the SMMEs also to get empowered by this democratic
Government.

It has already been said that one of the main issues or aims is to stop
fronting. Fronting still occurs, whether by white or black companies. Big
black companies are still using other people to secure tenders. When put
into practice, this Bill will really address this situation. We hope and
believe that, to some extent, fronting will be eliminated.

The opposition parties are concerned about the question of how long the
disadvantaged will remain disadvantaged. The fact is that the disadvantaged
did not receive proper education under the system of Bantu education. While
the disadvantaged were fighting the unjust and oppressive system, their
white counterparts were studying at universities. Because they did not get
a proper education they are today still disadvantaged and cannot make a
living. Therefore they will forever, or at least for some time to come,
remain disadvantaged because of their poor education and as far as the
economy is concerned.

Opposition parties say they are not going to vote in favour of the Bill
because it is unconstitutional. Clause 44(2) of the Constitution says that
the state can intervene in order to maintain economic unity. This Bill
really addresses that issue. The Opposition therefore has no leg to stand
on, unless they want to perpetuate white economic domination.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon member,
could you please round up? Your time has expired.

Mr A MNGUNI (Free State): Thank you, Chairperson. I say: Let the Opposition
take this opportunity to make right what they did wrong in the past. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Ms J FUBBS (Gauteng) Mr Chairperson, Deputy Minister of Finance - whom we
certainly welcome to this House as this was his maiden address, but I
suppose in his case we should call it a gentleman address - and hon members
of this House, Gauteng fully supports the Bill before us as amended.

I just want to pass a few comments before coming to the substance of my
speech. Many of the parties have supported or have finally seen reason to
support this Bill, in spite of vigorous discussions and debate. However, I
just want to address one of the fallacious arguments that were put forward
in opposition to black entrepreneurs being given contracts. The dangers, we
were told, are lack of delivery, or poor quality workmanship. I want to ask
members of this House if they read an article a few weeks ago about all
those houses that collapsed. What was the colour of the contractor? I want
to ask members: Who built this unfinished bridge I see in Cape Town? Who
were the contractors? I can go on and on with the list, but I do not wish
to waste my time because I think we all read, and it would be a very big
file to read about mismanagement of contracts by members of the white
community, who are highly skilled. That is just one thing I wanted to
address.

The other issue that came up, the second point, was about the danger of
provinces losing their political power and status granted in the
Constitution, that is, the great fear that national was now dictating to
us. It was quite clear that the chapter on co-operative governance was
ignored during this debate, and I think that what one sees within this Bill
is a full recognition of the status of provinces. This is a framework that
allows provinces to determine their preferential policy. Gauteng, of
course, has done just that.

Procurement is a powerful instrument for transformation, and Government
expenditure, through the purchase of goods and services at about R64
billion at the national level and R1 billion at Gauteng's level, is
probably the largest purchaser in the country, and as such directly
influences GDP. Gauteng, incidentally, contributes 38,1% to this GDP and,
clearly, we intend making a very big difference within the framework of
this piece of legislation.

Within this legislation the historical disadvantages of race, gender and
disability have clearly been addressed. I want to remind members that not
so long ago there was a systematic disempowerment of black people, where
legislation specifically excluded them and turned them into criminals for
even attempting to operate businesses. But despite this there were, of
course, a few entrepreneurs that managed to get ahead. Now this Bill aims
to redress that legislative disempowerment that continued for over 40 years
- and if we include colonialism, 300-odd years.

However, what the Bill is also addressing is that - and I must make this
clear - it does not act irresponsibly. There is implicit, throughout this
Bill, fiscal discipline. It recognises that one cannot go 50:50 or 60:40.
Yes, we need to cap this risk to the Government, this premium risk at
around 11,1% and about 20% to 25%. It recognises that. One may ask oneself,
as people were asking themselves during this debate: Can the Government
afford this? I am asking members: Can we actually afford not to do this?
That is the question members should be facing and answering.

This Bill will enable us - through this powerful instrument of procurement
within which each province takes into account its own unique situations -
to begin in a responsible manner to effectively redress the economic
imbalances. It does this in a variety of ways through clause 2(1) and
specific subsections. There are preferences, either specific or which can
be written into the tenders, for companies which employ people from
historically disadvantaged communities, and companies which show adequate
transformation of the workplace and active commitment to issues of
employment equity.

There is also the aspect of regulations. The Minister of Finance took this
one step further and said that he would publish these draft regulations in
the Gazette, not only for transparency, but again for constructive
engagement, not just with those of us sitting here, but with civil society
in general.

The Bill comprehensively accommodates RDP objectives. It increases
application, irrespective of the value of contracts. It does not eliminate
fronting. One cannot eliminate crime - show me any country that can
eliminate it - but the Bill effectively reduces the incidence of fronting.
It accommodates, as I have said, HDIs and women. My colleagues have spoken
adequately and inspiringly about that. The Bill allows us to do what few
countries have done. It harmonises fiscal discipline and economic
development with empowerment. The Bill is not a Bill ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Your time has
expired, hon member.

Ms J FUBBS: May I then close by saying that this Bill will contribute to
the dream of an African renaissance becoming action. [Applause.]

Dr E A CONROY: Mnr die Voorsitter, die Adjunkminister van Finansies en agb
lede, in artikel 217(1) van die Grondwet word vereis dat alle staatsorgane
op nasionale, provinsiale of plaaslike regeringsvlak en enige ander
staatsinstellings wat in nasionale wetgewing geïdentifiseer word, 'n
regverdige, billike, deursigtige, mededingende en kostedoeltreffende
stelsel van verkryging moet hê. Daar word egter in artikel 217(2)
duideliker en meer spesifiek bepaal dat die reeds genoemde instellings 'n
beleid van verkryging kan toepas waarin voorkeurkategorieë by die
toekenning van kontrakte bepaal word en persone of kategorieë persone wat
tevore deur onbillike diskriminasie benadeel is, beskerm word.

Dít is waaroor hierdie belangrike stuk wetgewing gaan, naamlik dat
entrepreneurs en opkomende entrepreneurs wat in die verlede deur wetgewing
benadeel is en sodoende verhinder is om suksesvol vir staatskontrakte te
tender, die geleentheid gegun word om ook hul deel van die ekonomiese koek
te kry. Daar word dus spesifiek in klousule 2(1) van die wetsontwerp verwys
na persone en kategorieë persone wat op grond van ras, geslag of
gestremdheid benadeel is. Hierby kan ook die klein, medium en mikro
entrepreneurs gevoeg word.

Die Nuwe NP vereenselwig hom heelhartig met hierdie beginsel in die
wetsontwerp, omdat ons opreg meen dat dit 'n instrument is wat baie daartoe
kan bydra om die helingsproses van die verlede se wonde te versnel. Ons
stem daarom vir die beginsels wat die wetsontwerp beliggaam en sou graag
wou sien dat die wet - wat dit sekerlik by die afhandeling van vandag se
debat sal wees - 'n modelwet, of so ná moontlik aan perfek, moet wees.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr E A CONROY: Mr Chairman, Deputy Minister of Finance and hon members,
section 217(1) of the Constitution contains the requirement that all organs
of state at national, provincial or local government level and any other
government institution identified in national legislation, must follow a
fair, reasonable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective procurement
system. However, section 217(2) provides more clearly and specifically that
the aforementioned institutions may apply a procurement policy in which
preferential categories are determined when contracts are allocated and
persons and categories of persons who were previously unfairly prejudiced
by discrimination are protected.

This is what this important piece of legislation is about, namely that
entrepreneurs and emerging entrepreneurs who were previously detrimentally
prejudiced by legislation and consequently prevented from successfully
tendering for contracts are given the opportunity to receive their slice of
the economic cake. Specific reference is made in clause 2(1) of the Bill to
persons and categories of persons who have been prejudiced on the grounds
of race, gender or disability. Here one can include the small, medium and
micro entrepreneurs.

The New NP associates itself wholly with this principle in the Bill,
because we in all sincerity think that it is an instrument that can
contribute much to accelerating the process of healing the wounds of the
past. For that reason we are voting in favour of the principles contained
in the Bill and would like to see that the Act - which it will certainly be
after the conclusion of today's debate - is a model Act, or as near perfect
as possible.]

We have, therefore, in terms of the New NP's policy of constructive
engagement, argued the following points at the joint committee, which we
felt should have been included in the main body of the Bill and not only be
accommodated in the accompanying regulations.

In the first instance, we strongly feel that the provisions of the Bill
should not result in the discrimination of South African citizens vis-à-vis
foreign nationals. This is not, may I add, a case of xenophobia, a term
which was often used out of context during the deliberations of the joint
committee on the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair
Discrimination Bill.

An example of discrimination of this nature would be if an African-American
who retained his or her American citizenship obtained a South African
residence or working permit and settled in the Republic with the purpose of
involving himself or herself in the construction business. Although South
Africa welcomes foreign investment and any new skills which might help in
the acceleration of our economic growth, such a business should not enjoy
the advantages of this Bill against tenders submitted by, for example,
white females.

As far as foreign participation is concerned, foreign pressure was also
apparently exerted on the Government to ensure that this Bill does not
adversely affect the existing and future free trade agreements in the sense
that there should be no discrimination against foreign companies that wish
to tender. We are therefore pleased that clause 3(b) of the Bill states
that the Minister may, on request, exempt an organ of state from any or all
of the provisions of this Bill if the likely tenderers are international
suppliers.

In the second instance, we are of the opinion that any company submitting a
tender in terms of this Bill must be in good standing with the SA Revenue
Service and that a clean bill of health, so to speak, should be a part of
the required set of tender documents. The joint committee has been given
the assurance that these matters will be addressed in the regulations, and
one can assume that this will be done in future.

In the third instance, we feel that the Bill should make provision for
review after a certain period. This could possibly be after 10 or 15 years.
This Bill might hopefully no longer be necessary after a period of about 10
years, because all disadvantaged companies would have used that time
fruitfully to acquire all the necessary skills to obtain access to finance
and to understanding the tendering process. I conclude by saying that the
New NP supports this Bill despite the few reservations I have enumerated.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, I am speaking on behalf of the Province of
Mpumalanga. We had a few public hearings and consultations with the various
role-players in the province, and the finance committee in the province met
to deliberate on the Bill. Members of that committee did participate also
at the joint committee here in Cape Town with regard to this Bill, and the
province supports the enactment of this important piece of legislation.

This Bill indeed gives a framework within which the affirmative procurement
policy of Government will realise its set objective. I believe that this
Bill, contrary to the view expressed by those who fear that it will have a
negative effect and that it equates to apartheid in reverse, will bring
about stability in our country and within our economic community. I think
this Bill sends a very clear message to all South Africans that this
Government is serious about redressing, in an appropriate way, the
imbalances that the apartheid system left behind.

My colleague Mr Conroy, in his closing remarks, indicated that perhaps in
10 years' time there will have to be a review, because at that time the
effects of apartheid will have been eroded. I am not sure whether what he
said could ever be correct. It takes a short time to cause destruction, but
it takes a very long time to rebuild what has been destroyed.
[Interjections.]

Obviously, one could expect that from the likes of my colleague on the
other side. This Bill will deal with those issues and I think we can only
succeed in redressing the imbalances of this country if all of us as a
people look at the effects of the evils that have happened and look forward
to addressing those things in a very constructive way. It is in the
interests of all of us, black and white, and all of business to support
initiatives of this nature. If we fail to do that, we shall have failed to
admit the errors that were made.

We support the Bill and we believe that it is necessary. I am sure I agree
with the previous speaker from Gauteng that it is very difficult to deal
with fronting. But I believe that we should consider including in the Bill
that will be considered by this Council in the near future, dealing with
whistle-blowing, a clause that will, in one way or another, deal with the
exposure of fronting within this sector of our community. However, in
principle I would want to say that we strongly support the passing of this
Bill. [Applause.]

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Chairperson, Minister, hon members of the Council, this day
has come after intensive deliberations with civil society nationally, in
all the provinces. May I remind this Council and the nation that it was
never an easy exercise to come to the final tune of this piece of
legislation and to meet the February deadline.

Ewe kuyinene ukuba uluntu ngokubanzi luza kuxhamla kulo mthetho  uyilwayo
unika ithuba lokuba omnye nomnye kwimiDaka yakowethu afake isicelo
sokubonisa isakhono sakhe ekwenzeni umsebenzi othile, kanti norhwebo.

Umnyango uvulekile gengelele ngakumbi kuninzi lwama-Afrika ahlala
emakhayeni kukudala elangazelela ukufikelela kumathuba anjengala aziswa
ngulo mthetho uyilwayo namhlanje.

Ndivumele ndiphawule ndithi: Lo mthetho uyilwayo ungummiselo ongqina ncam
okuyalelwa nguMgaqo-Siseko, kwicandelo lama-217. Sileli Bhunga lamaPhondo
leSizwe elililizwi lamaphondo, sithi kuluntu malubaze iindlebe, luqaphele
okokuba kungentsuku zatywala uMphathiswa wezeMali uza kundulula, apapashe
zonke izicwangciso neenkcukacha ezifunqula lo mthetho uyilwayo, ukuze nina
niwungenise endleleni enisa kwimpilo nobomi obungcono.

Yindlela ke leyo uluntu olwazikhethela yona mhla lwaluphawula igama lalo
kuKhongolose ngonyaka ka-1994, lwaphinda ngo-1999. Ngoku amasi abekwe
elangeni. Kosala amavila. Amavila ke siyawazi sonke. Into yawo yokuqala
kukunqena ukululamela imithetho nezicwangciso. Asoloko efuna into
engekhoyo, angayixabisi esondezwe phambi kwawo.

Xeshikweni bekuxovulwa, kuqulunqwa lo mthetho uyilwayo umntu ubesakuweva
ebhomboloza ngesunset clause, leya thina sayishiya ezipalini zogqatso ngo-
1999. Inokuba iyagodola apho ikhoyo okanye itshiswa ngamalanga. Vuma
ndikhumbuze le Ndlu noluntu ukuba apho kumnandi khona ngalo mthetho
oyilwayo kukuba akukho nto intsha uyithethayo koko umisa iinjongo ze-RDP.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Yes, it is true that the wider community will benefit from this Bill that
gives each and every black person an opportunity to submit an application
to show his or her skill in a particular craft, as well as in trade.

The door is wide open, particularly for the majority of unemployed Africans
who have been waiting eagerly for opportunities such as ones brought by
this Bill.

Allow me to comment thus: This Bill serves to implement that which is
instructed by section 217 of the Constitution. As the National Council of
Provinces, which is the voice of the provinces, we say that the public
should put their ear to the ground and note that the Minister of Finance
will promulgate and publicise all the plans and details relating to this
Bill so that they can take it down the road that leads them to a better
life.

That is the road the community chose when they made their mark next to the
ANC in 1994, and again in 1999. Now is the time. Only the lazy will not
benefit. We all know the lazy. First they are lazy to obey laws and follow
plans. They always look for something that is nonexistent and do not
respect that which is brought before them.
While the Bill was being debated one could hear them grumbling over the
sunset clause, which we left in 1999. Wherever it is, this clause must be
cold or frying in the sun. Allow me to remind this House and the public
that the best thing about this Bill is that it does not say anything new,
but implements the objectives of the RDP.]

In conclusion, I must reiterate that only those who uphold the principles
of the RDP, as outlined in the White Paper, will find their way and that
that will translate into the creation of SMMEs on a large scale. Like my
province, I hope all provinces are ready to vote for this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr G A LUCAS: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister of Finance, hon members of
this House and hon special delegates from the provinces and Salga, section
217 of the Constitution states:


  When an organ of state in the national, provincial or local sphere of
  government, or any other institution identified in national legislation,
  contracts for goods or services, it must do so in accordance with a
  system which is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-
  effective.

It goes further to state in subsection (2):


  Subsection (1) does not prevent the organs of state or institutions
  referred to in that subsection from implementing a procurement policy
  providing for -


  (a) categories of preference in the allocation of contracts;


  (b) the protection or advancement of persons, or categories of persons,
       disadvantaged by unfair discrimination.

Therefore we as the Northern Cape Province welcome this Bill, ie the
Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill, precisely because it seeks
to address and expresses our constitutional requirements as contemplated by
section 217 of our Constitution. It is our firm belief that this Bill will
greatly contribute towards the economic advancement of those historically
disadvantaged by the brutal system of apartheid and that, indeed, our
organs of state can play an important role in ensuring that the majority of
those disadvantaged are able to enter the mainstream of our country's
economy.

We must ensure that we as the state, in our small way, contribute towards
closing the gap between the rich and the poor of our country. This Bill
seeks to do exactly that, especially in our province where the majority of
our people live in abject poverty.

There is no way that we as elected representatives can oppose any
progressive initiatives aimed at improving our people's lives and living
conditions. This would be a gross betrayal of our people's confidence and
trust in us to advance their needs and aspirations. Furthermore, it is our
belief that this framework will ensure that fronting, which has been used
by those who seek to enrich themselves at the expense of our disadvantaged
people, does not continue. We have seen only yesterday that even political
parties also use fronting by renting a Mangope to advance their own
election. [Laughter.] Really we need to ensure that this Bill addresses
those specific issues.

Furthermore, this Bill will ensure that there is uniformity among all our
state organs in the procurement process which will greatly assist our
people when tendering for Government programmes. During the public hearings
we conducted in our province, the citizens of our province overwhelmingly
supported this Bill without any reservations. In fact, they indicated that
this framework was long overdue and that it would contribute towards
accelerating the pace of change currently taking place in our country for
the betterment of our people's lives. It also came out clearly during those
hearings that our people in the province are sick and tired of corrupt
elements within our society who seek to use every available opportunity our
Government creates to enrich themselves. It is their wish that we ensure
that this procurement policy framework addresses their concerns.

Above all, this framework ensures that Government, in its tender process,
adheres to clear business principles which are equitable, transparent and
cost-effective. This Bill also emphasizes the importance of addressing the
programmes for reconstruction and development which form key pillars of our
Government's commitment towards creating a better life for all. The
Northern Cape Province supports this Bill without any reservations.

I wish to thank the two chairpersons of the committees for the sterling
work and leadership that they have given during the deliberations on this
Bill. Indeed, their contribution and leadership assisted us a lot. In
conclusion I just wish to indicate that there have been concerns from the
NNP that this Bill does not cover international issues and people from
foreign countries. I am not sure where this fear comes from, because
clearly, in terms of the Bill, there are exemptions that the Minister can
apply to ensure that those people who are not South Africans are unable to
use this Bill their to own advantage. I wish to suggest to the hon member
that he must go through the Bill more thoroughly than he did in the
committee, and maybe he will begin to understand some of the issues.
[Interjections.]

Lastly, the question of timeframes is not necessary, because we have been
elected to do an oversight work. It is important that in our execution of
responsibilities, we are able to monitor the policy so that as conditions
change, we are also able to change that policy to suit those particular
conditions. I am not sure what the noise is all about concerning the
question of timeframes. [Applause.]

Mr N MATHEBE (Salga): Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister Mr M B Mphahlwa,
hon members and special delegates, I am Norman Mathebe from the SA Local
Government Association. Let me begin by wishing members all the best for
the new millennium and the African century.

The Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill is an important piece of
legislation for a number of reasons, among which the following are worth
noting. The Constitution of South Africa requires all organs of state to
follow a procurement system which is fair, equitable, transparent,
competitive and cost-effective. This constitutional provision is important
for the developmental state to advance the intentions of the reconstruction
and development of our society.

Secondly, clause 2 of the Bill deals specifically with the required
framework for the implementation of procurement policy. Even though our
state is divided into different spheres, it has never been the intention of
the Constitution to disintegrate the state and foster a lack of co-
ordination. Therefore it is absolutely critical that the procurement policy
of the state be uniform, consistent and coherent. This will ensure that the
state is cohesive and fosters development in a co-ordinated manner.

The current state of affairs in municipalities is such that there are
municipalities with different procurement policies, and some do not have
policies at all. Depending on the type and capacities of the
municipalities, one finds a mixed bag of types of procurement policies. We
are confident that this Bill will begin a process of ensuring sound
policies within our municipalities.

This Bill is important for local government, due to the nature of services
that we provide. Municipalities, immediately after the passing of their
budgets, are involved in issuing different types of tenders for key
services that affect the lives of our people and generate income, jobs and
economic growth. If those tenders are issued without a coherent procurement
policy, the state will fail in advancing the development of this country.
The Council is aware of the currently unfolding process of restructuring
local government and its boundaries. After this process, there will be
fewer municipalities, and they will be properly managed, both
administratively and politically.

This Bill will assist those municipalities to put in place firm policies
for procurement.

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to thank the Minister and his
department for drafting this Bill. I also wish to extend our thanks to both
the chairpersons of the committee and all members of the committee, who
participated in this process, for driving the process in considering this
Bill.

Lastly, to the Chairperson of the NCOP and the members of this House, may
your work and commitment to this institution bring you joy, success and the
growth of the NCOP as an institution. [Applause.]

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Mr Chairperson, the DP will be supporting this Bill, not
only because a Bill of this nature is required by the Constitution, but
also because we believe it is socially and economically desirable. It seeks
to give disadvantaged people a hand up rather than a hand-out and,
therefore, offers a prospect of permanent empowerment rather than creating
dependency.

The amended Bill before us today is a victory for common sense. The DP has
consistently argued that trade-offs were implicit in this legislation.
Empowering disadvantaged builders by accepting a premium on price
necessarily means fewer houses. An emerging printer who supplies textbooks
at 20% over market price means 20% fewer textbooks.

We consistently argued that not all organs of state were equally well
resourced; nor were profit margins among industries necessarily similar. A
balance between empowerment and efficiency, as indeed between addressing
poverty or inequality, needs to be maintained. The amendments contained in
clause 2 of the Bill address these concerns. Organs of state now have
substantial flexibility to determine their own preferential procurement
policies. Cash-strapped local authorities may award fewer than either 10 or
20 points for categories of preference, and thus remain within their
budgets. Up to 10 or 20 points may be awarded by financially stronger
organs of state for tenders pertaining to a higher margin industry.

The restriction of the so-called 80/20 formula below a prescribed amount is
a sensible amendment which helps to contain costs while affording
assistance to entrepreneurs who need it most. So far so good.

A lingering unease remains whether the Bill will have the effect of
creating a few new elites rather than empowering the many disadvantaged.
The intent of the Bill is to empower and support the disadvantaged
individuals and small and medium enterprises. Those who have succeeded
against all the odds, despite the ravages of apartheid, to establish
thriving businesses deserve admiration and respect. The focus of the
legislation now is to shift to those who are still struggling to establish
themselves.

There seems to be no logical reason not to place a ceiling on the value of
tenders for which preferential treatment can be given. An enterprise that
turns over millions of rands does not need further entrenchment.

Lastly, there is nothing in the legislation which restricts the same
persons or businesses from receiving preference time and time again. The
degree to which common sense and fairness is applied by organs of state
when awarding their tenders will be critical to the success of this
legislation. Likewise, the regulations that the Minister will need to
promulgate will have to be realistic and workable. These are achievable
objectives.

If these challenges are met, in the decades to come, this progressive
legislation offers the prospect of a new class of emerging, self-assured
and confident entrepreneurs for the foundation of an open society and
successful economy. [Applause.]

Ms S SITHOLE (Northern Province): Mr Chairperson, it is a privilege to
speak in this House today on behalf of the people of the Northern Province.
We, as the Northern Province, want to thank our chair in the NCOP, Comrade
Dorothy, for having actually involved us vigorously in the deliberations
leading to the passage of this Bill today.

We also want to say, as a province, that we congratulate the Ministry of
Finance for the role it has played in effecting transformation in South
Africa today. This is not the first time. It has made so many efforts, such
as the Bill that we have today, which is an instrument with which we are
going to carry out our oversight role.
The Department of Finance has further shown that it is prepared to face the
challenge of economic transformation, by putting before this House the Bill
that is going to change the face of procurement in our country for ever. As
a country, we have to understand that, in order to address our present
situation, we have to ask ourselves who we are. The answer is that we are
South Africans coming from a background divided by the policies of
apartheid. We are coming from a past in which there were people who were
dismally disadvantaged. That we must understand.

Where do we want to go? We want to lead the world in showing that
transformation can be done peacefully. It can be done. Transformation can
be effected if people sit together around the table and talk, plan and
legislate; because all of us here are members of the legislatures and
members of the NCOP, and we are here because people trusted that we have
one thing in mind - to transform South Africa for ever.

One writer, William Shakespeare, once wrote:


  There is a tide in the affairs of men which, when taken at a time, may
  sometimes lead to fortune.
This is the tide. We are on stage, as South Africans. If we take this
chance - the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill - we can change
South Africa for ever, and I am pleading with everybody in this House that
we should not come here and make empty political speeches, but must face
the reality from which we come. The reality is that we come from a past
with a lot of imbalances, and, today, we must stand up together, hold
hands, address these issues and put them aside for ever.

William Shakespeare further wrote that the world is a stage where every man
can play a part. I say that the world is a stage where South Africa can
play a part. We have to demonstrate to the international community that
when we talk of the African renaissance, it can be done; and when we talk
about nation-building, it can be done. Today we must speak as one and say
that we are putting aside the imbalances of the past.

As a province, we took this Bill very seriously. We went into public
hearings, and we must thank our communication section in the legislature
for doing its best to ensure that every part of the Northern Province was
informed about this Bill. Our people came in numbers and stakeholders
spoke. The public hearings were conducted in English, Afrikaans, Xitsonga,
Tshivenda and Sepedi, and everybody spoke in their own language. They all
said that this was a good Bill.

Of course, we had a few people - the DP to be specific - who actually cried
a lot about the word ``historically'', which they said they did not like.
However, I am standing here to tell them that in order to put right what is
wrong, one has to understand one's history. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): I am informed that
the hon member A Ismail is not here at the moment. Let us proceed to the
hon member A J Hamilton.

Mr C ACKERMANN: Mr Chairperson, may I just address you on the point that
you have raised. Mr Ismail, who is the chairperson of the Standing
Committee on Finance in the Western Cape, became very ill this morning.
However, he attended all the meetings and was very involved with this
legislation, and he still wanted to participate in the discussion on this
legislation.

He was on his way but, apparently, this bug is very severe. I just want to
apologise for the fact that he is willing to be here, but it seems that it
is not possible. Therefore, please accept our apology for that.

Mr A J HAMILTON (KwaZulu-Natal): Mr Chairman, may I start by apologising
for the absence of Felix Dlamini and John Aulsebrook. We have a gambling
Bill going through our parliament today and that is where they are,
therefore I will be representing all parties, as is correct in a coalition
government.

Our government supports the Bill. In fact, we have had a two-tier
procurement policy for our tenders in existence for the past three or four
years, differentiating between small-value contracts and high-value
contracts.

There is no question that gross disadvantages against black entrepreneurs
were in existence until recently and are still, in many ways, in existence,
but I myself was a member of a deregulation committee set up under the
chairpersonship of Louise Tager. Literally hundreds of regulations and
bylaws in all spheres of government were removed. So redress is justified.
That said, the objectives that this Bill has been drafted to achieve will
depend almost entirely on how the regulations are framed.

This matter was raised in the joint standing committee, and we received the
assurance from the Minister that not only would the regulations be
published in the national Government Gazette, but they would be published
in all provincial government gazettes, and that consultation would take
place. We should not forget that the vast bulk of tenders for goods and
services emanate from the provinces, not from the national Government. So
it is going to be our responsibility to ensure that the objectives for
which the Bill was drafted are achieved.

I think it would also be naive to underestimate the ingenuity of mankind or
womankind - humankind - in looking for and finding ways of exploiting
loopholes in legislation. That would be very naive.

I would like to touch on a couple of items which I have some disquiet
about. First of all, there is a lack of a review clause. It is a duty, in
my view, that we, as the National Council of Provinces, the voice of the
provinces, should ensure, perhaps on an annual basis, that the objectives
which we wish to achieve by this Bill are achieved.

People have touched on the question of fronting. There are two kinds of
fronting. There is the rent-a-black fronting that we have referred to, and
then there is the kind of fronting in which a historically disadvantaged
community member sets up a postbox and a telephone and obtains tenders for
goods, and then hawks around and sells them for a commission. That does not
achieve what we want to achieve, because the object here is to see the
development of business and that is not a business. We would wind up paying
a commission.

What is also very important if we are not to see the tender process in
South Africa brought into disrepute is that great care be taken in framing
every tender that is put out so that one is comparing apples with apples,
and that tenderers are aware exactly what the criteria will be before they
put in their tenders. I think we need to also ensure that room for
subjectivity - and that is going to be a provincial responsibility - in
awarding tenders by tender boards is removed. We cannot have a situation in
which somebody on a tender board likes the sound of X, Y or Z's name,
rather than A, B or C's name, and for whatever reason decides to make an
award on a subjective basis. As long as one has room for subjectivity, the
tender process can easily be brought into disrepute.

With regard to the values in the 80:20 and 90:10 qualification, I think
great care is going to have to be taken in establishing those values. One
hopes that the Minister and his department will consult with us, the
provinces, on establishing those values. It is vital that we have consensus
on the upper values of tenders for the 80:20 qualification and for the cut-
off value for tenders that qualify for the 90:10 qualification.

I think, also, that another thing we need to be aware of is the point at
which a historically disadvantaged community firm ceases to be historically
disadvantaged. Is it when it has a listing on the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange? Is it when the firm has successfully traded profitably for a
period of years? This is because the more one runs the risk of getting an
entrenched elite amongst a few firms, the less effective the legislation
will be. We want to see hundreds and thousands of historically
disadvantaged businesses starting up. We do not only want a few. So I think
we would need to be careful about that.

I would also like to say that there should be an automatic disqualification
of any firm or individual not in good standing with the SA Revenue Services
from being allowed to tender. I think that is a very important
qualification. There are other areas where this can be looked after.
However, I think tender boards need to have their attention specifically
drawn to a proviso like this.

However, as I said earlier, our province totally supports the objectives
for which this Bill has been drafted and we have pleasure in supporting it.
[Applause.]

Ms T ESSOP (Western Cape): Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, allow me,
before I get into my speech, in the absence of Mr Ismail from the Western
Cape, to put on record the Western Cape's unanimous support for this
particular Bill. I am sure Mr Ismail would have wanted that message to be
delivered to this House today.

I want to relate a story I heard from a black businessman in the Western
Cape, a certain Mr Kakaza, who reminded me about how blacks had been
structurally and legally discriminated against and prevented from enjoying
economic empowerment in the past. He spoke about how black businesses in
the townships were only allowed to sell certain basic products, such as
flour and mealie meal, and not products such as yeast. This meant that
blacks were forced to buy other essential products from white businesses
outside of the townships. Where contraventions were suspected, police
confiscations took place. Black businesses had to apply annually for the
renewal of licences to the township superintendent, who was white, who had
so much power, and who would inevitably victimise individuals whom he or
she considered cheeky.

African men were only permitted licences if married to women who had
section 10 rights, ie the right to live in an urban area. Financial
institutions were separated along racial lines and the Xhosa Development
Corporation would only approve loans to businesses located in the Transkei
and Ciskei. Today we still find these structural obstacles in place.
Financial institutions still insist on security which, as hon members well
know, is difficult to come by for people living in the townships, because
property in townships has very little value. In fact, African ownership of
property is very low. As Mr Kakaza said: ``When you fill in the second page
of the loan application, you already disqualify yourself.''

I am providing this historical context, because people need to understand
that when we talk about affirmative procurement policies, we are not
talking about hand-outs and we are not talking about favouritism based on
race or gender. We are talking about the moral obligation - let alone the
legal obligation - as enshrined in our Constitution and in this Bill, for
us to redress the legacy of the past.

The structural and systematic economic disempowerment of our people is
probably the most horrific legacy, as its reality remains with us today. It
is much more so in the Western Cape, where black businesses still complain
constantly about the lack of access and opportunity when it comes to
provincial government procurement. So what is this reality in the Western
Cape? For example, in the construction sector, out of a total of 54 million
contracts awarded by the tender board, only 7,7 million have been awarded
to black businesses since April 1999, and out of a total of 19 million
awarded by the Department of Public Works, 8,5 million have been awarded to
small businesses.

Let me go further. Of all the contracts worth over R1 million awarded since
April 1999, only 10 million have been awarded to black businesses, and
absolutely zero to women-owned businesses.

A good example of this would be the much-publicised case of a woman-owned
construction company, Zeigon, which in this particular industry is
something of a rare phenomenon. This company was not awarded a single
contract by the provincial government. The 10-point preference system,
which should have been applied, clearly did not benefit her.

Black businesses have expressed their unhappiness with the Western Cape
provincial government, and everybody will recall the Sunday Times headline
screaming: ``Black business threatens exodus from the Western Cape''.

Therefore, for the disadvantaged businesses in the Western Cape, this Bill
will certainly offer hope. And while it clearly does not go far enough to
address all other obstacles in our procurement system, it certainly does
provide these businesses with an important economic opportunity, a foot in
the door. Many SMMEs rely on Government tenders as a way of establishing or
sustaining themselves.

I must, however, express a word of caution based on our experience in the
province. While the national Government has produced many important
transformative pieces of legislation and policies, we often find that the
implementation of these is still a problem. What we need is a political
will and commitment from all players to ensure that the Preferential
Procurement Policy Framework Bill will be implemented, otherwise it will
once again be meaningless to all those whom it is intended to benefit.

We congratulate the Minister in his absence, the Deputy Minister and the
department on their good work and their willingness to accommodate the very
important amendments made to this Bill.

I would also like to thank the two chairpersons who led the process of this
Bill so competently. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Mr Chairperson, I would like, at the
outset, to thank all the members of the House generally for the support
that they have given to this Bill, and also for some very useful
observations that they have made about the processes that are going to be
involved in realising this particular Bill.

There are one or two issues that I think do need to be clarified. One of
these is the question of the premium that the Government pays when
exercising or implementing a preferential policy.

While one has one's 25% as the maximum premium that the Government pays,
one does not, however, always pay that premium of 25%. I will tell members
why. Information at our disposal shows that the premium that we pay as
Government averages 3%. A simple example, perhaps, to illustrate this point
is that if a company that is tendering is wholly black-owned, or wholly
owned by women or wholly owned by a group of disabled people and it happens
to have the lowest price among all the tenderers, that particular company
automatically gets maximum points. And because it is either black-owned or
owned by women, it automatically gets a full 10 points, depending on how
the specification has been outlined. So in that case we actually do not pay
a premium at all.

However, we have also had complaints around the issue of dominance of
price. What we have actually found in practice is that one does not
actually have too big a difference in price.

I think the important thing about price is that as Government we deliver
services from a limited pool of resources, and therefore there has to be a
limit on the sort of premium that we pay, because implementing a policy
such as this one should not mean that we want to deliver services at any
price. In that way we would, of course, limit the scope of what we can do,
given that everything we do is from a limited pool of resources.

So it is not necessarily true that because we pay a premium it results in
us building fewer houses because, as I have tried to show from the
information that we have at the moment, the average is around 3%.

The other issue is the provision in the Bill which enables the Minister to
make exemptions if it is in the public interest and if the bidders are
international companies. The hon Dr Conroy has said that we have been under
considerable foreign pressure to include such a provision. I would like to
assure everybody here that we, in doing the work that we have been doing on
this Bill, of our own volition, examined systems that are in place
elsewhere. We even examined the agreement of the World Trade Organisation
on public sector procurement, and we were doing this because we always try
to get at something that would be best practice. I cannot recall, at any
stage, that we as Government or the committee doing this work came under
any foreign pressure to include particular provisions. These are things
that we did to ensure that we do not lock ourselves into a situation that
makes us unable to operate at times.

One would, for example, have tenders for defence equipment, and one
necessarily has to create the necessary flexibility that, in such cases,
one may make particular exemptions. It is not as a result of any foreign
pressure, and in any case, I do not think that this particular Government
is very prone to that kind of thing. I think our record over the past few
years shows that we are, for example, pursuing an independent foreign
policy, and therefore, we are not scared to differ with anyone, even those
who are said to be the big policemen of this world.

The hon Hamilton asked when a firm of historically disadvantaged
individuals ceases to be that. I would like to address that question by
saying that we have got to recognise that, in South Africa, we need a
greater change in the business environment that exists in the country. One
needs transformation in the business environment itself, and when one has
such an environment it will be an environment that will support all sorts
of companies.

At present, I do not think we have that in South Africa and this is why - I
think hon councillor Mathebe made reference to a developmental state - it
is important for the state to play a particular role. We are functioning in
a distorted environment, and we want to bring about that kind of wider
change, in society and in the environment that exists, so as to offer
opportunities to all and enable role-players to play their roles. In this
context one can then examine the question that he is raising much more
meaningfully.

With these few words, I would like to thank all members who participated in
the debate. [Applause.]
Debated concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     PROMOTION OF EQUALITY AND PREVENTION OF UNFAIR DISCRIMINATION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I take this opportunity to
welcome the hon the Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development and thank the Deputy Minister of Finance for the deliberation.
He may be excused if he so wishes.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you,
Mr Chairperson. I would like to tell members that they should not panic
because this is not a very long speech. It is just in big print.

Mr Chairperson, colleagues and comrades, it is a great honour for me to
present the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
Bill in the National Council of Provinces. At a function on Wednesday
evening I talked with a woman and remarked that I had seen her sitting on
the National Assembly gallery during the debate on the equality
legislation. She seemed surprised at my comment and said that of course she
had been there and that she could not stay away because it was too
important to miss.

At first, I thought it was a demonstration of sisterly solidarity, but I
soon realised that by ``us'' she meant ``us South Africans''. She was
right, because we cannot talk about freedom and liberty when a section of
our society, any section, languishes under the yoke of discrimination. So,
too, women, people living with disability, gays and lesbians are not the
only ones liberated by the removal of discrimination against them. The
removal or absence of discrimination liberates the whole society of which
they form part.

With the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
Bill, we are proactively balancing the scales of justice for all South
Africans. By explicitly promoting equality and eliminating unfair
discrimination, we are on course to improve the quality of life of all
citizens, and moreover, to help to free the potential that lies dormant in
all South Africans.

This Bill affirms the inherent dignity in each one of us. Racism and sexism
are the first discriminatory practices that spring to mind. However, our
society is fraught with different types of pernicious repression. Indeed,
it is the cumulative effect of subtle and deceptively trivial acts of
discrimination that ultimately undermine our humanity and determine our
status.

The compound oppression suffered by African, rural, working-class, poor
women has made them one of the most tragic casualties of discrimination in
our society. This Bill provides the mechanism to cast off those shackles of
oppression. No person should be doomed to having their lives narrowly
circumscribed to them by outmoded and degrading stereotypes.

The energies and resources of this country must be channelled into
unleashing the best we can be as individuals and as a society. A dynamic
and nuanced implementation of this legislation will contribute
significantly to that aspiration.
This Bill compels us to take stock of all the disempowering prejudices that
pervade our society. It is not only the positive duty, but also the express
commitment of this Government that the equality Bill becomes the touchstone
of our very existence. Every decision that we take in policy formulation,
legislation, implementation and in our day-to-day lives should be guided
and informed by the substance of this Bill. It should and must become
second nature to us, a natural human instinct.

Another important characteristic of the Bill is the parallel approach of
fighting unfair discrimination, while, at the same time, advancing
equality. This approach reflects the proactive strategy that informs all
Government policy. A guiding principle of this legislation is that the
historical context of South Africa should always be considered in its
application. Here I refer to clause 4(2) of the Bill:


  In the application of this Act the following should be recognised and
  taken into account:


     (a)    The existence of systemic discrimination and inequalities,
         particularly in respect of race, gender and disability in all
         spheres of life as a result of past and present unfair
         discrimination, brought about by colonialism, the apartheid system
         and patriarchy; and


     (b)    the need to take measures at all levels to eliminate such
         discrimination and inequalities.

The remedies offered by the legislation will impact on the entire value
system of our society. Nobody has been left out of the equation. As I have
pointed out before, the Bill forbids unfair discrimination on the grounds
of race and gender, but, more importantly, also on the grounds of
disability. It also outlaws harassment and harmful hate speech.

It is of particular significance that disability has been given a primary
focus in this legislation. On Wednesday, we heard from the hon Grové in the
National Assembly how this very institution remains a veritable obstacle
course for those MPs living with disability and who happen to work here. He
described our vague discomfort about how we relate to people who do not
look or speak or seem the same way we do and how this condemns those living
with disability to isolation and loneliness.

It was a stark reminder that discrimination is reflected everywhere in our
society, even in its architecture, and we need constantly to remind
ourselves that privilege invariably comes at the expense of someone else.

This Bill will be our conscience, our guide and our mentor. It will form
and shape the way we think and behave. No person or entity will remain
untouched by this enactment, whether it be in the way we conduct ourselves
in business or in our daily lives, whether it be in religious organisations
or traditional systems of belief.

This legislation will contribute to the elimination of unfair
discrimination in almost every aspect of our lives: In commerce; in
employment; in the provision of such services as education, health and
housing; in the acquisition of land; in the professions and in professional
associations; in the provision of goods and services; in the rules
governing pensions and even in social clubs and sports associations. All
will have to take cognisance of this ground-breaking legislation.
Our express goal with this legislation is the creation of a society based
on respect for the dignity and equal worth of all human beings. The
underlying tenet of the Bill is the belief, firstly, that we can eliminate
systemic forms of unfair discrimination inherited from a past fraught with
prejudice and bigotry, and secondly, that we can prevent and prohibit any
new forms of disadvantage that may arise.

In this sense, the Bill follows the dual approach of undoing past wrongs by
outlawing unfair discrimination, and at the same time proactively advancing
the achievement of equality in all walks of life. It offers the use of
corrective or restorative measures in conjunction with measures of a
deterrent nature. In this light, I should point out that the legislation
does not limit its ambit to a closed list of discriminatory practices or
prohibited grounds. It is a legal instrument that will remain alive to the
ever-changing dynamics of our society.

It is important for us to know against whom and on what grounds we may not
discriminate. Grounds for unfair discrimination described in the Bill
include race, gender, sex, pregnancy, marital status, ethnic or social
origin, colour, sexual orientation, age, disability, religion, conscience,
belief, culture, language and birth.

However, and most importantly, it does not restrict the application of the
Bill to these specific grounds. It leaves the door wide open for the
inclusion of any other ground where:


  ... discrimination based on that other ground -


  (i) causes or perpetuates systemic disadvantage
  (ii)     undermines human dignity; or
  (iii)    adversely affects the equal enjoyment of a person's rights and
           freedoms in a serious manner, that is comparable to
           discrimination ...

We are therefore not prescribing a closed list of unfair practices. Any
person experiencing any form of unfair discrimination may seek legal
remedy. This legislation imposes a positive duty on the state to adopt the
directives of the legislation and, more importantly, to enforce and monitor
its development and implementation.

The guardian of this legislation is a special seven-person Equality Review
Committee that will include a member from the NCOP. Maybe, just maybe, the
NCOP representative to the review committee will come from my home
province, the Free State, and we will no longer have to bear the brunt of
rude and derogatory references made to the good old Vrystaat. [Laughter.]

I take great pleasure in, once again, thanking the parliamentary committee
that dealt with the Bill. I would also like to make special mention of the
committee chairperson, Comrade Mohseen Moosa, Prof Shadrack Gutto, Adv
Lawrence Bassett and Adv Thuli Madonsela. The state law advisers who were
involved were Susan Masapu and Mr Shivaga Netshitomboni and there are many
more, like of course our old stalwart, Mr Deon Rudman. All these people
played a significant role in finalising this Bill and within the given
deadlines.

I also cherish one final dream and that is that each and every citizen in
this country could receive a copy of this Bill in her or his own language.
It is a basic tool for personal empowerment.

It gives me great pleasure to put this Bill before the Council, and I look
forward to an interesting debate. [Applause.]

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, thank you very much for the opportunity to speak
in this debate.

At the outset, I also need to thank a few people for what was a very
difficult process in completing this Bill on time. Firstly, I want to thank
my cochair, Comrade Ntombazana Botha, who is sitting up there right now.
She played a very important role. The quiet confidence that she showed all
along really helped in making sure that we were on track all the time in
order to get our work done. I especially want to thank her.

I also want to thank the law advisers from the department, viz Prof
Shadrack Gutto, Tuli Madonsela, Lawrence Bassett and Deon Rudman. I
especially want to thank the NGOs, the business community and those who
came to participate in the public hearings and who stayed with us right to
the end. Some of them did that purely because they love equality and
freedom and want to see the realisation of human dignity in our country.
They stayed with us right up to the end and assisted us wherever they
could. I want to thank them for that.

I also want to thank committee members who worked until very late,
sometimes with very harsh statements from the chairperson that we would sit
until three in the morning or until we were done. They were disciplined and
they did that. I want to thank them for their support to members.

At times the department would be given instructions at three in the
morning, and they would come back at eight o'clock the next morning with
new drafts. I do not know how they managed it, but they did. Perhaps they
were drinking Red Bull or something, or perhaps they were drinking
something else, I am not sure. [Laughter.]

We come from a divided past, a past that we ourselves have divided because
of our own prejudices. The inhumanity and the indignity that millions of
our people have suffered throughout our history should have us hanging our
heads in shame, because we ourselves, as South Africans, have for so long
allowed so many innocent people to die in vain. We have allowed so many
people to suffer without basic things such as fresh running water. We have
dispossessed so much of their land, we have forcefully removed so many from
their homes and so many children in our country knew only malnutrition and
undernourishment as a way of life.

So many women, the bearers of life itself, were made to believe that they
could never be equal to their menfolk, whether in the eyes of their
religion, their culture or the law. So many disabled people were made to
believe that they would always be something less than human.

It is within this context that the equality Bill was born and it is within
this context that section 9 of the Constitution, which compels us to
entrench equality in our society, was drafted.

At this point I want to say that it has been a real disappointment that
some political parties in this Parliament have decided not to support the
ideals enshrined in the Bill of Rights.

At a press conference two days ago I said that the DP's opposition to this
Bill was a smoke screen. Perhaps I should explain that further here. The DP
said that they do not like the powers given to the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development to designate magistrates and judges. They felt
that that was an unconstitutional clause and therefore they could simply
not find a way in which they could support this Bill.

Let me say from the outset that this Bill was not about designation. This
Bill was about equality. This Bill was about transformation. This Bill was
about changing the very fabric of our society so that we redress the
disadvantages of a systemic nature that we have suffered as South Africans
for so long, and so that over a period of time we attempt to achieve
equality.

If the DP opposed this Bill then that is what they were opposing. Whether
they clothed it in language legal or otherwise the principles of this Bill
were sound and they have always been sound. Whatever reasons they may give,
at the end of the day we are convinced, more and more every day, that the
DP supports only the rich and the powerful in our society. They only speak
on behalf of those people. They see no sense in anything that attempts to
curb the privileges that those people have enjoyed all these years, and
they make sure that any attempt that this Parliament makes to address some
of the concerns that we as South Africans have about transformation is
blocked and is opposed by them, and that must go down to be known for all
time.

I believe that this was one opportunity that no political party should have
missed: an opportunity to state squarely, categorically and unequivocally
that they support equality, transformation and the bringing about of a
society in which human dignity is a key to our harmonious coexistence.

I also want to say that there are further detailed matters that the DP
opposed when we were discussing this Bill. In discussing the contents of
the Bill, I will highlight them as we go along. I want to start with the
notion of substantive equality. Equality itself is merely a concept. What
is equality? When we speak about equality, we speak about the fact that
``all people are equal''. Equal in what sense? Equal colour, equal
clothing, equal wealth? What are we talking about? We are talking about
equality in substance and equality in effect. We have written into this
Bill a definition of equality that states that
equality means equality in terms of outcomes. A simple thing, meaning that
we do not talk about what processes we need to embark upon. We are not
concerned about what the state needs to do or what individuals in society
need to do or not do. At the end of the day, when we look at the outcomes,
people must substantially have achieved an equal treatment by the law, the
companies, the organisations and individuals in society. That is the kind
of equality we speak of.

Believe or not, the DP opposed this. They spoke about equality as if it was
some kind of a libertarian notion, and as if we lived in some kind of a
Utopia. We cannot talk about equality without outcomes. What does equality
of outcomes mean? They find it very difficult. We spoke yesterday of the
ideological divide that we have between ourselves and a party like the DP.
This is what we are talking about. They find it very difficult to
understand that we are attempting to address patterns of disadvantage and
redress these, and that when we speak about equality of outcomes we are
speaking about eventually transforming our society so that it is a tolerant
society which is based on respect for human dignity.

To the business community, we need to say that we are thankful that
substantially, by and large, they have come to support the Bill and its
contents. We were very encouraged by utterances made in an editorial in the
Business Day which said that this Bill deserve support and also by
newspapers such as The Citizen. An editorial in The Citizen squarely said
that they thought this was a good Bill which must be supported.

We want to say to the business community that all the fears that they
raised during the process were addressed. When they came to us and said
that the first Bill had a legal mechanism that would make it very difficult
for them to go about doing their business on a day-to-day basis, we
listened to them. We engaged them. We discussed it every day for the whole
three months that we dealt with this Bill, and at the end of the day we
came with a process that we believe they are satisfied with. We have dealt
with the issues substantially in a manner that they wanted us to.

However, one unfortunately cannot say the same for the insurance industry.
Up until last week - and, in fact, even in this week - they have been
writing, I do not know, to everybody: to the Deputy President, the
President and to all the members of the committee. I have received letters
from them, and I wonder if President Bill Clinton also received a letter.
They have been saying that they are concerned that this Bill does not allow
them to assess risk when they write insurance policies.

We have thought about this matter over and over again. We do not believe
that they are correct. At first they said to us that they wanted us to
exclude the notion of reasonableness and justifiableness from the test that
we wrote into clause 14 of this Bill. We said to them that if we deleted
that particular clause from the Bill, we might as well exclude the notions
from the operation of the equality law, because that is what the equality
law is all about. We said that when they engage in their practices on a day-
to-day basis, if they say that they are doing it on objective criteria and
if they are differentiating between people on objective criteria that are
intrinsic to their activity, then they must have no problem in agreeing
that those criteria must be reasonable and justifiable in an open and
democratic society.

So we argued with them for weeks on end and it appeared that they never
believed us. They never believed that was the correct approach. This week
we had an opinion from their legal counsel, Peter Hodes. In his legal
opinion, Peter Hodes said nothing about reasonableness and justifiableness
being problems. Nothing at all.

The insurance companies were not big enough to come to us to say that we
were correct. Even their own legal opinion is that we were correct. They
were not big enough to do that. Up to now the insurance companies have not
come to us and said that they have argued with us so much about this matter
but that we were correct.

This week they had another problem. Their problem, according to their legal
counsel, is the way in which we have written the onus provisions in this
Bill - the burden of proof. Now, simply speaking, for people who are not
lawyers, let me tell them what we have done with the legal test in this
Bill. When somebody complains about discrimination and they go to court to
complain about it, they must prove that they have been discriminated
against. If they can prove that, then we tilt the court case in favour of
the victim. That is what we have done and we do not apologise for it.

It has always been easier for big companies which have legal resources -
big attorneys, big advocates and senior counsels - to go and defend their
positions in court. It is not as easy for a black woman in a rural area who
is suffering because of discrimination to be able to do the same thing. The
onus provisions in this Bill have been tipped in favour of the underdog and
we do not apologise for it. That is what the equality law is about. That is
what equality in outcomes is about. That is what we have done in this Bill
and that is the way we believe we will achieve equality in this country.

To the religious community and to the traditional sectors, we need to say a
similar thing. This Bill does not say that one does not have to practise
one's religion and traditional culture. The Constitution of this country
enshrines one's right to practise it, and it has enshrined the obligation
of all South Africans to respect one another in the practice of these
rights, religion, culture and tradition.

What this Bill does is to state that one should practise one's religion and
culture in a value system that is universal, not only to this country, but
all over the world. That is how one should practice one's religion. If in
one's religion there is a practice that discriminates against one or other
person, then that practise is outlawed. It is based on the basic notion
that every culture, tradition and religion is based on interpretations. If
I speak to a progressive understanding of Christianity, Islam or Judaisim,
I will find umpteen references in the Bible or the Qur'an which say that
men and women are all equal. But if I speak from a conservative,
Calvinistic interpretation of that same Bible or Qur'an in the same
tradition, I will find umpteen references that say that women are inferior
to men.

So, at the end of the day, it is the value system that we put in place that
must test whether these practices are acceptable in our society. If one's
religious practice is acceptable, reasonable and justifiable, and fair,
then this Bill and its application in a court case will result in a court
telling one to go ahead with one's practice. In other words, if one can go
to court and prove that it is legitimate that one is discriminating against
somebody in one's religion or practice, then this Bill will allow one to
continue with that practice.

This Bill does not say that we are outlawing practices of a religious or
traditional nature. What it says is that we are imposing a value system in
which nobody is an exception - not religions, cultures, traditions, the
business community, the government, the State President or the homeless
community in Khayelitsha or in Phola Park. Nobody is an exception to this
law. In that sense, this law - many have argued this - is probably the
second most important piece of legislation in this country after the
Constitution. Because of our historical background and because of where we
come from as a society, we need to address these patterns of disadvantage.

I want to talk about the promotions clause in this Bill. The Deputy
Minister has already alluded to the fact that we have adopted a carrot-and-
stick approach, and she is correct. What we have done in this Bill is that
we have said that everybody - the state, juristic persons, nonjuristic
persons and natural persons - is compelled to promote equality. The state
must do so by making sure that the Ministers implement measures to
eliminate discrimination and achieve equality in the outcomes and
programmes of their departments.

The Bill says that when the state contracts with any business, any
independent contractor contracting or tendering to do business with the
state, it must make sure that they have equality plans in place. If they do
not have equality plans and an equality policy in place, the state must not
do business with them. We have written a clause in this law that says that.

With regard to private companies, juristic persons, the Sunday breakfast
club, the Saturday afternoon ladies' club, sports clubs and everybody else,
we have written a law that says they must have equality plans that will
make sure that they achieve equality in the day-to-day work that they do.
We have written a proportionality into this Bill so that if one is a big
organisation such as Anglo American, one must have big equality plans. If
one is a small organisation in Khayelitsha, one must have small plans.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, your time is up.

Mr M V MOOSA: If you will allow me to finish, Chairperson, I have just got
one little matter to raise. In conclusion, I just want to say that this law
is for all time. In the year 2100, we must be able to achieve equality with
this law, and I believe that we will. [Applause.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development and hon members, the consolidation of democracy
in our country is needed in order to eradicate inequalities of the past,
especially those that are systematic in nature and which were generated by
colonialism and apartheid.

Section 9 of the Constitution provides for the enactment of this
legislation in order to prevent or prohibit all forms of unfair
discrimination. The important part of the Bill is that it is the
responsibility of the state and all citizens to promote equality. But the
state has an important role to play by introducing measures to achieve
equality. In fact, a Bill of this nature is overdue because systematic
inequalities and unfair discrimination still remain deeply embedded in
social structures, practices and attitudes of some of the resisting forces
which do not want change.

The Bill states as follows:


  This Act endeavours to facilitate the transition to a democratic society,
  united in its diversity, marked by human relations that are caring and
  compassionate, and guided by the principles of equality, fairness,
  equity, social progress, justice, human dignity and freedom.

The Bill gives special rules of procedure and the balancing of deterrent
measures to fight unfair discrimination and hate speech. This is applauded.
The establishment of equality courts is a great achievement in the history
of South Africa. Over and above that, this Bill implies the advancement, by
special legal and other measures, of historically disadvantaged
individuals, communities and social groups who were dispossessed of their
land and resources, and, as the hon the Minister has said, deprived of
their human dignity and still continue to endure the consequences.

Lo mThetho osezithebeni namhlanje usudlulelwe yisikhathi. Kufanele ngabe
kudala washaywa ukuze kugcwaliseke inkululeko yethu thina ebesicindezelwe
wuhlanga olumhlophe ngezindlela eziningi. Siyazi ukuthi kukhona
abangawesaseli neze kodwa akusho lutho lokho. Kufanele bazi ukuthi
sekuyisikhathi manje sokuthi sihlalisane ndawonye omunye nomunye singanaki
ibala. Uphinde ube muhle futhi lo mThetho ngokuthi kunezinkantolo
ezizoxazulula izimangalo eziqondene nokwephulwa kwawo. Ocwasa omunye ambize
ngamagama edelelayo unokuhlawuliswa kanzima noma aboshwe. Emsebenzini, lo
mThetho uzobhekela ukuthi akukho ukuxhashazwa ngenxa yebala. Iholo lizokuba
njengokomsebenzi womuntu, hhayi njengoba kwakwenzeka kuqala.

Siyazi ukuthi abantwana bethu basahlukumezekile ezikoleni. Abantwana bethu
basahlukumezekile ezikoleni zabamhlophe ngoba bafunda ngesiNgisi
nangesiBhunu. Alukho ulimi lwabo. Ukuhlukumezeka lokho. Siyacela
kwabezemfundo ukuthi bakusukumele lokhu. Umntwana makazikhethele ulimi
afuna ukufunda ngalo angaphoqwa ukufunda ngolimi angalufuni. (Translation
of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[The Bill on the table is long overdue. It should have been passed a long
time ago so as to complete our freedom, as we were oppressed by the white
race in many ways. We know that there are those who are not happy about it,
but that does not mean anything. They must accept that now is the time for
us to live together regardless of colour. Another good aspect of this Bill
is that there are tribunals which are established to resolve cases
pertaining to the transgression of this Bill. Anyone who discriminates
against another person is in danger of being heavily fined or arrested. In
the workplace this Bill will make sure that there is no exploitation based
on colour division. A salary will be based on a person's performance in the
job, unlike before.

We know that our children were embarrassed at school. They are still being
exploited in white schools, because they are still learning through the
medium of the English and Afrikaans languages. Their mother-tongue
languages are not used at schools. That is a real humiliation. We appeal to
the Ministry of Education to take this seriously. A learner should not be
forced, but able to choose the language in which he/she wants to learn.]

We plead with the Education department, to just see to it that black
children who are now attending the schools which were formerly white, are
not forced to learn in foreign languages - both Afrikaans and English. They
must be given time to choose the language they want to be taught in. We are
very concerned about this. This is also inequality in a big sense. [Time
expired.]

Ms C BOTHA: Madam Chair, Deputy Minister, this Bill is a wonderful
opportunity we have had to give effect to our constitutional obligations
and to the transformation of a very severely damaged society. We are
fortunate enough to be in this Parliament not only at the dawn of a new
millennium, but also at the dawn of a new nation. We have been given the
opportunity to make history of a special kind. How history will judge us
when it reviews our execution of this rare privilege is an open question.

Definitions of equality flourish, as we have heard. It is equity, it is
substantive equality, de jure equality of de facto equality. De Tocqueville
saw it as follows:


  Democracy and socialism have nothing in common but one word, equality.

On the other hand Mahatma Gandhi believed in equality for everyone except
reporters and photographers. Had he been present at our early deliberations
on this Bill, he probably would have had his way!

Thus we have various and often conflicting agendas and definitions of
rights, each proponent wanting to cut their coat according to their own
fashionable interpretation of the equality cloth. And thus now, per new
definition in this Bill, ``equality of outcomes'' is departing from the
constitutional wording and opening a whole new debate.

We want, without qualification, equality for everyone, even against the
background of the horrendous injustices to which the majority of our
population was subjected - even for the main perpetrators. We, the
citizens, must be able to stand before the courts in the certainty of equal
justice for all. My understanding of equality is not conditional on the
circumstances of my past, nor does my past prevent me from understanding
the core concept of the inalienable right to equality for people, who are
not the same.

Wilberforce did not have to be a slave to campaign successfully for the
abolition of slavery nearly 200 years ago, nor did Lincoln have to be a
slave to fight a civil war in the same cause. And we would not have been
forced to question the intent of this Bill if it served the simple purpose
of getting rid of discrimination between persons as required, without new
definitions of equality. But when it also grows grandiose in its manifest
desire to redefine and circumscribe the moral obligations of every member
of society, in that they have an undefined duty and responsibility, in
terms of clause 24(2), to promote equality, then I tremble, as I did when
fundamentalist religion could prescribe to all who could do what on which
religious holiday, as when the Christian national state - Mr Moosa might be
interested to know this - prohibited fishing for everybody on Sundays in
the Free State, in the not-so-distant past.

The definition of ``equality'' and ``unfair discrimination'' becomes
acutely problematic when we look at it in this Bill in relation to
specially created equality courts as set out in Chapter 4 - an aspect of
the Bill which the Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development did not touch on and which, if I were in her position, I would
also try to ignore.

Let us presume that fairness and justice were the sole aims of the
legislation and that the purveyors of justice were the traditionally
blindfolded even-handed symbol of the law, that the presiding magistrates
and judges would be selected at random, and that if one could chance one's
arm in the High Court one had a second chance. Then our debate could have
ended here.

But it is not and they are not. Why does the Minister want to designate
magistrates and judges? Does he or she want to ensure through this route
that his or her definition of equality is the determinant of decisions made
in the courts? If not, then why insist on this provision? It is
questionable in the most generous of analyses and plainly sinister
otherwise.

This is no innovation in this country. We have seen it all before. I asked
a previous member of the NP whether he remembered the expression ``hou
koers regters'' - ``their master's voice judges'', those whom the NP
government rewarded with high office for giving popular judgments
favourable to the intent of the ruling party. He did not, nor did he
remember the havoc they caused, and I presume neither do the members of the
parties who support this Bill.

A Bill on the prevention of horizontal unfair discrimination should have
done exactly that - clearly and unambiguously prevented unfair
discrimination. No one should have been left feeling that they alone shall
pay the bill for the reprehensible ideologies of the past, regardless of
their own histories or without ever reaching a state of final atonement.

And about the insurance industry, I think the chair protesteth too much. He
had conflicting caucuses to reconcile and we have sympathy with that. But
if there was no undisclosed agenda we could have the insurance industry as
an ordinary and legitimate component of the commercial world, as was done
with similar legislation in several countries. That is nothing new. We
always quote them for their progressive anti-discriminatory legislation,
but they have included, upfront in their bills, the exclusion of actual
prohibited cold actuarial differentiation from the ambit of such
legislation. That is very simple. We could have done so too.
[Interjections.] We could have done so without upsetting the committee
chair's dearly beloved applecart, and without in any way giving to big
business or the ``big bad bear'', and at the same time the big employer, an
``out'' of genuinely applicable anti-discriminatory measures. What
silliness pretends that the eradication of poverty is not intrinsically
tied up with economic stability and growth?

I have sympathy with the Minister and also with Mrs Vilakazi who asks that
her children be allowed to be taught in their mother tongue. The Minister
asked that these Bills be translated into the different languages. We also
asked this in the committee, but were told that it is an extremely
expensive procedure to translate, that it will take two years before the
speakers of other languages in this country will have available before them
this Bill, which was supposedly written for the ordinary person.

Even as the DP supports the purpose of this Bill, in terms of our
understanding of the Constitution we cannot vote for the erosion of
judicial independence. Even whilst being referred to the independent court
system for reassurance in this House yesterday, as protection against the
state aggregating towards itself unwarranted power, the proverbial rotten
apple in the barrel, under the guise of designation, was infecting this
very independence.

I therefore implore the Minister to exclude from this Bill the inclusion of
a power which he does not need, does not want and should not have. I know
he will be credited for his vision. But if he does not, then be prepared,
as we are, not to be judged by political opportunism but by history. The DP
unambiguously supports equality, but not this Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr D M KGWARE: Chairperson, maybe before going into the debate I should say
that on 27 April 1994 and on 2 June 1999, the ANC was given a very broad
mandate to represent the people of this country. I think the other team
members will pick up some of the issues that the last speaker has just
raised.

The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill will
enable us to heal the division of the past. It will strengthen the
democratic foundation which we have laid since 27 April 1994. This Bill
fills us with hope and excitement that at last we will be able to free the
potential of each and every South African and inculcate a value system in
everyone based on respect for democratic principles, social justice and
human rights.

In its affirmation of equality, this Bill is consistent with the mainstream
of international opinion reflected in the Declaration of Human Rights, the
conventions and resolutions of the United Nations and the principles of the
OAU that reject discrimination. In the global perspective, the ideology and
practice of racism are no less repugnant than slavery. It is absolutely
correct for this Bill to emphasise racism and prohibit its practice because
racism was at the root of the oppression of our people.

Racism was the reason why we were dispossessed of our land and given barely
one tenth of the surface area of the country of our birth. Racism caused us
to live on the outskirts of all major towns. We often had to travel into
these towns to do our business. Many of these towns had public facilities
for whites only. This meant that we were unable to use facilities such as
toilets, even if someone desperately needed to relieve himself or herself.
One remembers towns like Brandfort, Hertzogville in the Free State, Jan
Kempdorp and others. There used to be big signs showing the European and
Non-European sections.

If one looks back at such happenings, it now seems almost bizarre that
human beings could have been subjected to such inhumane treatment merely
because they were black. Such racist practices are not something of the
past, though. Although we have travelled a long road since then, we still
find people who refuse to accept that all human beings are equal,
regardless of colour. A case in point is the recent humiliation experienced
by a black woman who requested holiday accommodation at a certain holiday
resort in the Western Cape. She was very impolitely told that accommodation
was not available for her, because the resort was fully booked. She
immediately asked her white colleague to make a booking at the same place
and it was immediately accepted.

In another case, a white barber refused to cut the hair of a black person,
because of threats by his white patrons that they would not to make use of
his service any more. These are but two of the many racist incidents that
have occurred over the past few months. It shows the absolute necessity of
the legislation such as the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair
Discrimination Bill.

This Bill envisages more than just outlawing racism. It seeks to unite all
South Africans in our common cause for a single culture - a culture of
tolerance and respect for human rights. This is important because black and
white South Africans interact in many places and co-operate in a wide range
of activities. Significant numbers of black and white South Africans hold
the same religious beliefs, belong to the same kind of family organisation,
play the same sporting games and pursue common political objectives.

The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill will
play an important role in further consolidating the already good relations
that exist between South African national groups. [Applause.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Madam Chairperson, and the honourable House, many people,
especially in the remote areas of our constituencies, are crying out that
their lives remain the same as prior to the birth of the new South Africa.
Nothing has changed meaningfully and they still remain objects of
discrimination, and it ends there. At the auction sales, their animals are
not sold on a first-come, first-served basis, but are sold last, and at
giveaway prices. They say the process of change and transformation has not
touched their lives.

However, the Bill before this honourable House seeks to address these
discrepancies. Section 9 of the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa of 1996 requires the enactment of national legislation that gives
full effect to the right to equality. It seeks to imbue our people with the
principle that they too, regardless of their circumstances and social
standing in life, are individuals worthy of respect.

Furthermore, the Bill seeks to prevent and prohibit unfair discrimination,
hate speech and harassment. No longer will anybody call anyone derogatory
names, no longer will anybody discriminate against anyone on the basis that
he or she has no struggle credentials and no longer will anybody
discriminate against anyone on the basis of race, gender or disability.

The Bill also makes provision for the establishment of equality courts
which could be approached by any aggrieved person in order to institute
proceedings in terms of this Act. In this way the courts will become
accessible, not only to the well-to-do people, but also to the poorest of
the poor, who form a large percentage of my support base and constituency.

Before I conclude my speech, I wish to take this opportunity to thank and
congratulate the chairperson of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill, Comrade Moosa, and
his committee for the work well done. [Applause.]

In conclusion, and on behalf of the UCDP, and in the interests of my
support base and constituency, I declare that we support this Bill.
[Applause.]

Ms L JACOBUS: Madam Chairperson, before going into my speech, I would also
just like to add my voice to those who have been thanking the department
for the work that they have done. It is a job well done.

The Chairperson has outlined the difficulties that we faced and the long
hours that we sat. They were there with us throughout. I would also like to
thank the chairperson for so diligently and competently leading and guiding
the work of this committee.

In 1995 South Africa sent a delegation to the Beijing Conference in China.
I am proud to say that I was part of that delegation. At this conference,
various governments committed themselves to working towards gender equality
in various ways. The question that we were all faced with there was: How do
we meet women's practical needs while getting rid of inequalities?

The conclusion we subsequently came to was that all government departments
in all countries should respond to the Beijing Platform of Action in a very
concrete way. One of the ways in which we can do this is to look at
legislation that will satisfy the terms of Cedaw, which is the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. In the
preamble of this Bill, we acknowledge our commitment towards this
convention, and this Bill, to a very large extent, speaks to this
commitment. It is against this background that I am happy to say that the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development has, once more, taken
the lead in making good on these commitments that we made as a government
five years ago.

The Bill before us today not only binds Government to promoting equality,
but goes a step further to also place the responsibility on individuals,
the private sector and civil society in general. Clause 24(1) and (2) speak
to that.

The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill can
be viewed as one of the most significant pieces of legislation since the
dawn of our new democracy. The dedication and commitment to the promotion
of equality is what we, as ANC legislators, expect from all South Africans.
This piece of legislation is rivalled only by the Constitution in the
significant impact it will have on the lives of the average South African.
Since this Bill is required to give practical effect to section 9(4) of the
Constitution, any opposition to it can be construed as opposition to the
Constitution.

Every single piece of legislation that we have passed since 1994 has
encompassed the promotion of equality and the prevention of unfair
discrimination, but none has gone beyond the one before us today. All
legislation passed thus far has sought, in its particular context, to
correct the imbalances of the past, so that, bit by bit, we as the
Government have chiselled away at the draconian laws which oppressed the
majority of our people for decades. This Bill also embraces and elevates
everything that we have so painstakingly sought to improve in the past five
years. It unequivocally outlaws inequality and unfair discrimination in
whatever shape, form or context it chooses to rear its ugly head.

Whilst the Bill imposes a heavier responsibility on the state and those who
exercise public power to introduce measures to promote equality in their
day-to-day activities, it also exerts similar pressure on companies, close
corporations, partnerships, clubs, sports organisations, corporate entities
and associations, by requiring them to do their share to actively promote
equality.

The Bill amplifies what is enshrined in section 9 of the Constitution and
refines and illustrates what is meant by equality before the law, and the
right to equal protection and benefit of the law. It calls for a cohesive
effort from all state institutions and Ministries to assist with the
promotion of equality in every way possible, whether it be at a legislative
or executive level, or by ensuring compliance with legislation or designing
codes of practice and programmes geared towards the elimination of unfair
discrimination.

As to how we promote equality and prevent unfair discrimination, this Bill
gives us clear guidelines in clause 28 of the Bill. It requires the state
and all of its institutions to develop awareness of fundamental rights
through education by, amongst other things, taking measures to develop and
implement programmes, developing action plans to address unfair
discrimination, developing codes of practice with guidelines, providing
assistance, advice and training in issues of equality and conducting
information campaigns.

The SA Human Rights Commission and the Commission on Gender Equality have a
duty, amongst others, to assist complainants in instituting proceedings in
an equality court, to conduct investigations into cases of inequality and
unfair discrimination and make recommendations to those equality courts, to
request from the relevant Government departments regular reports of cases
of unfair discrimination, and also to scrutinise equality plans from all
Government departments. Needless to say, these two constitutional
institutions will have a very significant role to play in the promotion and
popularising of provisions of this Bill, and monitoring its implementation.


We have to look no further than our schools to find examples of what racism
can result in. Examples were mentioned by my colleague over there. Two
years into our new democracy in 1996 the Weekly Mail reported with the
headline: ``Apartheid still rules in rural schools'', and gave examples of
schools such as Naboomspruit and Warmbaths in the Northern Province where
these incidents took place. And we all know about the Vryburg High School
debacle.

When looking at sexual harassment and gender discrimination one does not
have to look further than these corridors of Parliament. In fact, I am told
that there were reported incidents of harassment of members by other
members, and harassment of staff by members and so on.

Through the introduction of this legislation we want to ensure that no
woman, man or child has to go through the humiliation of discrimination and
unequal treatment, whether they be found in Sandton, Johannesburg, or
Cofimvaba in the Eastern Cape. This Bill goes to the heart of what makes us
South Africans and human beings. It looks at our diverse cultures,
religions and practices. It demands of us to rethink these practices and
weigh them up against what would be unfair discrimination or constitute
unequal treatment of our fellow South Africans. The Bill demands of us to
put measures in place to prevent their recurrence and it also demands of us
to monitor our environment so that never again will there be the likelihood
of unequal treatment of one person by another.

In summary, this Bill goes to the heart of our liberation struggle, which
was led by the ANC and other democratic forces, to create a united,
nonracial and nonsexist society, and it gives us the means to restore the
humanity and dignity of all our people wherever they may find themselves.
With this Bill, we are well on course to creating a better life for all.
[Applause.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Madam Chair, hon Deputy Minister and hon members of the
NCOP, we are debating in favour of a Bill that is aimed at preventing
unfair discrimination, promoting equality and providing for matters
connected thereto. In doing so we are responding to the call for national
legislation in terms of section 9, read with item 23(1) of Schedule 6 of
the Constitution.

We have to shake the pillars of persisting structural and systematic
inequalities to demonstrate our seriousness about the process of
transformation. Hence, those who interpret and apply this law must take
into consideration the Constitution, the preamble, other laws, codes of
practice, and international laws and agreements to which South Africa is a
signatory.

The courts should begin to give judgments that make an impact on people's
lives. Hence, the Bill provides for corrective and restorative measures, as
well as for measures of a deterrent nature. The state and all persons have
a duty to prevent unfair discrimination and promote equality through
equality plans, codes of practice and regular reports. However, the Bill,
sensitive to the concerns of the business community, excises the additional
grounds from those stipulated in the Constitution so that the Equality
Review Committee can make recommendations to the Minister as proposed. The
courts, however, can establish these if they undermine human dignity.]

The Minister's power over the appointment of the equality court magistrates
and judges must be understood in the context that such appointments are
limited to the existing pool of judicial officers initially screened by the
existing statutory commissions and are subject to consultation with them.
The burden of proof placed on the respondent is balanced against the
provision for the complainant to make out a prima facie case of
discrimination.

Our view is that this Bill is balanced and yet it conscientises us to be
sensitive to the reality of those who continue to suffer hardships and
privations because of the lasting effects of discrimination, especially on
issues of race, gender and disability.

That is why the court will consider these prohibited grounds as aggravating
circumstances should it be proved that unfair discrimination was based on
them.

With these few contributions, on behalf of the UDM, I support this Bill.
[Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Madam Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, members, the
Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill embodies
a firm commitment by our nation to ensure gender equality. Gender equality
means the equal enjoyment by men and women of socially valued goods,
opportunities, resources and rewards. This implies that opportunities and
life chances are equally distributed between them and do not depend on
their sex.

Under colonialism and apartheid, women and people with disabilities were
unfairly excluded and disadvantaged in relation to social and economic
resources and decision-making. This limitation of women and people with
disabilities in terms of access to resources and decision-making limited
their ability to develop and exercise their full capabilities for their own
benefit and for the benefit of society.

The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill
seeks to overturn this situation. It seeks to create the conditions for
women to address the humiliating practices imposed on them by colonialism
and apartheid. Although much has been said about the importance of this
Bill, very little attention has been paid to its practical implications and
how it will impact on the daily lives of women who were, and in some cases
still are, subjected to various forms of unfair discrimination.

The Bill has real practical value and will impact positively on many
aspects of the lives of women, the disabled and other groups who suffered
unfair discrimination. I want to limit myself to three specific areas in
which I wish to point out how this Bill will ensure a more qualitative way
of life for those women affected by unfair discrimination.

The first area in which I know this Bill will have a positive impact is
that of sexual harassment. Unfair discrimination through sexual harassment
has left many women with a feeling of diminished self-worth.

At present no legislation exists which specifically addresses or defines
sexual harassment outside the realm of labour legislation. Women exposed to
this indignity must lay a criminal charge of either rape or assault, both
of them attracting a high burden of proof from the complainant. The
Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill changes
all that. It provides a practical and easy remedy to women who are daily
subjected to sexual and other forms of harassment.

Another area in which this Bill will improve the quality of life of women
is that of the prevention of violence against them. The Bill will provide
relief for thousands of women, especially in our rural areas, who are still
subjected to female circumcision which in many cases has led to the
mutilation of their genital parts. Experts believe that over 120 million
women in 28 countries throughout the world, and that includes South Africa,
have been victims of some sort of genital mutilation.

Female circumcision can cause terrible health and psychological problems.
In many instances, it has led to women becoming infertile and depressed,
while others experience regular infections of the womb, kidneys or bladder,
as well as complications during childbirth. Often, women are circumcised in
groups and the same blade is used on them, adding to the danger of Aids
which is already one of the main causes of concern in Africa.

In terms of this Bill, female genital mutilation is regarded as an unfair
discriminatory practice. The significance of this fact is that women are
now able to make a decision on whether they want to subject themselves to
circumcision. I have no doubt that this will be widely welcomed by many
women who regard female circumcision as an invasion of their privacy and an
infringement of their right to bodily integrity.
Another form of discrimination which is experienced on a regular basis and
on which this Bill will impact positively is the inequalities experienced
by women, men and children that form part of families that fall outside of
the traditional nuclear family or recognised civil marriages. Such people
continue to experience inequalities regarding the recognition of their
relationships as well as their rights within these nontraditional family
forms. This is because of the common-law definition of marriage, which
recognises the voluntary union for life between one man and one woman, to
the exclusion of all others, as the only legitimate form of marriage.

This definition is contrary to the reality of a culturally diverse society
and does not recognise the multiplicity of family-forms that exist, such as
same-sex marriages, single-parent families, cohabiters, extended family
relationships and polygamous marriages. In terms of the Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill, such inequalities
will be regarded as unfair discrimination through the extended definition
of marital status.

I have highlighted only three instances in which this Bill will impact
positively on the lives of people who are unfairly discriminated against.
There are many more areas in which the implementation of this Bill will
have immediate and positive effect. Those who vote against this Bill, in
fact, are arguing for the continuation of unfair discriminatory practices
such as sexual harassment, female genital mutilation and the nonrecognition
of the right to equality of people involved in certain kinds of
relationships. [Applause.]

Mev J WITBOOI: Mnr die Voorsitter, agb Adjunkminister en agb lede ...
[Tussenwerpsels.] Ek stem soos my partykoukus besluit het, vir daardie agb
lid se inligting.

Elkeen van die 454 lede van die Parlement moes al op die een of ander
tydstip vir hom- of haarself gesê het dat hulle in hierdie bevoorregte,
verantwoordelike posisies sit omdat die mense daar buite soveel vertroue in
hulle gehad het om hulle hier te plaas. Die mense daar buite wie se belange
hier ten beste gedien moet word se oë is dus op hierdie lede en die
hantering van uiters belangrike wetgewing soos hierdie wetsontwerp, en ons
kan verseker wees dat die hele kieserskorps daar buite stil word wanneer
hulle evalueer hoe hierdie 454 lede van die Parlement gestalte gee aan
wetgewing wat dit ten doel het om die ongelykhede van die verlede uit te
wis. Dit is 'n groot taak vir 454 mense, wat maar feilbaar is, maar dit is
454 mense in die twee raadsale wat verantwoordelik is vir elkeen van die 40
miljoen mense landswyd.

Die Nuwe NP steun die wetsontwerp omdat ons onlosmaaklik deel wil wees van
die proses wat uiting moet gee aan artikel 9 van ons Grondwet. Ook as ons
terugkyk op die weg waarlangs ons gekom het, kan ons nie anders nie as om
na vore te kom en te sê ons wil deel wees van hierdie historiese
gebeurtenis. Ons wil deel wees van die meganisme wat geskep word om ná die
ondertekening van die wetsontwerp op 4 Februarie 2000 koers te help gee aan
en rigting te help aandui op die pad vorentoe vir die demokrasie in die
nuwe Suid-Afrika.

Vir miljoene voorheen benadeeldes, veral vroue en mense met gebreke, breek
'n nuwe era aan en met die klousules wat spesifiek hieroor handel, het die
Nuwe NP geen fout te vind nie. Met die ondersteuning van die wetsontwerp
verklaar ons as party ons hiermee bereid om mee te doen aan die uitwissing
van diskriminerende wette wat hierdie mense se menswees negatief mag
beïnvloed.

Hierdie wetgewing het egter ook klousules waaraan nog geskaaf sal moet
word. Tyd laat my nie toe om breedvoerig daaroor uit te wy nie, maar ons
lede in die NRP deel die kommer wat deur ons kollegas in die Nasionale
Vergadering geopper is. 'n Waarheid wat egter staan, is dat almal die blaam
sal dra as ons die demokrasie van koers sou dwing deur nie grootmoedig weer
te kyk na bepaalde klousules as die tyd daarvoor ryp geword het nie. Ek wil
die Minister by voorbaat bedank vir sodanige onderneming gegee aan my party
se leier, mnr Marthinus van Schalkwyk.

Ná vandag is dit nie meer nodig om terug te kyk nie. Diegene wat dit doen,
sal moedswillig wees. Van vandag af breek ons met wetgewing wat almal so
vryelik toelaat om te verwys na die nalatenskap van apartheid, en dit sal
die plig van elkeen van hierdie 454 lede in die Parlement wees om nie ander
monsters in die plek daarvan op die gelykgemaakte speelveld toe te laat
nie. Kom ons gee erkenning aan elkeen wat die hand aan die ploeg wil slaan
om die pad na 'n uitmuntende demokrasie oop te werk.

Inderdaad is dit die opregte wense van almal in hierdie land dat dinge vir
almal die beste moet verloop en baie jare van Februarie 2000 af sal elkeen
van ons se nageslag op hierdie gebeurtenis terugkyk, óf met trots óf met
leedwese. Daaroor kan ons besluit.

Die Nuwe NP sal steeds, waar nodig, met die regerende party verskil. Ons
staan steeds by ons ooreenkoms om konstruktiewe bydraes te lewer wat
positiewe dividende vir latere geslagte kan oplewer. Grootmoedige leierskap
aan die kant van die Nuwe NP is geopenbaar met die besluit om hierdie
wetsontwerp te steun en saam met die ANC medeverantwoordelikheid vir die
uitvoering daarvan te aanvaar. [Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs J WITBOOI: Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and hon members ...
[Interjections.] For the information of that hon member, I am voting as my
party caucus decided.

Each and every one of the 454 members of Parliament must have told him or
herself at some or other stage that they are in these privileged,
responsible positions because the people out there had so much confidence
in them that they placed them here. The people out there whose interests
are to be best served here are therefore watching these members and how
extremely important legislation such as this Bill are dealt with, and we
can be assured of the fact that all voters out there become silent when
they evaluate how these 454 members of Parliament give substance to
legislation aimed at eradicating the inequalities of the past. This is a
massive task for 454 people, who are, after all, fallible, but these 454
people in the two Chambers are responsible for each and every one of the 40
million people in the country.

The New NP supports the Bill because we want to be inextricably bound to
the process which is to give expression to section 9 of our Constitution.
When we look back at the road we have travelled we cannot help coming
forward and saying that we want to be part of this historic event. We want
to be part of the mechanism which is being created, after the signing of
the Bill on 4 February 2000, to guide us and indicate the direction to be
followed on the road ahead for democracy in the new South Africa.

For millions of previously disadvantaged people, especially women and
people with disabilities, this is the beginning of a new era, and the New
NP has no fault to find with the clauses dealing specifically with this
matter. By supporting the Bill we, as a party, declare that we are prepared
to participate in the elimination of discriminatory Acts which may
adversely affect the human dignity of these people.

However, this legislation still contains clauses which will have to be
amended. Time does not allow me to go into detail about this, but our
members in the NCOP share the concern voiced by our colleagues in the
National Assembly. However, it is an indisputable fact that everyone will
be to blame if we were to force democracy off course by not magnanimously
taking another look at specific clauses when the time comes for us to do
so. I want to thank the Minister in advance for such an undertaking which
was given to my party's leader, Mr Marthinus van Schalkwyk.

After today it is no longer necessary to look back. Those who do so, will
be being wilful. As from today we are breaking away from legislation which
allows everyone to refer to the heritage of apartheid so freely, and it
will be the duty of each of these 454 members in Parliament not to allow
other monsters to take its place on the levelled playing field. Let us give
recognition to all people who want to put their shoulders to the wheel to
pave the way for an excellent democracy.

It is indeed the sincere wish of every person in this country that everyone
should have the best possible life and that many years after February 2000
all our descendants will be able to look back at this event, either proudly
or with sorrow. That is for us to decide.

The New NP will still, where necessary, disagree with the ruling party. We
still stand by our agreement to make constructive contributions which can
produce positive dividends for future generations. Magnanimous leadership
on the part of the New NP was shown by the decision to support this Bill
and to accept joint responsibility with the ANC for its implementation.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr M L MOKOENA: Mr Chairperson, how is this Bill going to affect the
institution of traditional leadership? There is a perception in some
quarters that when this Bill becomes an Act the institution of traditional
leadership will be thrown into chaotic confusion.

They went on to mislead our traditional leaders that the Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill is aimed at changing
traditional leadership or how leaders ascend to their throne. How wrong
they are.

Can I refer those political piccaninies to the provision in Chapter 12 of
our Constitution, which categorically states that the institution, role,
status, custom and practices of our traditional leaders will be recognised
and protected.

This Bill is in no way going to cause disorder in these institutions. For
example, I cannot for a moment think that our rain queen Modjadji will,
because of this Bill, be removed from her throne.

I cannot imagine Kgoshigadi Langa of Mapela being pushed off her throne
because of this Bill. There is no way Kgoshigadi Chuene of Ga-Chuene can be
forced to vacate her seat because of this Bill. Who can believe the myth
that Kgoshigadi Mashashane of Ga-Mashashane can now be removed from the
throne because of this Bill? Who can believe those daydreamers who are
saying that Kgoshigadi Maraba of Ga-Maraba will, because of this Bill,
cease to rule over her subjects? The said magoši, regardless of their being
women, are still respected by their subjects. I cannot see men in those
respective areas challenging or claiming to be equal to them simply because
of this Bill.

This cannot be because the culture, tradition, customs and practices, and
beliefs of those areas are that only women can rule in those areas. At the
same time, I cannot imagine women in the very areas where traditional
leaders are men taking up arms and trying to remove traditional leaders who
happen to be men. What a distortion of facts! This cannot happen for the
very same reason. My colleagues who are traditional leaders should take it
from me that this Bill will instead assist their institution not to be
discriminated against by anybody.

I know that there was and there is still a complaint by some traditional
leaders that they are always discriminated against when it comes to the
area of development. This Bill will instead assist them not to be
discriminated against. This Bill, contrary to what my magoši are being
told, creates a very comfortable platform for them to stand up and be
heard. If there is some legislation in some other corners which seeks to do
away with the institution of traditional leadership, this is not the one.
Unfortunately, some people like preaching to the converted. Therefore I
cannot see a reason for this Bill not to be supported. [Applause.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I have decided not to be repetitive and to
focus on only one aspect which should also be a reminder of the promotion
of equality in the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair
Discrimination Bill.

To speak in one's mother tongue and be understood, and to listen to others
and to understand, is a basic human right. The state and everybody here
should do everything in their power to ensure that this right does not stay
a right but becomes a reality in our daily lives. For, as the hon the
Deputy Minister said, we should be assisted to be the best we are.

But the present realities, however, are that Africa's main languages of
governance are French and English. Whatever the historical or political
reasons, most of the indigenous languages in South Africa and Africa have
been neglected. South Africa is becoming monolingual. The Post Office,
Eskom, the Department of Home Affairs, the Department of Trade and
Industry, etc are all officially monolingual. The availability of mother
tongue education is threatened and not encouraged. There is a lack of
terminology development for most indigenous languages in South Africa. That
is a marginaliser. No priority is given to the training of translators and
interpreters.

When we talk about the promotion of equality and the prevention of unfair
discrimination, it starts here, right here in Parliament, in connection
with this issue I am mentioning. Parliament should set the example. We know
exemplum docet, the example teaches. I am privileged to be a language
ombudsman and I am granted the opportunity by President Mbeki to discuss
any language issue with the Deputy President whenever I feel it to be
necessary. I am having such a discussion next week. I have a few serious
issues I am considering raising with him - issues that might be
discriminatory.

Kom ons kyk na 'n paar hiervan. Die gebrek aan 'n taalbeleid vir die
Parlement, soos vervat in die voorstel wat ek vanoggend ingedien het en wat
ons moontlik later gaan goedkeur, is een so 'n kwessie. Verder is dit ook
nodig dat die taalbeleid wat deur die Departement van Kuns, Kultuur,
Wetenskap en Tegnologie ontwikkel word, as spoedeisend gesien word, en dat
die monolinguïstiese voorbeeld van die Parlement reggestel word deur
byvoorbeeld die parlementêre webruimte, sodat dit nie net in een taal nie,
maar in al die verskillende tale beskikbaar is, wat dan ook die welwillend
van almal van ons jeens meertaligheid sal weerspieël.

Daar is vandag in hierdie Huis onwillekeurig gediskrimineer teen die mense
wat op daardie galery gesit het - en in daardie stadium was daar 'n klomp
mense, selfs uit die Vrystaat, soos die agb Adjunkminister seker ook weet -
toe die agb lid me Vilakazi gepraat het, want hulle kon haar nie verstaan
toe sy in haar moedertaal gepraat het nie, bloot omdat ons nog nie
gehoorapparate op ons galerye in die Parlement het nie.

Dan is daar ook die bevordering van respek vir al die amptelike tale in die
provinsies en die gelyke gebruik daarvan soos bepaal deur provinsiale
taalwetgewing, wat in plek behoort te wees of in plek gestel moet word. Die
voorkoming van die gebruik van 'n spesifieke taal of tale vir die
doeleindes van uitbuiting, oorheersing of verdeling is nog 'n kwessie vir
bespreking. Die voorgestelde verengelsing in ons howe moet ook ondersoek
word.

'n Vertrekpunt om die negatiewe persepsies, die diskriminasie en
ongelykheid tussen taalgroepe aan te pak, is om die gesprek te voer op die
basis dat taal uit die kultuurpoel gehaal word en van enige historiese,
politieke of enige ander vooroordele gestroop word en net as taal behandel
word. Kom ons gebruik hierdie wetsontwerp om ons te herinner dat ons taal
'n skakel kan wees, 'n manier om hande te vat, Suid-Afrika te maak werk en
'n beter lewe vir almal te bewerkstellig.

Ek is bly om ter afsluiting te sê dat ek met die verteenwoordigers van
verskeie inheemse taalgroepe gesprekke hieroor voer en dat daar gesê kan
word: ``Ons praat!'', oftewel re a bolela, ri khou amba, siyakhuluma,
siyathetha, a vula vula, re a bua. [Ons praat.] [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Let us look at a few of these issues. The lack of the language policy for
Parliament, as contained in the motion I submitted this morning and which
we are possibly going to approve later on, is one such an issue. It is
furthermore also imperative that the language policy which is being
developed by the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology be
seen as urgent, and that the monolinguistic example of Parliament be
rectified by, for example, the parliamentary website, so that it is not
only available in one language, but in all the different languages, which
will also then reflect the goodwill of everyone of us towards
multilingualism.

Today in this House involuntary discrimination was displayed against the
people on the gallery - and at that stage there were many people, even from
the Free State, as the hon Deputy Minister surely knows - when the hon
member Ms Vilakazi spoke, because they could not understand her when she
spoke in her mother tongue, simply because as yet we do not have
interpreting devices on the galleries at Parliament.

Then there is also the question of promotion of respect for all the
official languages in the provinces and the equal use thereof as determined
by provincial language legislation, which should be in place or should be
put in place. The prevention of the use of a specific language or languages
for the purposes of exploitation, domination or division is another issue
for discussion. The proposed anglicising in our courts should also be
investigated.

In order to tackle the negative perceptions, the discrimination and
inequality between language groups one should, as a point of departure,
have the discussion on the basis that language be taken from a cultural
pool and be stripped of any historical, political or any other prejudices
and only be treated as language. Let us look at this Bill to remind us that
our language can be a link, a way to take hands, to make South Africa work
and to create a better life for all.

In conclusion I am delighted to be able to say that I am having discussions
with the representatives of different indigenous language groups and that
it is being said: ``Let's talk!'' [Applause.]]

Mr M E SURTY: Chairperson, we note with concern the fact that the DP
suggests that it embraces the spirit and intent of our Constitution as the
supreme law of our country, and yet accept a portion of it and reject
another portion. In biblical terms one could ask: Do they accept one part
of the Scripture and yet reject another part? Is this their religion, is it
their ideology?

To explain to the House why I premise my debate on this statement, I will
deal with issues that are fundamental to this Bill. The primary issue that
I am going to talk about is the issue of human dignity. Our founding
provisions commit us to this founding value. It is the only value that is
unqualified. When the Constitution in its founding provision talks about
equality, it talks specifically and categorically about the achievement of
equality - not about equality in abstract and formalistic sense, but the
achievement and promotion of equality in a substantive sense.

I want the DP to listen to this very attentively. When it talks about
dignity, it talks about it in unqualified terms. Some of the examples of
human dignity were illustrated by the hon D M Kgware, when he talked about
our past, our lack of access to institutions and facilities, and how these
prohibitions affected us, our self-worth and our self-esteem. But to have a
narrow one-dimensional perspective of human dignity results simultaneously
and concurrently in a narrow, limited and one-dimensional perspective of
equality. I shall try to explain why.

When we talk about human dignity we ar not only talking about the self-
worth and self-esteem of an individual, but also talking about the
fulfilment and the realisation of the self-worth and the self-esteem of an
individual.

If the DP could embrace that real progressive and comprehensive notion of
human dignity, they would, likewise, embrace a comprehensive, progressive
and radical notion of equality. I say that they are limited, narrow and
feigning attachment and loyalty to the Constitution, because if they did
not do so, they would draw the attention. There was a sinister silence
yesterday about the failure to emit what the Constitution refers to.

I think I should read for the benefit of the House, and the DP, in case
they have not read the Constitution and are not familiar with its contents,
the provisions of section 9(2), and I would ask the hon member Botha to pay
specific attention to it. It says very clearly:


  Equality includes the full and equal enjoyment of all rights and
  freedoms.

What are ``all rights and freedoms''? Is it only the freedom of expression,
or does it include rights to access to basic education, housing and a clean
environment?  Are these the second-generation and third-generation rights
which hon members really wish to embrace as they did in the constitutional
negotiations? At the outset they totally rejected the inclusion of
socioeconomic rights in the Constitution, and then, after much persuasion
and out of a lack of will to fight a lost cause, they decided to embrace
these values. Is this the position of the DP?

I am asking to these hon members: Why not argue for equality in its formal
sense, as they would argue about the freedom of expression? Why say that
that is important and that everybody has the right to freedom of
expression, when they do not at the same time argue for the right to basic
education in order that the individual could achieve fulfilment of that
particular right to freedom of expression?

Can they imagine what it is like for an illiterate person to be able to
express himself or herself fully? Can they have a one-dimensional approach
and say that only the freedom of expression is important, yet the second-
generation right to education is not important? Can they talk about
education in the context of an individual who is deprived of access to
institutions, housing and electricity? This is what the DP must understand.

When we talk about our freedom, we do so in a comprehensive sense, not in
an abstract sense or in a vacuum. I think the time has come for them to
cease this narrow, one-dimensional, limited and bigoted approach towards
our freedom and liberty in this country.

If the DP was true and honest to this Constitution - but there was a
sinister silence again - they would have said that the Constitution says:


  To promote the achievement of equality, legislative and other measures
  designed to protect or advance persons, or categories of persons,
  disadvantaged by unfair discrimination may be taken.

This is a statement in the Constitution to which we should be loyal. What
does the DP say? They say: ``We are not concerned about the past, and we
are not concerned about the atrocities of the past. We would like to look
at equality as equality.'' Abraham Lincoln ensured that there was a greater
commitment to the ideal of equality. When there was a liberation or a
struggle for liberation, it was not merely in words, it was in deeds.
People went to war for the liberation of our people. If there was that kind
of commitment by the DP, then certainly they would advance it here.

If we understand the concept of human dignity in its comprehensive form,
then we will understand what this Bill seeks to do. It seeks to prohibit
unfair discrimination and simultaneously advance the realisation of the
self-worth and self-esteem of people by promoting equality.

Another aspect that I should deal with, although I know my time is limited
- otherwise I would have gone on - is the issue of judicial independence.
Why has there not been a response to the issues that I raised yesterday?
The sinister silence again suggests one thing, that by responding to the
ANC, the DP would by assumption be saying that magistrates who are
appointed by a magistrates commission and judges who are appointed by a
judicial services commission, if they are so designated, are capable of
being influenced by the Minister or by Government.

That would impeach or impugn on the integrity of those very judges who are
independently appointed. They again fail to admit that the Constitution
permits the Minister to appoint acting judges. Acting judges are designated
to our family courts. Why has there been no hue and cry about this? It is
functioning very well.

There have been no difficulties, yet Mr Lever raised the matter of training
yesterday. He said that if training is the criterion, we should include it
in the legislation. We have done so in the equality Bill. Why is that not
mentioned? In other words, we are talking about a designated, trained and
skilled group of magistrates who have previously not dealt with issues of
this nature, and who will be designated by the Minister to fulfil a very
important task.

This is groundbreaking, new, difficult, novel and complex legislation. Do
hon members expect a magistrate who is dealing with traffic fines to be
able to administer this law effectively and efficiently? Is this the view
of the DP? Do they not recognise that there is a differentiation in skills
amongst magistrates in terms of their day-to-day experiences in court?
Would hon members say that a magistrate who sits in a criminal court is
equivalent to, or has the same skills as, a magistrate dealing with civil
disputes? Certainly not. The reality stares one in the face, and that is
that magistrates who are arbitrating in civil disputes or presiding over
those matters are more skilled and experienced in that particular area than
those who deal with criminal matters.

These are the kinds of resources that this Bill talks about. This faint,
weak and timid attempt to suggest that the independence of the judiciary is
going to be influenced or interfered with, is an attempt to obfuscate and
confuse people. They say that they have noble intentions because they
believe in an independent judiciary. Yes, we too believe in that. Our
Constitution says so and we, at least publicly, say that we shall embrace
it. We have not violated this document.

The mere fact that the DP articulates the concept of equality in a way that
does not include substantive equality, means that they are not true and
loyal to the Constitution. I think this reality must be brought to the
attention of the nation, that the DP is still continuing in the vein of an
abstract liberal notion of equality, devoid of a recognition of our past
difficulties, the objectives of our country and the attempt to advance the
goals of our people.

I say this Bill is groundbreaking legislation and that it is important that
we support it. I think we can again, like yesterday, celebrate the triumph
of our new democracy which is open and based on human dignity, equality and
freedom, and which is, as the DP should understand, based on our
Constitution. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, I have made so many notes. If members see me twisting my paper
as if I am trying to find a place on a map, and if in the process I end up
going round corners, please bear with me while I wade my way through my
papers, because there are very important issues that have been raised.
The DP's failure to support this Bill is a failure to support equality, de
facto or de jure or in any other way one wants to define it. It is a
failure to support equality.

The arguments that they have forwarded in their defence of this action are
incomplete and a sure case of smoke and mirrors. At the core of the DP's
failure to support this legislation lies a resistance to transformation and
substantive change. I would like to take up a few of the issues and start,
possibly, with the issue of language.

The Bill states clearly that the Minister must make the Act available in
all official languages in the prescribed manner within a period of two
years after the commencement thereof. On the issue of translation and the
production of this legislation into the various languages, I would like to
caution the hon Botha not to pooh-pooh the relevance of financial
constraints experienced by the Government. If we met all the hon member's
party's demands for the translation of this Bill and in other instances, we
might have to consider raising their tax rates, and I can only imagine how
``the DP as the shop stewards of capitalism'', to quote the hon Cronin,
would react to their new tax status. [Laughter.]

I cherish the dream and I am secure in the knowledge that we have a limited
time in which to meet our constitutional obligation to produce this Bill in
the official languages.

On the insurance issue I have to be a little more detailed. One of the
critical issues that the joint ad hoc committee had to grapple with was how
to deal with differentiation inherent in much commercial activity, and how
to distinguish between reasonable and justifiable differentiation on one
hand and unfair discrimination on the other hand.

Commercial interest groups, particularly lobbyists for the insurance sector
argued vigorously that their businesses depended on being able to
differentiate between categories of people on objective grounds. This
concern, I believe, is accommodated in clause 14 of the Bill. It sets out a
host of factors that would play a role in determining whether an action is
fair or unfair. It includes the very important consideration whether the
discrimination reasonably and justifiably differentiates between persons
according to objectively determinable criteria intrinsic to the activity
concerned.

It is clearly not the intention of the Bill to prevent insurance companies
from deciding that smokers are a higher risk for life insurance than
nonsmokers. What was not agreed was to exempt upfront all differentiation
based on actuarial and other commercial characteristics. The reason for
this is that under those conditions a complainant would have had to
establish a prima facie case that the discrimination that he or she was
complaining about was not differentiation. It would have raised the
barriers for the complainant too high, and would undermine the fundamental
principle of making justice accessible to the poor and ordinary victims of
discrimination.

Although this has been dealt with exhaustively, the Minister's power to
designate must be addressed. The whole question about the Minister's power
to designate magistrates and judges to become presiding officers in the
proposed equality courts is a tiny storm in an even smaller tea cup. Any
person acquainted with the appointment procedures of judges and magistrates
will know that the further designation of one of these appointed officers
is not an unusual occurrence. It is not giving the executive sweeping
powers. On the contrary it coincides with the designation of judicial
officers to specific positions in other areas of specialisation, for
example the land claims court, and in the constitution of the Magistrates
Commission, as well as the Judicial Service Commission.

To oppose the Bill solely on the grounds of opposition to clause 16 is
really a very incomplete defence. Besides, the Bill is clear that all High
Court judges and magistrates will eventually be designated, not only a
chosen few. However, they would only be so designated after acquiring the
necessary skills. This is real judicial independence and social
responsibility, and that is how it should be.

The DP's viewpoint, furthermore, on the designation of magistrates by the
Minister smacks of arrogance, and they are, of course, missing the point.
Members will recall that the same argument was also raised yesterday by the
DP during the deliberations on the Promotion of Administrative Justice
Bill. It would also appear that this is one of the main reasons why they
have opposed these two really important pieces of legislation.

I think it is important to put the matter in perspective. It is a reality,
and a sad one indeed, that in the old apartheid era the issue of human
rights was a foreign concept for many magistrates and judges. Proceedings
and judgments on administrative law were reserved for the High Court only.
If the hon member of the DP would care to read the reports of the portfolio
committee again, she will realise that the committee has expressed its
concerns about the lack of experience of the magistrates in respect of
administrative law and related matters, and that magistrates who intend
specialising in this field are to be specially trained.

This was also the reason why it was agreed and decided that the Minister
should designate magistrates who have expertise and experience to
adjudicate on the issue of administrative justice and the promotion of
equality and prevention of unfair discrimination.

If the DP would take the time to speak to some of the magistrates, a number
of them would indicate that they specialise in either criminal law or civil
law and are not adequately trained to deal with some of the complex issues
mentioned in the above Bills. But what will the hon members of the DP do
now if some of their constituency members approach them for advice on how
to settle, for example, an administrative issue in a simple way? Would they
advise them to go to the magistrates' court where the Minister has
designated an experienced magistrate in administrative law? Or will the DP,
in truly elitist fashion, advise their constituency members to approach the
High Court for relief in an action like this instead of referring them to
an accessible and affordable magistrates' court? I can only imagine what
the DP's response would be.

About the definition of equality, it is sad that there is disagreement on a
technical definition, because we all know in our hearts what equality is.
It is about outcomes. Let me tell members again that it is about outcomes.
Women, children and lots of men know that it is about outcomes.

But in order to discuss the issue as raised by the hon Botha, I have to go
back a little bit because in fact, she, again, has missed the point. The
Constitution, in section 9(2), states that equality includes the full and
equal enjoyment of all rights and freedoms. This automatically imports the
notion of substantive equality. Equal enjoyment of all rights and freedoms
cannot be possible without enjoying equality, both in law and in the actual
experiences of people.

The same subsection of the Constitution further states that:


  to promote the achievement of equality, legislative and other measures
  designated to protect or advance persons, or categories of persons
  disadvantaged by unfair discrimination, may be taken.

The approach in the Bill fully complies with the Constitution. An approach
which limits equality to formal equality would fall below the standard set
in that precious document, our Constitution.

To put the hearts and minds of those doubters out there at rest, I would
like to remind them - and those members who attended the debate in the
National Assembly will recall this - that the Minister, in his opening
address, undertook to monitor the legislation and to approach Parliament if
necessary with suitable amendments should the legislation have any negative
unanticipated implications, particularly for business.
I think this is unbroken territory to a large extent, and I think that we
have done something very special. But then I suppose I have to deal with
the real issue, and that is people's concerns, because those who are
opposing the Bill have concerns about the promotion of equality. That is
central to this.

Clearly, if one has problems with it, I have to resort to another argument
and will do so by by saying that if one cannot, like a reasonable person,
be persuaded on grounds of justice and equality that the promotion of
equality should be one of our primary goals, I would like to offer our
strident critics the option of approving this legislation on the basis of
pure economic good sense.

It is acknowledged even by institutions such as the World Bank, as we heard
from hon Davies in the National Assembly, that societies with greater
equality, as measured by the Gini coefficient and a variety of other
indicators, tend to be more successful economically than those with a high
incidence of inequality.

The 1999-2000 World Bank development report identifies equality as one of a
range of goals that must be pursued in the advancement of development. It
is common knowledge that colonialism, apartheid and patriarchy left South
Africa one of the most unequal societies in the world. So my advice is that
if one cannot think with one's heart and conscience, one must think with
one's purse.

I am proud to support this legislation and I would like to thank the House
for a very interesting debate. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Before we disperse, allow me to
dispose of a housekeeping matter which was raised during today's session of
motions without notice. You will recall that there was an objection to a
motion raised by the hon member Mr Van Niekerk and the grounds were that
the subject matter had been adjudicated upon by this House and could
therefore not be reintroduced in the same House.

I have had the opportunity of going through the proceedings of this House
since we began sitting and noted the following. On 18 November there was a
motion on languages by Mr Van Niekerk. Again, on 26 January, there was
another motion dealing with languages. All these motions deal with language
issues, but I must say that the subject of each motion is distinct and
separate and calls for a different action. For instance, the notice of
motion which he introduced on 18 November dealt with the provision of audio
apparatus for visitors in our parliamentary chambers. The notice which was
introduced on 26 January dealt with a declaration on languages which was
adopted at a conference in Eritrea.

Today's motion laments the lack of a language policy and calls upon the
House to urge the Rules Committee to give attention to the question of
language policy. I therefore submit that today's motion is not a matter
which has been dealt with by this House, and I shall call upon the member
just to read it out again to remind the members so that a decision can be
taken on that motion.

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek stel voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem dat


       (a)  die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika erkenning gee aan 11 amptelike
           tale, die uitbou daarvan, sowel as die beskerming van dié tale,
           en die ander tale in Suid-Afrika, teen diskriminasie;


       (b)  Pansat in die lewe geroep is om bogenoemde te help doen; en


       (c)  taalrade besig is om hul voete te vind in die provinsies, maar
           dat die Parlement van Suid-Afrika nog nie 'n taalbeleid het nie;
           en


  (2) die Reëlskomitee maan om onmiddellik hieraan aandag te skenk.
(Translation of Afrikaans motion follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, I move:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Constitution of South Africa gives recognition to 11
           official languages, the promotion thereof, as well as the
           protection of these languages, and the other languages in South
           Africa, against discrimination;


       (b)  PanSALB has been formed to assist in achieving the above-
           mentioned; and


       (c)  language boards are finding their feet in the provinces, but
           that the Parliament of South Africa is still without a language
           policy; and


  (2) urges the Rules Committee to give immediate attention to this.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I want to remind the members
that this was a motion without notice. Any objection to the motion?

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
The Council adjourned at 13:35.


