---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 February 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-02-16
---

WEDNESDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

INTERPELLATIONS, QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I give notice that on
the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that Parliament has instituted disciplinary procedures against
       a parliamentary official who has allegedly abused and sexually
       harassed women employees in Parliament;

  (2) expresses absolute support to the victims of sexual abuse, be it in
       Parliament or anywhere else, and calls on them to report the
       perpetrators; and

  (3) calls on the authorities investigating the matter to treat it as a
       matter of urgency so that the alleged perpetrator can be dealt with
       firmly in terms of the law.

[Applause.]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the excellent standard of services delivered by the provincial
           government to all the people of the Western Cape, especially the
           poor; and

       (b)  the stark contrast between the quality of provincial services in
           the Western Cape and those delivered in ANC-controlled
           provinces; and


  (2) rejects the attempt by the ANC in the Western Cape to introduce a
       motion of no confidence in the provincial government as opportunistic
       and lacking in substance.

[Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  South Africa has turned its back on discrimination and apartheid
           and has, in fact, enshrined in the Constitution and created
           legislation that racial discrimination is unacceptable,
           offensive and illegal; and

       (b)  the apartheid era signs which had such a brutal and negative
           impact on the dignity and humanity of the majority of our people
           have long been consigned to the dustbin of history;


  (2) is nevertheless gravely saddened and incredulous that the Kimberley
       Hotel in Roeland Street still has signage proclaiming ``Non-
       Europeans'' and ``Nie-blankes''; and

  (3) calls on the Minister of Safety and Security to do something about
       this and to deal with the operators and owners of the above
       institution accordingly.

Mr J D ARENDSE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the sacking of Mr Peter Marais from the Western Cape executive;
  (2) believes that by supporting this action Mr Van Schalkwyk lacks the
       courage to stand by his professed commitment to transformation and co-
       operation, values espoused by Mr Marais;

  (3) notes that the comments of the hon Tony Leon after the defection of
       the Centurion councillors to the DP that there is a ``major civil war
       brewing in the Western Cape'' indicate that DP co-operation with the
       New NP in the Western Cape is based solely on opportunism;

  (4) warns Mr Van Schalkwyk that the DP is using the New NP to advance its
       own interests at the expense of the New NP; and

  (5) supports the vote of no confidence in the government of the Western
       Cape.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with alarm the escalation in the price of crude Brent oil,
       which traded at $28 per barrel yesterday;

  (2) notes that the sharp escalation in the price of crude oil is the
       result of an agreement between a number of oil-producing countries to
       cut back on their volume of exports in order to manipulate the price
       of crude oil;

  (3) recognises that the increase in the price of crude oil may result in
       an increase of between 10c to 11c per litre in the price of fuel,
       which can further increase to R3 per litre in April;

  (4) notes that it appears that the increase in the price of crude oil,
       plus the weakening of the rand, may have a negative effect on the
       cost of living index and the official inflation rate;

  (5) notes that according to the figures issued by Statistics South Africa
       our present inflation rate of 5,2% is the lowest in 30 years,
       compared to 6,9% in 1998 and 8,6% in 1997; and

  (6) appeals to all concerned, on behalf of the New NP, to encourage
       fiscal discipline and keep the inflation rate at the present
       acceptable level.

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  most of the proclaimed townships in rural areas, in particular
           those in the Northern Province, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal,
           were established by the former apartheid government for the
           purpose of the implementation of the notorious Group Areas Act;

       (b)  these proclaimed rural township areas were historically,
           traditionally and demographically part of the land placed under
           the jurisdiction of traditional authorities;

       (c)  these rural townships are now land-locked and surrounded by land
           placed under the jurisdiction of traditional leaders;

       (d)  these rural townships have no area for expansion and have
           consequently suffered serious restraints in terms of their
           socioeconomic needs and development;

       (e)  traditional authorities were deprived and dispossessed of the
           land on which these rural townships were established and no
           compensatory arrangement was made for the loss of their land;
           and

       (f)  the vast majority of traditional authorities are not prepared
           ...

[Time expired.]

Mr S M RASMENI: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the devastating floods that have taken place across the country
           in various provinces;

       (b)  that the Chief Whip of the ANC, the hon Tony Yengeni, has
           released members of this House who are from the affected
           provinces to go to those provinces to assist flood victims; and

       (c)  that those members will report back to the ANC in Parliament on
           the state of affairs in the affected communities; and


  (2) commends the ANC for its exemplary and sincere effort to assist the
       victims in dealing with the effects of the floods and starting to
       normalise their lives sooner rather than later.

[Applause.]

Dr S E PHEKO: Chair, I give notice that at the next sitting of the House I
shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House notes that -


  (1) the Freedom of Expression Institute has taken up Dr Costa Gazi's case
       and will defend him in his appeal against the disciplinary action
       brought against him by the Eastern Cape health department;

  (2) Dr Costa Gazi, head of Makiwane Hospital in East London and also PAC
       secretary for health, has advocated that the Government make
       available the AZT drug to expectant mothers suffering from HIV/Aids
       in order to reduce the risk of the disease spreading to their babies;

  (3) the PAC holds that sections 15(1) and 16(1) of the Constitution give
       Dr Costa Gazi the right of freedom of opinion and expression; and

  (4) the PAC will support Dr Costa Gazi right up to the Constitutional
       Court, if necessary, and applauds the involvement of the Freedom of
       Expression Institute in the defence of Dr Costa Gazi.
Mr M A MANGENA: Chair, I give notice that at the next sitting of the House
I shall move on behalf of Azapo:


  That the House, noting -


  (1) the continued inequalities among tertiary institutions as decreed by
       apartheid;

  (2) the decline in student enrolment at the so-called ``bush
       universities'' as students stampede in search of better facilities at
       the better-resourced universities; and

  (3) the threat of a collapse of some of these institutions due to poor
       student numbers and therefore fewer subsidies from the state;


  calls upon the Ministry of Education to prevent the closure of these
  institutions by implementing urgent and sustainable remedies.

Ms M SMUTS: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the House
I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with extreme concern that new subpoenas are being served daily
       on editors to appear before the SA Human Rights Commission as part of
       its enquiry into racism in the media; and

  (2) urges the SAHRC to furnish clarity on -


       (a)  the reasons for so summoning the media; and

       (b)  its intentions with the investigation, which must necessarily,
           as currently conducted, threaten to intrude on the media freedom
           enshrined in section 16 of the Bill of Rights.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That, whereas -


  (1) the new democratic Government undertook to help the previously
       disadvantaged people of our land to own their own houses through RDP
       projects and fixed subsidies given to households; and

  (2) there is no doubt that in solving one part of the problem, by putting
       many families into formal houses, we have inadvertently made other
       problems more serious;


  the House therefore recommends that the President appoint a small short-
  term commission to ascertain whether the joy of the opportunity to own a
  house has been followed by the grief of sudden cracks appearing, the
  space being totally inadequate and maintenance becoming as burdensome as
  paying for accommodation.

Mnu M MPEHLE: Somlomo, apha ndenza isaziso sokuba xa iphinda ihlala le Ndlu
ndiza kwenza isiphakamiso egameni le-ANC:


  Sokuba le Ndlu -


  (1) iwuqaphele umsebenzi nendima edlalwa nguMnumzana Nelson Mandela
       ekugayeni inkxaso yokwakhiwa kwezikolo neekliniki kwiindawo zabantu
       abahluphekileyo;
  (2) iwuncome iwubuke umsebenzi awenzileyo uMadiba ekwakhiweni kwesikolo
       semfundo ephakamileyo iDumalisile eMpuma Koloni, neminye imisebenzi
       emihle elolu hlobo ayenzileyo;

  (3) imxhase ngokupheleleyo kumalinge akhe, ivuya ngokuzimisela kwakhe
       ekuqhubeni ngalo msebenzi mhle kangaka wokugaya uncedo lokuphucula
       umgangatho wokuphila wabantu abahlelekileyo abahlala emaphandleni
       kweli lizwe; kwaye

  (4) ibulele bonke oosomashishini abalisabeleyo ikhwelo likaMadiba
       ikhuthaza nabanye ukuba benze njalo. Aa Dalibhunga! Ukwanda kwaliwa
       ngumthakathi.

[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa notice of motion follows.)

[Mr M MPEHLE: I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of this
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises the role played by Mr Nelson Mandela in canvassing
       financial support for the building of schools and clinics in poor
       communities;

  (2) applauds the work that Madiba did in the building of Dumalisile
       Secondary School in the Eastern Cape as well as all the other good
       work he has done;

  (3) unreservedly supports him in his efforts in appreciation of his
       determination to continue doing the work he has been doing towards
       the improvement of the quality of the life of the poor communities,
       especially in the rural areas; and

  (4) thanks all the people in the business sector who responded to
       Madiba's call for help, because this will encourage others to follow
       suit.

[Applause.]]

Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -
  (1) met skok en afgryse kennis neem van die onlangse vlaag moorde en
       geweld op plase;

  (2) sy meegevoel uitspreek teenoor die naasbestaandes;

  (3) terdeë daarvan bewus is dat werkgewers, werknemers en gewone
       plaasbewoners en hul families daardeur beïnvloed word;

  (4) vra dat die reg sy volle gang moet gaan sodat diegene wat
       verantwoordelik is vir hierdie wandade toepaslike strawwe sal
       ontvang; en

     5) 'n beroep op die landelike inwoners doen om so 'n samelewing te skep
        dat elkeen veilig, menswaardig en gelukkig kan leef.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock and horror the recent spate of murders and violence
       on farms;

  (2) expresses its sympathy with the next of kin;

  (3) is thoroughly aware that employers, employees and ordinary farm
       dwellers and their families have been affected;

  (4) asks that justice should take its course so that those responsible
       for these atrocities will receive appropriate punishment; and

  (5) appeals to the rural population to create a society in which everyone
       can live a safe, decent and happy life.]

Mr S ABRAM: Chair, I give notice that at the next sitting of the House I
shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) condemns the partisan stance of the Government and the well-
       documented military, intelligence and political support they lend to
       the war effort of the rebel alliance fighting the government of the
       Democratic Republic of Congo ...

[Interjections.]


  (2) calls upon Government to explain to the South African public ...

[Interjections.] Ag, bly stil man! [Oh, keep quiet, man!]


   ... and SADC the reasons for their unacceptable conduct given their
   public undertakings in the past that they are impartial mediators who are
   brokering peace in the DRC conflict.

[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is
in order for the hon member to mislead the House without furnishing any
details of the allegations he is making?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order,
but we shall look at the Hansard and ask the questions we need to.

Mr N B FIHLA: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that about 4 000 people will be given plots in the centre of
       Port Elizabeth as restitution for the land from which they were
       evicted 30 years ago in terms of the inhumane Group Areas Act;

  (2) recognises that this agreement was reached after an agreement to
       relinquish individual claims and all claimants to negotiate as a
       group;

  (3) notes that the development of this land will contribute to the
       reintegration of Port Elizabeth, breaking down apartheid racial
       borders; and

  (4) congratulates the Port Elizabeth Land Restitution Association, the
       Minister of Land Affairs, the hon Thoko Didiza, the City of Port
       Elizabeth and all officials of the Land Affairs department for the
       conclusion of this ground-breaking agreement.

[Applause.]

Mr C W EGLIN: Mr Chairman, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its dissatisfaction at the failure of President Mbeki to
       give Parliament and the South African tax-paying public a full
       account of the decisions taken at the recent presidential and
       ministerial meeting with President Mugabe in Harare;

  (2) asks the Government: Why the silence? Why the secrecy? What does the
       Government have to hide? What about accountability; and

  (3) calls on the Government to give -


       (a)  a detailed account to Parliament without delay; and

       (b)  a categoric assurance that no assistance by South Africa to
           Zimbabwe will be used in any way to support or prolong President
           Mugabe's ill-conceived participation in the war in the DRC.

    DEVASTATING FLOODS IN COUNTRY'S PROVINCES AND SOUTHERN AFRICAN REGION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I move without
notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the devastating floods that have taken place during the last
       few days, both in the provinces of the country and in the Southern
       African region;

  (2) extends its sincere sympathy, and pledges its support, to all the
       affected families and communities who were victims of great loss of
       life and property, across provincial and national borders; and


  (3) calls on all sectors of society to make a positive contribution to
       alleviating the hardship of those affected by the floods.

Agreed to.

                   CONGRATULATIONS TO PROTEAS CRICKET TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr S E MZIMELA: Mr Chairperson, on behalf of the UDM, I hereby move without
notice:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the South African cricket team on comprehensively
       beating England in the final of the One Day International Triangular
       Competition, played at the Wanderers Cricket Ground;

  (2) acknowledges that this victory confirms South Africa's status as a
       dominant force in limited-overs and test cricket; and


  (3) wishes the Proteas a successful tour to India and Sharjah.

Agreed to.

        TRANSFORMATION AND RECAPITALISATION PROJECT OF TAXI INDUSTRY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Rev K R J MESHOE: Mr Chairperson, hon members, we all agree that our people
need safe and efficient transportation. We agree that the carnage on our
roads must be stopped. It is regrettable that the taxi industry, which has
provided reliable and available mobility for our people, has contributed to
the loss of lives that has almost become a daily occurrence. The Government
decided to introduce what they call the transformation and recapitalisation
of the taxi industry to try and stop this carnage.

I am sure that we will all agree that for the Government to be successful
in its endeavours, it needs the support of all commuters, taxi drivers'
organisations and taxi owners' associations. However, unfortunately, some
stakeholders complained that they were not consulted and are therefore
being left out of the process.

The recent protest by some taxi drivers, who fear losing their jobs, is a
clear indication that many people are unhappy about the Government's
recapitalisation project. Instead of Government listening sympathetically
to those opposing its plans and doing all it can to bring them on board, it
chose to take a high-handed threatening approach, thereby intimidating its
opposition into submission.

Nobody denies that there are serious problems in the taxi industry and that
something has to be done about it urgently. What we argue for is the
inclusion of all stakeholders in the transformation of an industry that was
established and managed without Government's help.

I now want to highlight some problems in the taxi industry and then propose
solutions. The main problem in this industry is the result of Government's
failure to enforce the rules that must govern this industry. Many taxi
drivers have no regard for traffic rules and signs. They believe that they
have the right to stop at any time, anywhere and without due regard for
other road users. Some are disrespectful, aggressive, intolerant and a law
unto themselves. Replacing the 15-seater minibuses with 18- or 35-seater
minibuses will not change the arrogance and lawlessness of the unruly
drivers, but enforcing the law will.

Secondly, some taxi drivers are incompetent, unqualified and, sometimes,
even unlicensed. Such drivers are a constant danger on our roads. Giving
them bigger buses will make them even more dangerous, not only to their
passengers, but to all road users. If the Government says that drivers of
the 18-seater and 35-seater buses will be properly trained, why does it not
give the same training to the drivers of the present 15-seater taxis?

Thirdly, just as there are many unroadworthy vehicles on our roads, there
are also fairly new minibus taxis on the road. It is therefore not fair to
scrap all the existing minibus taxis, regardless of their condition. If
Government is concerned about the ageing vehicles, then let them target
those and leave the new vehicles on the road. Replacing a one-year old or
even two-year old 15-seater minibus with a brand-new 18-seater bus does not
make economic sense. Is the Government focusing on the size or the
condition of the vehicles? The ACDP says that the old, dilapidated vehicles
should be scrapped, but that the relatively new ones should be left alone.

The fourth problem in the industry is speeding. It is possible to install
electronic devices in the existing vehicles to limit their speed. Companies
such as Intercape have already done that with their fleet of vehicles. Why
does Government not issue a directive that all 15-seater taxis not older
than three years, for example, be fitted with such devices in order to
reduce speed, and then allow those taxi drivers to carry on with their
jobs?

The fifth problem is overloading. A driver who overloads a 15-seater
minibus will find a way of overloading the 18-seater and 35-seater buses,
just as thieves find ways of stealing cars even if they are fitted with the
most sophisticated and expensive immobilisers. If drivers do not fear
punishment by Government officials, then they will continue overloading,
thus endangering the lives of more people.

The Minister of Transport must tell this House why Government does not
compile a list of specifications that will ensure high safety standards and
greater comfort and then give such specifications to any car or bus
manufacturer in this country who is interested in making the new safer
vehicles. Why subject this process to tender, which may lead to a monopoly?

To enhance competition, the ACDP calls on Government to allow taxi owners
to have a wider choice of where to buy their vehicles, instead of being
restricted to those manufacturers who shall have won the tender. We say the
Government should give Delta Motor Corporation, Toyota, Nissan, Volkswagen,
Mercedes Benz and other interested groups its specific requirements, and
then allow them to build the 18-seater or 35-seater vehicles if they so
wish. It should give the people a greater choice of where to buy. It should
not kill competition, but should rather allow and encourage it. It should
let different manufacturers compete with their prices. I appeal to
Government not to scrap all 15-seater vehicles, but only the old,
dilapidated ones.

There are people who have invested in the new 15-seater vehicles, and who
will suffer a great loss if their vehicles are also scrapped. Compensation
of between R30 000 and R40 000 will not cover the cost of these new
vehicles. The problem we must face is not the size of the vehicle, but its
condition. It is the attitude and the poor qualifications of the drivers
that must be changed. Changing from 15-seater to 18-seater or 35-seater
vehicles is irrelevant at the moment. An unqualified driver behind the
wheel of a 35-seater vehicle is as dangerous, if not more dangerous, than
an unqualified driver behind the wheel of a 15-seater vehicle.

Too many jobs have been lost since 1994. We do not want to see people in
the taxi industry losing their jobs because of the Government's
recapitalisation project. Those who say that manufacturing these new buses
will create new jobs must be reminded that the scrapping of the present
taxis will cause more job losses than will be created.

People who use taxis on a daily basis need safe and efficient
transportation. Allowing new 15-seater vehicles with specified high safety
standards - fitted with all other Government safety requirements -
alongside the new 18-seater and 35-seater buses, will bring unity in the
taxi industry. Scrapping and disallowing all new 15-seater vehicles in the
industry is going to create unnecessary tensions and bring division, which
may lead to renewed violence that our country does not need at the moment.
Government must listen to the concerns of all protesters and bring them on
board.

For the sake of peace and stability, the ACDP says we should let all
stakeholders be part of the transformation and recapitalisation process.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chair, hon members, there are three things wrong
with the input which we have just heard.

The first one is that it is based on ignorance. The hon Meshoe would have
been better served had he known all the facts or ascertained them first.
The second one is that he confuses the issue of recapitalisation with
issues of road safety. There are a number of road safety and law-
enforcement issues which are obviously very important, but he must not
confuse them. So, it seems to me that I should spend a bit of my time
explaining what the process is all about. [Interjections.] The third one is
that that confusion is shared by some on my left. [Laughter.]

The taxi recapitalisation project is one element of a multifaceted plan -
and I think they should listen, for a change - to transform the minibus-
taxi industry from one which is often cursed and despised, into one which
is respected and can become the pride of the nation. The multifaceted
programme involves a number of related processes. There is within
Government total clarity about the objectives sought to be achieved. At the
same time, in adopting strategies to achieve those objectives there must be
room for a degree of flexibility in order to correct mistakes, do things
better, incorporate new and better ideas which may come up from time to
time and allow for provincial variations, if necessary.

It is also important to note that the recapitalisation project and other
processes are not being imposed from above. It has been driven and
continues to be driven and implemented in partnership with the core of the
minibus taxi industry as represented by the South African Taxi Council,
Sataco, which incidentally represents 90% of the industry.

We also consider consultations and close co-operation with trade unions and
organisations which represent drivers and other workers in the industry to
be absolutely essential. These workers have a stake in the processes. Their
livelihood, remuneration, driving conditions, conditions of service, and
opportunities for them within the transformation processes must be and are
being discussed with the elected leaderships.

The legitimate grievances of workers will be addressed. The protection
which workers in other sectors enjoy must be extended to workers in the
taxi industry as well; and we will interact with all stakeholders to ensure
that this happens. But I want to stress once again, especially in response
to the hon Meshoe, that we are very firm in our view that we will not allow
anyone to take the law into his or her own hands. We are determined to
stamp out all forms of violence associated with the industry and are
determined to ensure that tough law-enforcement measures will prevail.
Members might have seen some examples of that already. But legitimate
grievances we will certainly address.

The minibus taxi industry is an extremely important one. It is
indispensable in the lives of more than 65% of our country's daily
commuters. Our strategy is aimed at providing vehicles which simultaneously
provide safe and affordable transport to commuters, creating opportunity
for jobs in manufacturing and downstream industries, promoting the use of
diesel fuel as a more cost-effective and efficient fuel, and broadening the
tax base. The strategy is also aimed at providing significant empowerment
opportunities through the taxi industry in support of the objective to
formalise the taxi industry.

Let me give members an idea of all the processes which are involved. First,
it involves the registration and legalisation of all minibus taxis. Members
know the history of our country that this industry arose essentially as
part of the informal sector, unregulated, often operating in anarchy.
Therefore, registration and legalisation of all minibus taxi industries is
a very important process. Already, as we stand here, many thousands of the
taxi operators have registered. There are still approximately 5 000
throughout the country who have to register. So the legalisation process is
well on the way.

Secondly, we aim at the conversion of the industry from one essentially
associated with the informal sector and making it part of the formal
sector, in other words the formalisation of the industry. That is the
second important element of the processes. The third important process is
the democratisation of the industry itself, as an important and determined
way to provide an alternative to anarchy, mafia-type activities, rule by
force and violence which have been besetting the industry for such a long
time, and giving the operators the opportunity to participate in decision-
making in appropriate matters. The creation of provincial and national taxi
councils are designed to achieve this objective. This process is also well
advanced.

Then there is the effective regulation of the industry in place of the
current anarchy with regard to routes, unlawful control over routes, with
threats of violence and actual violence, which is one of the results of the
absence of regulation. Therefore one of the important processes under way
is the implementation of regulation over the taxi industry.

The next process coupled with regulation is effective law enforcement, to
which we are paying very serious attention. Then there is a further
process: training, capacity building and empowerment programmes for
everyone in the industry. These programmes will be in management, business
methods, driver training, road safety, training as mechanics or
entrepreneurs, and so on.

Then we come to the recapitalisation process. This involves replacing the
current minibus taxi fleet, which at present are on average almost 10 years
old, perhaps a little more, with a purpose-built taxi fleet, especially
designed to provide an efficient and safe mode of transport. In addition to
that, we are introducing the use of technology, for example the smart-card
system, to facilitate matters for everyone and to eliminate fraud, robbery
and theft. Lastly, as one of the processes, we will introduce community
education programmes so that there will be total co-operation between taxi
operators, the industry, and drivers, as well as local communities, to make
the process work and to transform the industry, as I have indicated, into
one of which the nation can be proud.

The recapitalisation project is headed by a steering committee of relevant
directors-general. So there is a high-level interdepartmental structure
which oversees the process, and those directors-general are of course
accountable to the relevant Ministers. The specifications and tender
processes, which were made public, were prepared by a project committee on
which Sataco itself is represented, and on which there are experts and
representatives of various departments as well. These processes were made
public many, many months ago, and what we saw at the exhibition hall a
month ago is actually the result of a very long process which is continuing
and which will ultimately result in tenders being awarded. Currently the
situation is that a short list has been drawn up, and a number of potential
manufacturers have their names appearing on the short list. The next phase
of the process will hopefully end by April, when the successful tenderers
will be announced.

I would like to conclude by saying that the recapitalisation process is
part of a large and ambitious programme of economic empowerment, especially
black economic empowerment. It involves the opening of service stations,
repair shops and retail outlets selling tyres and spare parts, as well as
cafés where taximen and taxiwomen can stop, in many parts of our country.
In other words, there are many, many opportunities being opened up at many
local levels throughout the country.

It is not an instant solution. It is a process which will unfold over the
next 10 years, but hopefully, as I say, our taxi industry will become the
pride of our nation. [Applause.]
Mr S B FARROW: Mr Chairperson, the taxi industry in South Africa bears
witness to the power of private enterprise in adverse circumstances such as
those created by the apartheid government. It has established itself
despite the severe restrictions imposed on black would-be entrepreneurs and
the absence of finance.

This is what we in the DP would describe as one of the better examples of
privatisation in Africa. Yet, once again, we see coming before us a
proposal from the ANC which in theory is nice and appeasing to certain
sectors of the community, but, in reality, is not feasible to the broader
sector of the community.

Since its birth the taxi industry has provided employment for hundreds of
thousands of people, and it has given freedom of movement to millions. The
automobile and tyre manufacturing industries, as well as the petrol
companies, and other vehicle-related enterprises, have all benefited
enormously from this industry. The relaxing and final scrapping of taxi
licences about 10 years ago had the predictable result of increasing
overtrading in the industry.

The consequences of this overtrading are well documented. It resulted in
competition and rivalry over lucrative routes, taxi violence, unroadworthy
conditions of vehicles, drivers disregarding traffic regulations, excessive
speeding resulting in fatal accidents, incompetence of drivers, unlicensed
drivers, etc. The list can go on.

Much of the problem that we see and read about daily in the media, relates
to the lack of law enforcement. If lawmakers would only grasp the nettle,
then those affected taxis which are no longer roadworthy would have
automatically been taken off the road, upgraded or repaired, meaning that
the recapitalisation scheme that the hon the Minister talks about would not
be so extensively required.

Taxis which disregard the traffic laws of our country should be brought to
book. Innovative ideas like the fitting of governors to all new fleet taxis
to control speed should be a consideration, as was suggested by my hon
colleague Rev Meshoe of the ACDP. Disparate taxi owners and unions which
are constantly killing and maiming each other should be nailed and jailed.
Only then will the innocent commuters who rely on these services be
safeguarded from death and injury caused by accidents and violent conflicts
of interest.

Recapitalising the taxi fleet by exchanging the current dilapidated minibus
taxi fleet for 18-seaters and 35-seaters will help to reduce traffic and
accidents on many of our overcrowded routes. But what will the cost to the
taxpayer be? And what about the approximately 40 000 potential job losses
that have been indicated?

When Minister Omar replied to the taxi drivers' concern about these job
losses, he said, and I quote:


  Surplus drivers will be retrained for employment in the manufacturing and
  servicing of new vehicles and other auxiliary services.

What Mr Omar does not take into account are the people who build and
service the present fleets. Where do they fit into his thinking?
[Interjections.]

Coupled to this is the backlog of over R9,5 billion in the maintenance of
national roads, which also contributes to the enormous loss of life and
property due to accidents on our roads. I want to ask the hon the Minister
where all this money is coming from. The Government cannot simply solve
problems by throwing nonexistent money at the problem. [Interjections.]

Hon President Mbeki, in his state of the nation address, stressed
Government's determination to carry out its programme to renew the minibus
taxi fleet and to introduce other measures to ensure that this sector
provides a safe, dependable and disciplined service to the public.

Our proposal is that, as a first, the hon the Minister should look no
further than getting the unruly taxi unions disciplined within the confines
of the law and the regulations that govern them, before offering them
exchanges for ageing fleets. Otherwise the very same renewed fleet will
condemn paying passengers to risk their lives by travelling the even bigger
``mobile coffins'', as the hon the President called them so derogatively in
his speech.

It is a well-known fact that Sataco alone does not provide the necessary
cohesive representation in the taxi industry in South Africa. In this
regard the number of passengers or movements daily, weekly and monthly
versus the number of taxis available should be established first in order
to determine whether and to what extent the taxi routes are overtraded and
with whom they are affiliated.

The power and influence of the taxi lords must be curbed, and the system of
taxi hiring which we are told is also practised by police officer taxi
owners, and which is obviously responsible for the majority of problems in
the industry, such as excessive speed, disregard for traffic rules, etc,
must be properly controlled. Our second proposal would be to ensure that
corrupt and colluding members of the SA Police Force involved in the taxi
industry be identified, brought to book and dismissed. The DP has access to
a copy of a report indicating that officers of police stations such as
Rietgat, Soshanguve and Putalong are intimately involved in taxi violence
and that R5s and Government property were apparently hired out, and I would
be very happy to share this with both the respective Ministers who could
act on it.

Our third proposal is that a specific investigation be undertaken to
determine the precise shortfall of traffic police in posts around South
Africa, estimated to be 8 000, and to identify means of funding them.
Fourthly, we propose the introduction of regular medical and safety checks
on drivers and their vehicles before permits are issued. Fifthly, proof of
prior bona fides should be required in respect of those taxi owners
requiring to exit the recapitalisation scheme. To this end, Government must
look at unroadworthy taxis and allow these to exit the system. One can
compare this to other unsuccessful private businesses; it will undoubtedly
set a precedent. Sixthly, the DP proposes that the Government looks at
means of investigating safer travel within the big cities such as rail
transport. It is commendable to know that Gauteng is doing this.

The present taxi industry has been self-financing from its inception and
does not need the Government to waste R3,5 billion to R5 billion of
taxpayers' money on recapitalising the taxi industry. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before I call on the next
speaker, I would like to recognise the Rev Jesse Jackson from the USA.
[Applause.] He is here to look at business proposals and investments in the
whole of Africa. We wish him well. Welcome to South Africa, sir.
[Applause.]
Mr J H SLABBERT: Chairperson, the IFP supports every move aimed at
improving the safety of commuters that are transported daily by the taxi
fleet in our country. We, therefore, agree that the taxi fleet must be
upgraded and properly regulated. The necessity for an upgrading programme
is, therefore, essential for the ageing part of the taxi fleet.

However, the IFP is concerned that certain taxi organisations - with a
substantial representative base - allege that Government did not consult
with them in regard to the taxi recapitalisation project. The IFP,
therefore, urges Government to urgently undertake an information and
consultation programme with these taxi organisations. Alternatively,
Government, via the portfolio committee of either transport or trade and
industry, should engage in a programme of public hearings.

The IFP, in the interest of the public, the passengers and the taxi
industry, will engage in discussions and consultations with the Government,
role-players in the taxi industry, the existing vehicle manufacturers and
the public, in order to consider suitable standards for an acceptable taxi
transport system for the affected community. In this regard the IFP will
consult, facilitate and negotiate with the stakeholders in order to achieve
a more satisfactory position. The IFP is embarking, with immediate effect,
on a consultation programme with the different taxi associations, and has
set up nine teams of IFP parliamentarians that will negotiate with
associations in the nine provinces of South Africa.

As a strong proponent of private enterprise, the IFP has great appreciation
for the role that is being played by the South African taxi industry, which
has developed into a mega industry by sheer determination and without
Government subsidies. Future taxi recapitalisation programmes must ensure
that the basic ownership of taxis remain with small enterprises and
individuals, whilst caution must be exercised that newly established groups
and big business do not take over or compete with this multifaceted small
business enterprise.

Substantial industrial development and job creation may occur with an
acceptable recapitalisation programme, with the many benefits that such an
upgrading programme will have for the South African economy. It is,
therefore, important that South Africa must create such an acceptable
recapitalisation programme.

Consideration should also be given to legislate mini-vehicle
specifications, in order to compel existing South African vehicle
manufacturers to comply with such minimum, prescribed specifications,
instead of sidelining them. Surely, the existing vehicle manufacturers in
South Africa can play an important role in producing suitable transport
vehicles that will be safe, durable and affordable, according to prescribed
specifications. The IFP, however, realises that any scheme introduced
without proper and appropriate law enforcement, as is the case now, will
never be successful.

In the long-term interest of the transport industry, it is imperative that
the concerns of taxi stakeholders, and particularly the safety of the
commuters, should be taken into consideration. Obviously, Government should
give greater attention and consideration to the concerns of the relevant
stakeholders. The IFP, therefore, welcomes the announcement made by the hon
the Minister of Transport that the ``bolts and nuts of the taxi programme''
could be reviewed.

In terms of the Constitution there is a right of demonstration and mass
action, but the IFP would be against any violent or disruptive
demonstrations. Demonstrations at and threats of possible disruptions to
visits by overseas delegations such as the 2006 Soccer World Cup Inspection
Committee must be condemned and all responsible bodies and parties should
distance themselves from such action. [Applause.]

Mnr J J NIEMANN: Mnr die Voorsitter, laat ek dadelik sê die Nuwe NP steun
die Regering 100% wat die regulering van hierdie belangrike bedryf betref.
Ongelukkig is dit waar dat die beeld van die hele taxi-bedryf uiters swak
is, soos saamgevat in 'n hoofartikel in die Sunday Times van 30 Januarie
2000: (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr J J NIEMANN: Mr Chairperson let me say at the outset that the New NP
supports the Government 100% as regards the regulation of this important
industry. Unfortunately the fact is that the image of the entire taxi
industry is very poor, as was summarised in an editorial in the Sunday
Times of 30 January 2000:]


  Minibus taximen have a thoroughly detestable reputation for which they
  have themselves to blame. Their appalling road etiquette aside, they have
  long adopted violence as a means of solving disputes among themselves -
  including fatally shooting one another and assaulting and sometimes
  killing passengers. Such conduct is unacceptable and must be stamped out.

We all agree about that.

Die President van Suid-Afrika sê passasiers ``risk their lives by
travelling in mobile coffins'', maar gaan dan verder en sê 'n baie
belangrike ding. Hy sê:


  ... it is a mistake to think that the Government can be intimidated into
  taking wrong decisions.

Ek steun hierdie punt 110%, maar dit sou eweneens 'n fout wees as ons
oorhaastige besluite neem.

Natuurlik sal daar groei- en oorgangspyne wees. Daarvoor is ons nie blind
nie. Die sogenaamde verlies aan werk vir sowat 41 000 bestuurders is
natuurlik nie heeltemal korrek nie. Dit is hoegenaamd nie korrek nie. Die
Minister het oor en oor die versekering gegee dat diegene wat hul werk
verloor, in ander sektore van die bedryf heropgelei sal word. Ons is bereid
om sy woord daarvoor te aanvaar.

Die tweede aspek waaroor daar groot ontevredenheid is, is dat die SA
Taxiraad of Sataco, wat in die plek van die SA Swart Taxi-
eienaarsvereniging gekom het, tans onwettig saamgestel is. Met die stigting
van Sataco ongeveer 18 maande gelede is 'n onderneming deur die tydelike
leierskap gegee dat 'n grondwet opgestel sal word en 'n vrye en
demokratiese verkiesing sal plaasvind. Na my wete is daardie demokratiese
verkiesing tot vandag toe nog nie gehou nie. Daardie onderneming is nie
nagekom nie, en die Regering was 'n stigterslid. Geen wonder nie dat die
Regering nou afgedreig word. Vir 'n vreedsame reguleringsproses sal dié
saak dringend aandag moet kry.

Soos die Minister en 'n paar ander sprekers hier, wil ek ook op 'n paar
pluspunte wys. Een daarvan is dat die pendelaars met slimkaarte hul
reisgeld sal kan betaal. Die nuwe voertuie se deure sal ook elektronies
beheer word. Satellietopsporingstelsels sal verseker dat hul op die
toegelate roetes bly. Taxi-eienaars sal 'n afskrywingstoelae van tot 45%
van die koste van hul huidige voertuie ontvang. Dié voertuie sal nie weer
op die Suid-Afrikaanse paaie gebruik word nie. Elektroniese meganismes sal
ingebou word wat sal verhoed dat die voertuig beweeg indien dit oorlaai
word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The President of South Africa says that passengers ``risk their lives by
travelling in mobile coffins'', and then he goes further and says something
very important. He says:


  ... it is a mistake to think that the Government can be intimidated into
  taking wrong decisions.

I support this point wholeheartedly, but we would likewise be making a
mistake if we were to take rash decisions.

Naturally there will be growing and transitional pains. We are not unaware
of this. The so-called loss of jobs for approximately 41 000 drivers is of
course not quite correct. It is by no means correct. The Minister has given
the assurance time and time again that those people who lose their jobs
will be retrained in other sectors of the industry. We are prepared to take
his word for that.

The second aspect about which there is a great deal of dissatisfaction is
the fact that the SA Taxi Council or Sataco, which has replaced the SA
Black Taxi Owners' Association, is at present illegal. When Sataco was
established approximately 18 months ago, the temporary leaders gave an
undertaking that a constitution would be drafted and that a free and
democratic election would take place. To the best of my knowledge that
democratic election has not yet been held. That undertaking was not
honoured, and the Government was a founder member. It is not surprising
that the Government is now being threatened. If we want a peaceful
regulatory process, we shall have to pay urgent attention to this matter.

As the Minister and a few other speakers here did, I also want to point out
a few advantages. One of these is that commuters will be able to pay their
fares with a smart card. The doors of the new vehicles will also be
operated electronically. Satellite tracing systems will ensure that they
travel only along the permissible routes. Taxi owners will receive a write-
off allowance of up to 45% of the cost of their present vehicles. These
vehicles will not be used on South African roads again. Electronic
mechanisms will be built in to prevent vehicles from moving if they are
overloaded.]

Other hi-tech mechanisms are that it will record when it is due for
inspection and maintenance, administer the automatic cashless collection of
fares and transmit that information to a central database. By automatically
registering the new taxis, the Department of Transport hopes to create a
complete register of South African taxis that will make law enforcement
much easier. The new owners will also be registered taxpayers. Minibus
taxis carry about 65% of South Africa's commuters, but because the industry
is unregulated the fiscus receives very little of that in the form of tax.

Die nuwe voertuie sal hier gebou word. Hulle sal 'n plaaslike inhoud van
80% hê en swart bemagtiging is 'n absolute voorwaarde vir hul
vervaardiging. [Tyd verstreke.] [The new vehicles will be built here. They
will have a local content of 80% and black empowerment is a prerequisite
for their manufacture. [Time expired.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before I call the next
speaker, I would like to point out that the hon Ms Mnumzana is making her
maiden speech. Please afford her the courteously and dignity she deserves.
[Applause.]

Ms S K MNUMZANA: Chairperson, Deputy Speaker, Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, hon members, today we meet to discuss the recapitalisation
project of the taxi industry. My role is to discuss the issue of
consultation and job creation.

The process of consultation started in 1994 when the democratic forum known
as the National Transport Task Team was established by the national
Government to lay the foundation for the sustainable and violence-free
development of the industry. What emerged after three years of intense and
extremely difficult consensus-building work, involving exhaustive
consultation with the industry, was a set of recommendations which was
finally agreed to by Government and industry in the National Transport Task
Team final report. These recommendations can be summarised as follows.

Firstly, there is a need for formalisation. In terms of this process, all
taxi associations were formally required to register with the taxi
registrars, upon which members became legal operators with permits and
associations were allowed to operate. Secondly, the industry has to manage
its affairs in terms of the Constitution and comply with the requirements
as agreed to in different provincial Acts. Thirdly, Government initiated a
regulation and control process, through a programme to assist the industry
to establish itself on a firm and sustainable business footing. The special
legalisation procedure initiated in 1995 legalised illegal operators. Ke
tla rata ho di beha mohatl'a kgwiti mona hobane nako ha e yo. [I would like
to stop here because my time is up.]

In 1995, the National Transport Task Team was dissolved. At the summit held
at Volkswagen Centre, where all stakeholders from the regions were
represented, a new mandate was given to a newly formed structure known as
the South African Taxi Council. Its recognition by Government is premised
on the fact that it represents nine provincial councils and 12 recognised
mother bodies. The process of formalisation, regulation and control was
reinforced. Local taxi councils and local transport forums were established
to ensure smooth communication and consultation between Government and
stakeholders.

A programme of economic assistance was also initiated by Government to
assist the industry to establish itself on a firm and sustainable business
footing. The core element consisted of the national co-operative pilot
programmes, in terms of which five provincial pilot co-operative projects
have been established with the assistance of the national department.

On the issue of job creation, we agree that there might be some initial job
losses due to the reduction of the total number of minibus taxis when there
are replaced by 18-seater and 35-seater buses. However, this Government,
which is the first to put in place policies and programmes, has ensured
that opportunities are there to address the backlog of issues that affect
the majority of the people of this country negatively. For example, there
are co-operatives that will address the issue of joblessness through the
creation of new jobs and the redeployment of those who will lose their
jobs. There will be training which will create a career path for employees.
Criteria for training will be skills, experience and level of education.
This will ensure the correct placement of staff in this new co-operative
project.

Ke kopa ho hopotsa ntlo ena hore tsena tsohle tse ileng tsa etshala ka hare
ho indasteri ena ya ditekesi e bile ka lebaka la hobane indasteri ena e ile
ya ntshuwa taolong ya Mmuso. E mong le mong e ne e le ``baas'' [mohiri]. O
ne a hira hoseng, a leleka bosiu. Ha ho le jwalo, Mmuso ona wa rona o ile
wa bona hore ho bohlokwa hore o nke kgatelo pele ho bona hore o kenya taolo
indastering ena. (Translation of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[I would like to remind this House that everything that has happened in the
taxi industry was caused by the deregulation of the industry by the
Government. Each operator became his own master. He could hire people and
dismiss them at will. Therefore, our Government felt it was important to
restore order in the industry.]

In summarising, I would like to take this opportunity to thank this
Government for the huge stride that it has taken towards a better life for
all by delivering safe, decent taxi transport to our people, which will
alleviate the suffering of the poor.

Ho na le bahanyetsi kahare ho projeke ena. Empa re hopole hore batho bana
ba tsamaya ka majaba-jaba a dikoloi kapa, ba tsamaya ka dipalangwang kapa
dibese tse tsheheditsweng ka ditjhelete ka molao ke Mmuso. Empa ena
indasteri ha eso ka e thuswa ka ditjhelete ka molao ho hang. (Translation
of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[There is opposition to this project. But, we must remember that those who
are opposed to it drive flashy cars or use public transport that is
subsidised by the Government. However, the taxi industry has never been
subsidised.]

I say the time has come for this Government to subsidise this industry to
enable it to be affordable, safe, user-friendly and sustainable, and to
save thousands of lives.

Ledumme, mme ke qetella ka hore dikgomo tseo le manamane a tsona.
[Ditlatse.] [In conclusion, let me wish everybody peace. [Applause.]]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Madam Speaker, I would like to make it clear that the UDM
sees the need for the rationalisation of the taxi industry and also for its
formalisation. What we do have reservations about is the method chosen for
the recapitalisation of the industry. We believe that the decision by the
Cabinet to accept the proposal to discontinue the use of 16-seater minibus-
taxis in favour of 18-seater and 35-seater minibuses is inexplicably hasty
and devoid of legitimacy in the absence of broad and satisfactory prior
consultation with all stakeholders.

The reasons advanced to justify this change are both unconvincing and
uncertain. It is argued that the frequency of fatal accidents is
attributable to the size and peculiar specifications of the present minibus-
taxis and therefore that the logical thing to do would be to minimise road
accidents by using larger 18-seater and 35-seater minibuses. Taxi operators
and the public at large are not aware of any scientific studies having been
conducted before arriving at this conclusion. What one is persuaded to
conclude is that it is a decision taken with scant regard for the dire
consequences of a wholesale disqualification of minibuses from operating as
taxis on our roads.

Job losses which will directly result from the scrapping of the existing
minibuses on our roads have been estimated at 41 000 taxi drivers. These
are breadwinners from a social background of large extended families. We
are talking of hundreds of thousands of workers and their dependants who
will be left without an immediate means of livelihood at the stroke of a
pen. A decision of this magnitude cannot be justified by the consent of a
few bureaucrats of organisations who may claim to represent the industry as
a whole without first verifying whether there has been proper consultation
with all the people affected by this decision. Both the previous and
current incumbent Ministers have not satisfied the industry and the public
that they have adequately consulted all stakeholders.

Taxi operators have offered some plausible solutions, suggesting better
training of drivers and the deployment of more disciplined and
incorruptible law enforcement officers on the roads. They believe that
there is a need for a radical change of attitude among all people involved
in the industry and in fact all road users, including those entrusted with
enforcing law and order.

They further argue that the reasoning that there is a large incidence of
accidents among ... [Time expired.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, die minibus-taxibedryf, ongeag die
ernstige probleme wat hy het, is gevestig in die kultuur van die stedelike
en plattelandse gemeenskappe, wat nie ryk gemeenskappe is nie en afhanklik
is van goedkoop vervoer.
Dit is 'n voorbeeld van private ondernemingsvernuf, van entrepreneurskap
wat volgens vraag- en aanbodsituasies ontstaan het. Verder is dit 'n diens
wat aan 'n spesifieke behoefte in die arm gebiede voldoen; dit gee werk aan
duisende mense en dit vervoer die massas. Dit is 'n goeie voorbeeld van die
klein en mediumgrootte ondernemings waaroor ons so baie praat.

Die probleme wat in hierdie bedryf bestaan, het eintlik eerstens betrekking
op die wetstoepassing deur die Regering op ons paaie wat betref
voertuigstandaarde, padveiligheid en spoed, standaarde van die paaie self
en dan die misdaad en beheer op die paaie. Ek het geluister na die agb
Minister se verduideliking van die prosesse, en ek stem op drie na met
almal saam. Ek stem nie saam wanneer die agb Minister eerstens praat van
``informeel'' wat nou ``formeel'' moet word nie. As die agb Minister praat
van doeltreffende regulering, is ek bang hy bedoel oorregulering. Saamgevat
in hierdie twee aspekte wat die minister genoem het, is daar 'n spesifieke
gevaar dat die Regering te veel in die privaatsektor sal inmeng en dat die
Regering sal inmeng met die markkragte wat, onder omstandighede, nie goed
is nie.

Ek het onlangs gelees dat tot 'n derde van die bestuurders hulle werk kan
verloor as hierdie opgradering en planne van die Regering deurgevoer word.
As boer weet ek ons moenie oorkapitaliseer nie. Dit is nooit 'n wyse stap
nie. Hierdie opgradering kan die arm mense nóg armer maak en die gegoede
deel van die swart bevolking bevoordeel ten koste van die arm mense.

Diegene wat opgradering kan bekostig; en die Regering moet dít aanvaar,
moet toegelaat word om dit te doen, maar dit kan nie op almal afgedwing
word nie. Die enkel-eienaars van die ou minibusse moet ook nie in hierdie
proses uitgeskakel word nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, the minibus-taxi industry, irrespective of
its serious problems, is established in the culture of the urban and rural
communities, which are not wealthy communities and are dependent on cheap
transport.

This is an example of private business acumen, of entrepreneurship that
arose out of supply and demand situations. It is furthermore a service that
meets a specific requirement in the poor areas; it provides jobs to
thousands of people and transports the masses. This is a good example of
the small and medium-sized enterprises about which we talk so much.

The problems that exist in this industry in fact firstly relate to law
enforcement on our roads by the Government, in respect of vehicle
standards, road safety and speed, the condition of the roads themselves and
crime and control on the roads. I listened to the hon the Minister's
explanation of the processes, and I agree with all of them, except three. I
do not agree when the hon the Minister, in the first instance, talks about
``informal'' that must now become ``formal''. If the Minister is talking
about effective regulating, I am afraid that he means overregulating.
Contained in these two aspects that the Minister mentioned, there is the
specific danger that the Government will intervene too much in the private
sector and that the Government will intervene in market forces which, under
the circumstances, is not good.

I read recently that up to a third of the drivers could lose their jobs if
this upgrading and these plans of the Government are implemented. As a
farmer I know that we should not overcapitalise. That is never a wise step.
This upgrading can leave the poor even poorer and it will benefit the
affluent section of the black population at the expense of the poor.

Those who can afford the upgrading, and the Government must accept this,
should be allowed to do so, but this should not be forced on anyone. Nor
should the single owners of the old minibuses be eliminated in this
process.]

The FF feels that we should go back to the drawing board and have more
consultation on this important subject. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, colleagues, as my
colleague the hon Minister of Transport said, it would seem quite clear
that there is a considerable lack of information or ignorance around this
matter. Firstly, with regard to consultation, we have been consulting now
for well over four years in one or other way throughout this industry. For
those who are booing and do not know what is happening, I have personally
been responsible for the consultation for many of these years.
Secondly, what is the problem? Many speakers have quite correctly
highlighted aspects of this problem, but the central problem - and it is
common to a number of industries - is this: There is a fleet of 132 000
taxis, with an average age of 10 years. For vehicles of this type and for
this use, the safe user-period is something in the region of four years.
Manifestly, the industry has failed to recapitalise itself. New purchases
last year were less than 3 000 units. Accordingly, the fleet will get older
and older. It has no prospect under the present structure of recapitalising
itself.

Now, anyone who says that that is a situation which we can tolerate is
playing with people's lives. In the first place, these vehicles were built
as light utility passenger vehicles, not as heavy-duty taxis. None of them
have been modified to meet the needs. All of them are potentially
dangerous, no matter how new they are. So we have a structural problem
here. We have had similar problems, and no one got so excited, in the
clothing and textile industry. When this Government pumped nearly R1
billion into the clothing and textile industry through the IDC and others
to recapitalise its equipment, no one complained, because we had to
recapitalise it. The same applies to the taxi industry.

Now what was the other alternative? The other alternative, put forward by
many operators, was that we should buy second-hand vehicles. Let me tell
hon members that that is suicide. Second-hand vehicles in Europe may cost
one $3 000 to $5 000 to scrap because of environmental reasons. So, it is a
well-known fact to anyone that knows anything about the automobile industry
that a second-hand vehicle has no price. In fact, people pay to get it
taken away from them. So we cannot support any programme with second-hand
vehicles, because we will be giving away money to people without knowing
exactly what we are paying for and why we are paying for it.

Secondly, the second-hand vehicles - even with the modifications we have
had in one of the operations in Lesotho - are still totally inadequate for
the operation. They were not built for this purpose. Thirdly, we would have
had to monitor the second-hand vehicles very closely indeed, because if
they have tires that come from Japan, they are not built for these
temperatures. If they have tires that come from Europe, they are not built
for these temperatures. We have no knowledge about the homologation systems
that come in. We will have to check whether they are, in fact, credited
here according to homologation practice here in South Africa. So we would
have ended up with an administration just as big as the one we have to do
now. Therefore we need to recapitalise the industry.

Someone told me that we should wait for all the producers to do it. What
have we been doing? We have been talking to them for four years, and they
have done nothing. Why? Because it is not profitable. What we have done is
come forward with a subvention so that we can recapitalise this industry.
The subvention is approximately equal to the deposit that would be paid.

If hon members read the study very carefully they will see that it is an
integrated package, designed to maintain the vehicles for a safe period,
and ensure that there is financing, and that proper depreciation allowances
are kept. It is a comprehensive programme that is being put forward. We
cannot just sit and wait, because it will never recapitalise itself.

There are two other complete and absolute misconceptions in this thing. The
first is that we are halving the fleet. That is nonsense. The economics of
the routes differ. Everybody knows that on some routes a 35-seater is the
only economically viable proposition, and on other routes an 18-seater is
the only economically viable proposition. That will be left to individual
operators. No one is being forced to scrap all their vehicles. That is
complete nonsense.

What will happen is that, with the new support for this industry, sensible
operators will realise that somewhere around the fourth year they should
trade in their vehicles. And that is why we have planned the programme over
four years, so that people who have bought their vehicles recently will
still qualify by the fourth year. Anyone who acts sensible will trade in
the vehicle as the vehicle comes up for trading in. No one is being forced
to do anything.

But, what we are doing is addressing all the problems that the more
sensible speakers have put forward, problems such as management; financing;
safer vehicles, including environmental aspects; vehicles that accommodate
disabled persons better than they did; and vehicles that are safer and more
comfortable. This what we are trying to do. It is a major and innovative
approach to this problem. The alternatives do not exist. Everything else
that has been put forward is not an alternative, because it has not
answered the fundamental question of how we would recapitalise the fleet
and still provide an affordable and safe service to commuters. That is the
fundamental objective.

People can shout, scream, jump on the roof and threaten violence - then we
will put them in jail ... [Laughter] ... but we are not going to back off
from providing a safe, affordable service to our people. That is the
responsibility of Government, no one else. We will provide that service and
that is what this scheme is going to do. [Applause.]

Deputy Speaker, can I abuse the debate? I am afraid we have had an
interesting day on another matter. It has nothing to do with taxis, but it
may have one day. It concerns grappa and ouzo. [Interjections.] If I could
- out of courtesy and respect to the House - I would have liked to have
made a statement, but I am afraid there was no time for us to do that.

I would like just to state briefly that this morning we received a letter
from the president of the European Commission, President Prody, putting
forward a proposal on this agreement. It contains three elements: firstly,
that the provisional application will be implemented; secondly, that we
will set up a joint commission in terms of the agreement; and thirdly, that
at the end of a five-year period we will phase the five names only out, if
there has been agreement in the WTO that these names will be protected.

This is a compromise. We still have to argue it out. There is going to be
quite an argument on this. It is a compromise, but the main purpose of this
compromise is to ensure that the main agreement goes forward. I think we as
South Africa have remained true to our principles that we would not agree
to something that is incompatible with the World Trade Organisation.
[Applause.]

Mr G E BALOI: Madam Speaker, the transformation of the taxi industry is
aimed at the integration of the taxi industry into the mainstream public
transport system of our country. It seeks to put in place a sustainable
platform in order to level the playing field and to increase the
competitive environment for all road-based passenger transport modes.

The Government is spending millions of rands as a result of accidental
deaths that are caused by minibus taxis that are not roadworthy and are
worn out. We as legislators of the day should support the transformation of
the taxi industry into a modern one. The new taxi will relieve the burden
carried by the Government in spending millions, if not billions, of rands,
caused by uninsured taxis, worn-out tyres and inexperienced taxi drivers.

South Africa is a beautiful country whose sons and daughters should be
living their lives until old age. Untimely deaths, as caused by the taxis,
are unacceptable. Every year, statistics show an increase in deaths caused
by minibus taxis. New taxis will be equipped with a tracking system to
ensure that they travel according to their allocated routes. This will
ensure that taxis do not operate on routes other than theirs. These
measures will also enhance the safety of all concerned - drivers and
passengers alike - as it will be easy to detect what went wrong and where.
South Africans make 2,5 billion passenger trips per year, 66% of which are
by taxis. Concerns were raised about the current monopoly in the market,
which - according to the SA Taxi Council, Sataco - has led to a situation
where profits have become more important than the safety of passengers.
[Time expired.]
Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, the PAC supports the
introduction of a new purpose-built vehicle for the taxi industry and the
scrapping of the old fleet. However, the process must be reviewed, and in
terms of that process the PAC feels that there is no distinction between
the regulatory body and the representative body, leading to conflict and
confusion in the industry.

The Government-appointed SA Taxi Council is both a regulatory and
representative body. We are convinced that Government must divide the two
functions, and allow the SA Taxi Council to form a regulatory body that is
independent of the representative body. The taxi industry in South Africa
has shown itself to be incapable of sorting out the issue of
representation. This is illustrated by the protest action in Johannesburg a
few weeks ago. Taxi drivers are saying that they have not had a proper
input into the process and that this has largely been confined to the taxi
owners. Once again we have seen no sensitivity or sympathy shown for some
very important stakeholders in the process.
The PAC wants to appeal to Government to begin a proper and inclusive
information and education process for all drivers and owners on the
recapitalisation process. Thereafter, it should set manufacturing standards
for the production of the new 18-seater and 35-seater buses, and leave the
manufacture and sale to the market. Ultimately, both commuter and operator
will, through the usage patterns, decide whether the product in its current
format is suitable for our conditions.

Mrs N D MBOMBO: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon comrades and hon
members, today we are here to discuss the recapitalisation project of the
taxi industry. There is going to be a roadshow where members of the SA Taxi
Council will be leading the process. Government has opted for this kind of
vehicle because the old ones were not sustainable and were not build to
carry such workloads. With this new mode each seat has a safety belt, and
there is enough space when alighting or getting off. The height is
acceptable, and the seats are removable and comfortable, even for larger
commuters.

The long-distance ones have trailers for luggage, so commuters will be
comfortable, without lots of luggage on their sides. The chassis are
purpose-built for passenger transport, making them much safer. This mode
also has a lower floor, and the concerns of the people with disabilities
are being looked into. The new taxis will have speed-control gauges, so
that the safety of the commuters should be a proper priority at all times.

With regard to tendering, tenders must comply with technical specifications
as laid down by the department. The operators will be empowered through co-
operatives which will assist by creating jobs, also leading to a greater
understanding of democracy and the democrative process. The role of
transforming economic and social conditions builds unity and trust amongst
members, which leads to the empowerment of the community as well. Other
people just keep saying: ``Taxis, taxis'' when they had never been inside
those taxis. [Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Madam Speaker, the FA will always laud any move to curb
the carnage on our roads and which will also bring the much-desired law and
order to the taxi industry. However, with the announcement that minibus
taxis will be replaced by the much bigger, specially built, newly designed
taxis, one wonders if enough research and indeed enough thought have gone
into this drastic measure. I heard what the hon the Minister said, but I
still want to ask: Have enough consultations been conducted with the
current producers of minibus taxis? [Interjections.] Has the effect of the
scaling down or closure of the production lines, with the concomitant job
losses, been fully established and the consequences entirely understood?
[Interjections.]

Some other questions which arise are the following. Will the new taxis be
constrained to only transport the number of passengers they are designed
for? [Interjections.] Will they not be overloaded? Will these new taxis
leave at fixed times or will they wait until they are full?
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Yes.

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: I hear that. Will new areas for parking for these
vehicles be provided, or will they still, as the case is now, be allowed to
park or stop wherever they choose? [Interjections.] Yes. No. There is a
difference then in opinion. Will the taxis be allowed to summarily stop in
the middle of the street, even during peak hours, to load or offload
passengers? [Interjections.] These are questions I think which one has to
look at. Will these taxis have speed governors that cannot be removed or
changed?

If answers to the above questions are in the affirmative, the question is
simply: Why could the present taxis not be curbed? The announcement of the
maximum speed of 100 km/h over the festive season was all but ignored. If
not controlled, we will merely turn moving coffins into moving hearses.

In lighter vein, one good thing that will come out of the change is that we
will ... [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon Ministers and
members, I must firstly congratulate the hon Mnumzana on her maiden speech.
Well done. [Applause.]

In the taxi industry the passengers' comfort and needs are very seldom
taken into consideration. Emphasis is placed on a minimum profit per day.
This means that the taxi driver must make sufficient money to earn his
salary and maintain a roadworthy vehicle. These two reasons encourage the
overloading of taxis, fast driving in order to make more than one trip, and
making commuters wait until taxis are filled to capacity. Undoubtedly,
competition in the industry is fierce, which leads to unnecessary violence
and road accidents.
The recapitalisation of the taxi industry has focused on specially building
taxis for the purpose of passengers, which in turn means safer passenger
transport. The vehicles will be equipped with tracking systems and a
reliable national database of permits will be established. The
recapitalisation of the taxi industry also provides potential opportunities
to promote black empowerment.

When promoting the use of smart cards, a reasonable price must be set, as
one must take into consideration that the majority of commuters hail from
the lower economic sectors. Diesel minibuses will be more cost-effective
and cheaper to run. The introduction of the 18-seater and 35-seater
minibuses will decrease traffic congestion, which will hopefully mean a
reduction in road accidents.

For too long priority was given to profits and not the safety of the
passengers. The compelling reasons for restructuring include the need to
eliminate violence, the need to improve on the levels of safety and a
desire for quality service in the transport industry. The greatest
challenge is to discover a way to implement these important objectives. The
MF supports all measures to curb the loss of life and limb among our
people. [Applause.][Time expired.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, die taxibedryf is een van daardie
grensgevalle; dit is 'n private bedryf, maar tog 'n bedryf wat in die
openbare sfeer optree, op so 'n wyse dat dit regstreekse openbare
implikasies het. Anders as met vele ander sektore van die sakewêreld is dit
dus noodsaaklik dat die Regering orde moet skep in hierdie omgewing.

Die sleutelwoord hier is ``orde skep'' en nie ``oorneem'' nie. Dit sou 'n
anomalie wees indien Eskom, Telkom, Vodacom, ``Dotcom'' en ``Antikom''
geprivatiseer word, en ``Taxicom'' word genasionaliseer. Hierteen moet ten
alle koste gewaak word. Die geheim is regulering en nie sentralisering nie,
en dit klink vir my asof die Regering dit ook so insien.

Die vraag kan ontstaan of hierdie nie 'n ingryp is in die private
ondernemingskap wat in hierdie bedryf ontstaan het nie. Ja, sekerlik, maar
tog moet in gedagte gehou word dat hierdie private bedryf meestal
krygsgevange gehou word deur konsortiums en gesigloses agter die skerms,
dikwels tot nadeel van taxi-eienaars en -operateurs, in so 'n mate dat
taxioorloë soms skrikwekkende afmetings aangeneem het.

Ander negatiewe elemente verbonde aan die bedryf is bekend. Statistiek wys
dat die ongeluksyfer van taxis veel hoër is as dié van ander voertuie.
Oorlading is algemeen en die mate van padwaardigheid laat veel te wense
oor. Enkele jare gelede is op die Pietersburg-pad 'n taxi voorgekeer met 20
insittendes en 'n ``vice-grip'' vir 'n stuurwiel. Verkeersreëls word
dikwels veronagsaam en menige grafsteen kan die inskripsie kry: ``Hier lê
Meraai; links gewys en regs gedraai''!

Daarom moet opleiding, wetstoepassing en deeglike gereelde toetsing van
bestuursvaardighede prioriteit geniet. Om die ingrype te minimaliseer moet
bestaande kontrakteurs voorkeur kry by die toekenning van kontrakte.
Deeglike beplanning moet gedoen word in verband met die talle huidige
minibusse, wat soos blanke staatsamptenare oortollig verklaar sál word. Ons
vertrou dat hierdie proses ordelik sal geskied met die minste moontlike
ontwrigting vir almal. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, the taxi industry is a borderline case; it is
a private industry, but nevertheless an industry that operates in the
public sphere, in such a way that it has direct public implications.
Contrary to the case in many other sectors of the business world, it is
therefore essential that the Government should bring order in this
environment.

The key word here is ``bring order'' and not ``take over''. It would be an
anomaly if Eskom, Telkom, Vodacom, ``Dotcom'' and ``Antikom'' were
privatised and ``Taxicom'' nationalised. This should be avoided at all
costs. The secret is regulation and not centralisation, and it sounds to me
as if the Government is of the same opinion.

The question may arise whether this is not an intervention in the private
entrepreneurship that has developed in this industry. Yes, certainly, but
one should nevertheless keep in mind that this private industry is mostly
being held to ransom by consortiums and faceless people behind the scenes,
often to the disadvantage of taxi owners and operators, to such an extent
that taxi wars have sometimes reached alarming proportions.

Other negative elements relating to the industry are known. Statistics show
that the accident figure for taxis is significantly higher than that for
other vehicles. Overloading is common and the degree of roadworthiness
leaves much to be desired. A few years ago a taxi was stopped on the
Pietersburg road, which was carrying 20 passengers and had a vice-grip for
a steering wheel. Traffic rules are often ignored and many a gravestone
could carry the epitaph: ``Hier lê Meraai; links gewys en regs gedraai''!
[Here lies Meraai, she indicated she was going to turn left and then turned
right!]

For this reason training, law enforcement and thorough regular testing of
driving skills should receive priority. To minimise intervention, existing
contractors should receive preference when contracts are allocated.
Thorough planning will have to take place in respect of the many minibuses
now in existence that, like white public servants, will be declared
redundant. We trust that this process will take place in an orderly manner,
with the least possible disruption for everybody.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, there is no doubt that the taxi industry has
some problems. It is plagued by endemic violence. A large percentage of
taxis are too old and the owners are unable to replace them due to falling
revenue. For the same reason, those operators who acquire new vehicles have
problems with their instalments, more often than not leading to
repossession. Taxis contribute significantly to the road carnage.

The proposal to recapitalise the industry and introduce the 18-seater and
35-seater buses will attend to some of these problems, but by no means all
of them. The old fleet will be removed from our roads and the public will
have a more comfortable and dignified form of transport. But the carnage on
our roads will not be reduced by the mere introduction of new buses. Just
as the bigger buses kill people at present, there is no reason why the new
taxis will not do so if conditions on the roads remain the same.

The accident rate will only come down if there is a visible, thorough and
vigorous enforcement of the law. Corrupt officials who unleash unfit
drivers on to our roads by issuing fake drivers' licences must be rooted
out. The same fate must befall corrupt traffic officers who routinely take
bribes in order to turn a blind eye to defective vehicles.

The recapitalisation of the taxi industry is certainly a worthwhile
proposal. We welcome the assurance that no one is going to be compelled by
law to buy the new 18-seater and 35-seaters. We hope that just as the
Pontiac Parisienne, Valiant and ``Six Mabone'' were forced out of the
market by the imperatives of the business in which they operated, the same
route will be followed here. In particular, it must be remembered that ...
[Time expired.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, the taxi recapitalisation
project, which we have been debating and discussing this afternoon, is a
very bold, imaginative and far-reaching programme. In fact, it is one of
the major social delivery programmes that we have seen unfolding over the
past five years. It is an area where - if we are as honest as we must be,
as the ANC - we have battled to deliver to our people. We have done well in
water; we have done well in housing, and I think this really gives us the
opportunity to make a difference to people's ordinary day-to-day lives by
providing them with decent, affordable, accessible and safe public
transport. That has to be the priority.

But, it is a programme that will benefit all South Africans. Those of us
who do not rely on minibuses, on a daily basis, will also benefit from a
better-regulated, legal and better-maintained taxi fleet. We all have an
interest in seeing this happening. For operators, including those who were
complaining that they were left out of the process and so on, hundreds of
thousands, probably some billions, of rands will be flowing into this
industry.

The message given to them this afternoon, particularly by the DP, was:
``You pulled yourself up by your bootstraps during the apartheid years;
continue to pull yourself up by your bootstraps now in the liberated South
Africa.'' That is not the message we want to give them. We say that we want
to help them to recapitalise their industry, and that it is in our
collective interest that they do so.

For drivers also there are important benefits. The slogan of: Let us
maintain the status quo, simply does not make sense. Some alleged driver
organisations were hoisting the flag of status quo. For drivers there is
every interest in having a safer industry and a better-regulated set of
working conditions. For our entire economy it would indeed make sense to
recapitalise this very important sector. The fiscus ... [Interjections.] I
take that as a very high compliment coming from him.
The taxi industry is estimated to have an annual turnover of about R40
billion, and yet very little of this comes into the fiscus. By formalising,
legalising and recapitalising we actually stand to benefit in the medium to
longer term rather than simply spending taxpayers' money. Our entire
economy would indeed benefit from having a safe and efficient public
transport system of which this will be an important component.

We concede, however, as the ANC, that precisely because it is a bold and
far-reaching initiative, there are uncertainties. There are problems and
possible difficulties. The way to approach these is with a clear head, with
consultation and with an open mind.

Let me list just some of the issues. One of them is the diesel issue, which
none of the parties here has raised this afternoon, but which has been
raised outside of this House by environmental groups. They are not wrong in
raising this issue. As the ANC, we salute them for raising the concern
about diesel. Diesel is a polluting form of fuel. This is a serious
concern.

The reason we are nudging in the direction of diesel is that South Africa,
in the refining process, produces a surplus of diesel which we cannot use
locally and we are actually currently exporting it at a loss to our
economy. Therefore, it is obviously attractive to use diesel in this taxi
fleet, but we need to weigh that up intelligently, and with farsightedness,
against environmental sustainability.

Then there is the issue of jobs. Somewhere out of the air has come a figure
of 40 000 or 41 000 job losses. I am not sure what the scientific basis of
this figure is. Currently, we estimate some 130 000 minibuses on the roads.
Nobody is quite sure how many, exactly. The assumption is that suddenly,
and out of the blue, they will go down to 80 000. That is an assumption.
There are no scientific grounds that I am aware of for making that
assumption.

The assumption is also based on the idea that one taxi equals one driver.
That is the case now, all too often, one vehicle circulates around the
streets for 17 hours a day, and one poor driver is driving that taxi for 17
hours. That cannot be the case in future. As we recapitalise, the operators
must understand that the quid pro quo for the benefits that they will get
from this major injection of public money is that the working conditions in
the taxi industry must improve and must become regular. If a taxi vehicle
should be on the road for 17 hours, then there should be two or three
drivers working in shifts. So, as we capitalise, there may well be more
drivers rather than fewer.

There are also many important proposals in terms of downstream job creation
with the capitalisation process. But all of these will happen - this is our
perspective, as the ANC - only if the trade union movement is an active
partner in the process. It cannot simply be left to the owners of taxis. We
encourage taxi drivers to be organised, to be articulate and to come up
with proactive plans and suggestions so that they become an integral
component of the taxi recapitalisation process.

Then there are issues of inclusivity and representivity, and most of them
have attached to Sataco. The two Ministers who have spoken before me have
explained that Sataco has emerged out of a four-year consultation process.
It represents the nine democratically elected provincial taxi councils. It
also has, on its steering committee, the 12 recognised mother bodies.

As far as we are concerned, it is a relatively representative body in a
very complicated industry. However, we are not attached to the given
individuals who are in the leadership at present. They have been elected by
the taxi associations. However, if the taxi associations are unhappy with
that leadership, then they must insist that the leadership exercises
effective mandates and is answerable to those associations, and, as there
are re-elections planned in the coming months for Sataco, that will ensure
that there is adequate representation.

The hon member from the PAC completely misunderstands the nature of Sataco.
It is not a regulatory body. Like other professional bodies, we expect them
to have some degree of professional self-regulation. Regulation will be
implemented in terms of the new national land transport Bill by provincial
authorities and by national Government itself.

In conclusion, I want to use the occasion to appeal, especially to my
fellow ANC MPs. We need to understand that this taxi recapitalisation
process is a major transformation campaign that all of us must take up.
When we go on our weekends and into our constituency weeks in March, we
need to go with information. The kind of disinformation or confusion that
we are hearing is an enemy of progress and transformation. It is very
important that we get the message of transformation across. [Applause.]

However, when we go to our constituencies, we must not only preach but also
listen, because we are an organisation which is democratic not only in name
but in reality, and it is our job to listen to what commuters have to say,
what drivers have to say and what the associations have to say.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Your time has expired.

Mr J P CRONIN: To the other members here I say that they are also invited
to come on board, but they can miss the bus if they want to.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, I feel a bit intimidated to challenge my
former comrade and mentor, but things have changed. The issue here is not
... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, could we listen to the hon member,
please.
Adv Z L MADASA: The ACDP thanks the House for the discussion. All that we
wanted was for the issue to be discussed here openly. I think everybody has
done that. That is all that we needed. The ACDP does not challenge the
issue of recapitalisation. That is not the issue. What we are doing here is
to present the report that we received from the taxi associations. We are
presenting it before the Minister so that he should take all the
suggestions on board. That is the issue here. [Interjections.]

The Minister has accused the president of the ACDP of ignorance. The truth
is really that the taxi associations are ignorant of the process. That is
what is coming out from the grass-roots level. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Adv Z L MADASA: The Minister said that the recapitalisation process is
going to provide more jobs. To me, that is illogical. How can one lose more
jobs in order to create more jobs? It is alleged that the taxi industry is
also going to empower black people. The truth of the matter is that the
people are already empowered, even at present.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: We cannot hear the
speaker. It is not possible with ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, could we have some order so that we
can hear the hon member.

Adv Z L MADASA: The Minister has said that the process is going to help to
curb violence, but I disagree with him, because violence in the taxi
industry is not really caused by whether the taxis are old or new. There
are other causes of violence. I think that this process is going to create
more pirates and, unless the Ministry addresses that, the pirates are going
to cause violence because they are going to challenge the present owners.

The hon member Mnumzana said that there has been an exhaustive process
since 1994, and the Minister of Trade and Industry has said so as well.
However, the evidence that we have of challenges and protests contradicts
that allegation.

The Minister also said that the process is going to help to address the
issue of structural problems. On that issue, I say that all the car
manufacturers must be given an opportunity to come forward with suggestions
to address structural problems, because if we give the contract to a
preferred bidder, then we will be creating a monopoly and, eventually, the
standards will go down. [Interjections.] Yes, standards.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please, we would like to hear what
the hon member is saying. [Interjections.] Even if we disagree with him, we
need to hear what he is saying.

Adv Z L MADASA: What I want to emphasise to the Minister is that there is
evidence that Sataco co-opts, and taxi councils, as the hon Cronin
conceded, are not fully representative, and that is the burning issue. Taxi
associations say that these people have not been elected by them, so the
Minister cannot deal with people whose mandate is in dispute. The Minister
has to deal with that, otherwise the whole process will falter.

The burning issue according to these people is that the taxi associations
are not represented in these structures and bodies. That must be addressed
so that their concerns can be taken on board. That has to be revisited.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

  CONSIDERATION OF DECISION OF SUBCOMMITTEE OF JOINT PROGRAMME COMMITTEE ON
    FAST-TRACKING OF CHIROPRACTORS, HOMEOPATHS AND ALLIED HEALTH SERVICE
                         PROFESSIONS AMENDMENT BILL

Order disposed of without debate.

Decision ratified in terms of Joint Rule 216(4).

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL
             GOVERNMENT ON FIRE BRIGADE SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

                    FIRE BRIGADE SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE AND LAND
               AFFAIRS ON LAND AFFAIRS GENERAL AMENDMENT BILL

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

                     LAND AFFAIRS GENERAL AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Adv S P HOLOMISA: Madam Speaker, ladies and gentlemen, the Land Affairs
General Amendment Bill, as approved by the Portfolio Committee on
Agriculture and Land Affairs, is a piece of legislation that seeks to
address certain shortcomings in seven existing Acts. These are the Deeds
Registries Act, the KwaZulu Land Affairs Act, the Provision of Land and
Assistance Act, the Restitution of Land Rights Act, the Land Reform (Labour
Tenants) Act, the Extension of Security of Tenure Act and the
Transformation of Certain Rural Areas Act.

On account of the fact that the Bill, together with amendments proposed by
the Department of Land Affairs and the Ministry, enjoyed the unanimous
support of the portfolio committee, the committee mandated me, as
chairperson, to report on its behalf, to this Chamber, on the implications
of the provisions contained in the Bill. It did turn out, however, some
days after the approval of the Bill, that an important stakeholder in the
agricultural sector, Agri SA, formerly known as the SA Agricultural Union,
had problems with some of the new amendments to the Bill. These amendments
related to the Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Act and the Extension of
Security of Tenure Act. I duly advised Agri SA that in view of the fact
that the Bill had already been approved by the portfolio committee, we were
not in a position to open further discussions on the matters raised, but
that the organisation could still make representations to the select
committee when the Bill was sent to the National Council of Provinces. This
approach, I am happy to say, has been accepted by Agri SA.
The Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Act provides that labour tenants may apply
for land, land rights and servitudes. This right to apply must be exercised
before 23 March 2000. It has become evident that, due to their poor social,
economic and educational station, a great number of people who are entitled
to enjoy these rights are not aware of their availability. The Department
of Land Affairs has thus embarked upon a publicity campaign to ensure that
information reaches the intended beneficiaries. The final date for the
lodgement of the applications is thus being extended by a year to 31 March
2001. As stated earlier, the committee approved of this amendment.

It has come to the attention of the Department of Land Affairs that both
the magistrates' courts and land claims courts have been constrained to
grant eviction orders, even in circumstances when the victims of such
orders did not have suitable alternative accommodation due to the fact that
the Extension of Security of Tenure Act does not specifically require that
it first be established that such accommodation is available. This state of
affairs has resulted in a situation where undue hardship has befallen
innocent family members, including children whose schooling is often
disrupted.
In order to address this shortcoming and to promote the constitutional
rights of all involved, the portfolio committee adopted a clause which
provides that the court, before granting an eviction order, must appoint a
probation officer in terms of the Probation Services Act of 1991. This
officer must, within a reasonable period, submit to the court a report on
the availability of suitable alternative accommodation, as well as the
effect of the eviction on the constitutional rights of those affected,
including the children.

The portfolio committee, in its adoption of this clause, signalled its
strong intention to do away with the spectre of the recent past when human
beings were dumped by the side of the road with nowhere to go. We would
urge that appropriate funds be made available to ensure that the work of
these probation officers is done speedily and effectively, so as not to
unduly disrupt the operations of the landowners.

The Restitution of Land Rights Act is being amended to deal with the
imminent expiry of the term of office of the judges of the Land Claims
Court. The amendments provide that the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development must, after consultation with the Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs, cause judges of the High Court to be seconded
to the Land Claims Court. Alternatively, the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development may, at the request of the Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs, appoint an acting judge to the Land Claims
Court for a specified period of time. Cases which have not been finalised
at the time of the expiry of the term of office of a judge, be this a
sitting judge, an acting judge or a seconded judge, must be completed by
that judge.

The amendment relating to the Deeds Registries Act is meant to empower the
deeds registries regulation board to make regulations which will force
conveyancers and certain attorneys to pay fees owing to the Deeds Offices
without the latter having to go the expensive route of litigation in court.

This amending Bill seeks to facilitate rapid delivery of land reform. I
commend it to hon members. [Applause.]

Mnr A J BOTHA: Mevrou die Speaker, ons het 'n jammerlike geskiedenis van
die miskenning van menseregte met betrekking tot grondregte en grondbesit
in ons land in wat beskryf kan word as 'n eeu van onreg. Alle redelike
mense steun dus die doel van dié wetgewing asook die wysigings. Ek haal met
trots aan wat my agb kollega E K Moorcroft gesê het met die
inwerkingstelling van die wetgewing in 1996 (Hansard, Senate, 1996: col
126): (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, we have a lamentable history of disregard for
human rights with regard to land rights and land tenure in our country, in
what may be described as an age of injustice. Therefore, all reasonable
people support the aim of this legislation, as well as the amendments. I
quote with pride what my hon colleague E K Moorcroft said when the
legislation came into operation in 1996 (Hansard, Senate, 1996, col 126):]

  I should like to begin by confirming that the DP is fully supportive of
  the overall objectives of the Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Bill, which
  are to protect the labour tenants against summary or unjust evictions,
  and to protect the rights of labour tenants, particularly in terms of the
  ownership of land.

In a like-minded manner, we find that Agri SA, the umbrella organisation
representing commercial farmers in South Africa, communicates as follows
regarding the amendments:


  Agri SA recognises that the court needs to verify the information.

Net so het die portefeuljekomitee ook die doel van die wetgewing en die
wysigings eenparig gesteun, maar die doel, hoe edel ook al, heilig nie die
middele nie. Ek haal weer eens die agb E K Moorcroft aan waar hy sê
(Hansard, Senate, 1996, kol 126): (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Similarly, the portfolio committee also unanimously supported the aim of
the legislation and the amendments, but no matter how noble the end may be,
it does not justify the means. Once again I quote the hon E K Moorcroft,
who said (Hansard, Senate, 1996, col 126):]


  This Bill, in short, seeks to do the right thing in the wrong way ... in
  what can only be described as a singularly undemocratic and
  nontransparent way.

The portfolio committee was led to believe that all stakeholders had been
consulted. What we find in reality, however, is that Agri SA communicated
on 10 February after our meeting, as follows:


  We are most concerned with two amendments effected to the abovementioned
  Bill without prior consultation.

The relationship between the employer and employee is delicate at all
times, but all the more so in agriculture in which the additional element
of access to land is in the picture. The greatest degree of consultation
and co-operation is required, and, in this case, is clearly forthcoming
from organised agriculture as demonstrated.

In fact, the empowerment of all those who have been effectively excluded by
legislation from farming also depends largely on the input from existing
commercial farmers in order to achieve any measure of success. What we do
not need is high-handed and undemocratic action by any of the role-players,
especially the state. The consequences of such a disservice to the country
are aptly illustrated by the appalling situation in which our neighbour
Zimbabwe now finds itself, directly as a result of such behaviour.
The committee report before Parliament today quite correctly reflects that
the portfolio committee voted in favour of the amendment, in fact
unanimously so. From the foregoing it will, however, be clear that this was
done under a misconception, even to the extent of having been misled, and
therefore the DP demands that the Bill stand over or at least go before the
portfolio committee again so that the matter may be referred back for
consideration. The DP will oppose this Bill and we will definitely address
the matter in the NCOP. [Interjections.]

Prof H NGUBANE: Madam Speaker, amakhosi and fellow members of this
honourable House, the IFP supports the amendments contained in this Bill,
especially as they seek to upgrade the relevant Acts so as to meet most of
the needs of the people whom such legislation was supposed to benefit.
We are particularly encouraged that some of the amendments expressly
address our specifically stated concerns over eviction in the past. Adv
Holomisa, the chairman of the portfolio committee, has already expressed
the crux of the Bill.

The expressed intention of the Department of Land Affairs is to conduct
extensive communication campaigns to inform labour tenants of their new
rights during this financial year. One would also wish to see the
accompanying activity of monitoring and evaluation of how much people
actually benefit from these provisions.

The whole approach embodied in these amendments indicates a move in a very
promising direction and therefore we in the IFP duly congratulate the
Minister on these efforts.

Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Mevrou die Speaker, kollegas, hierdie betrokke
wysigingswetsontwerp het ten doel om sekere beperkende klousules te wysig,
ook sekere klousules van wette wat betrekking het op plaaswerkers en
huurarbeidersgevolge en om onder meer lewering ten opsigte van
grondhervorming ingevolge huidige wetgewing te vergemaklik en/of te
bespoedig.

Die Nuwe NP verwelkom die wysigings met betrekking tot die bespoediging van
grondhervorming. Sekerheid en stabiliteit in ons plattelandse gemeenskappe
sal slegs verkry word wanneer die probleme rondom eienaarskap en
herverdeling uitgestryk is.

In klousule 7 word die tydperk vir die indiening van aansoeke as
huurarbeiders verleng tot 31 Maart 2001. Alhoewel die Nuwe NP hierdie
wysiging in beginsel steun, is ons van mening daar is meer as voldoende tyd
verleen vir sodanige registrasie.

Daar is inligting dat individue wat hoegenaamd nie kwalifiseer nie, of net
marginaal binne die gees van die wetsontwerp, op groot skaal aangemoedig
word om aansoek te doen. Dit perpetueer net die huidige onsekerheid in
gebiede waar huurarbeiderpraktyke beoefen word. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr E A Schoeman: Madam Speaker, colleagues, the aim of this particular
amending Bill is to amend certain restrictive clauses, including certain
clauses of Acts which pertain to farmworkers and labour tenants, and, inter
alia, to facilitate and/or expedite delivery with regard to land reform in
terms of present legislation.

The New NP welcomes the amendments with regard to the expediting of land
reform. Certainty and stability within the rural communities will only be
achieved once the problems surrounding ownership and redistribution have
been sorted out.
In clause 7 the period for the submission of applications as labour tenants
as been extended to 31 March 2001. Although the New NP supports this
amendment in principle, we are of the opinion that more than enough time
has been allowed for such registration.

There is information that individuals who do not qualify at all, or qualify
only marginally within the spirit of this Bill, are being encouraged on a
large scale to apply. This only perpetuates the present uncertainty in
areas where labour tenant practices are being pursued.]

The only clause which can be viewed as being controversial is clause 10
which amends section 9 of the Extension of Security of Tenure Act. I
associate myself with the criticism expressed by the hon member of the DP.
There is justified criticism that legislation tends to favour and protect
the worker, in this instance the farmworker, leaving the employer, in this
instance the farm owner, vulnerable.

Maybe the time has come for all parties, including Government, to convene a
forum in which the reasons for the shedding of hundreds of thousands of
jobs in the agricultural sector can be discussed and possible solutions
proposed. The New NP will vote in favour of this Bill, with the
understanding that clause 10 will be amended in the NCOP and referred back
to this House.

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the Almighty God is a God of justice. To please
him we must do what is right, just and fair, neither showing favouritism
nor denying justice to the poor in their law suits.

The Government's programme of land reform aims at extending security of
tenure to all South Africans, which the ACDP supports. However, we are very
aware of the fine balance that must be found between the rights of the
landless and the landowners. The ACDP recognises the necessity of land
reform, but maintains that it should be aimed at retaining and improving
the existing standards of utilisation. Training of new landowners therefore
is of the utmost importance in order to develop the necessary expertise.

According to international trends, violence is an inevitable result of land
invasion, which occurs when the process is caught up in long legal disputes
and lacks the necessary momentum. Clause 10, unfortunately, has the
potential to create more insecurity and delays. The ACDP will not vote
against this Bill, but we appeal to Government to monitor the results and
to amend it if found necessary.

Dr S E PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the PAC supports the amending Bill. This is an
administrative Bill designed to facilitate and ease a wide variety of
administrative Acts.

These amendments underline the fact that the administration of land in
South Africa is still a conundrum. Land is the trophy over which the
liberation struggle was fought from 1652 to February 1994. The Bill is
prolific on land legislation, but it is superficial.

Land dispossession of the poorest of the poor was colonially entrenched
through the Native Land Act of 1913, which has been consolidated by section
25(7) of the Constitution. This legislation confines land claims to the
arbitrary and illogical date of 1913. It must be amended. The unresolved
land issue is a time bomb which will explode and destabilise this country.

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Madam Speaker, the saying goes: ``It takes two to
tango'', and that is how we started to debate the technical changes to the
Land Affairs General Amendment Bill. When some of the hon members went
slightly off track or missed the rhythm of the discussion, the chair, the
hon Holomisa, brought us skilfully back into step again. The portfolio
committee thus functioned well.

Later, as we waltzed through the detail up to a proposal that a probation
officer be appointed by the court to submit a report on the effect of the
eviction of a person and his family, the music suddenly changed to a fast
foxtrot. Again, the chairperson, the hon Holomisa, succeeded in getting all
members in tune and paved the way for a small addition to a clause of the
Bill to the effect that the probation officer was to submit the report
within a reasonable timeframe. All parties then supported the Land Affairs
General Amendment Bill.

The problem that I have is that, through the answers to the questions that
I put to the officials of the department, we were given the impression that
the specific matter of a probation officer had been discussed and approved
by other parties, especially Agri SA. Research on this matter showed that
it was not the case. That is why I referred to the saying: ``It takes two
to tango.'' If we want to function well in the committee, then we must have
this interaction and not wait for inputs coming from outside. So we would
object to the procedure but not to the Act as such, because we approve of
that.

Let me now say something in general about the Act. I do not want to prolong
the discussion, because the objective of the Act is commendable, but if we
look at the practical application at ground level and see how it is applied
and that the results are negative, then we surely have to revisit the fact
that there are fewer job opportunities in South Africa within the
agricultural sector than there were some time ago. We must look at the
reasons for that.

We must look at the number of houses being built on farms. No new houses
are being built. No upgrading is being done. There must be a reason for
this and we have to look at it. Even farmers who intend to do the above,
and who want to work together to improve the living conditions of
farmworkers, find that they are penalised by certain provisions in the Act,
and we have to rectify that.

There are a large number of farmers who are willing to assist Government in
uplifting the conditions of farmworkers, and if the Act does not help, then
we must look at it again. On that basis, we will support this Act.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the discriminatory policies and laws and
the neglect of the majority of the population during the apartheid regime
have left many people living in fear of being evicted, of losing their
homes or of not having sufficient land for the cattle and sheep to graze.
The Land Affairs General Amendment Bill addresses the above problems
experienced in South Africa.

Although various pieces of legislation have been implemented by the new
democratic Government to redress the inequalities of the past as far as the
land issues are concerned, most rural areas' communication infrastructures
are still under development. The MF welcomes the decision taken by the
Department of Land Affairs to extend its communication campaign to inform
labour tenants of their right to lodge applications in terms of the Land
Reform Act, 1996, until the end of March 2001. After all, special attention
must be given to the rights of labour tenants and the vulnerable people who
occupy rural and peri-urban land. Postmortems and the review of all land
legislation assure the people that the Government is transparent and
accountable.

The MF supports the Land Affairs General Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Speaker, ladies and gentlemen, more than three years
ago we passed a piece of legislation which gave hope to thousands of rural
people. Hope was given to those people who were most subjected to harsh and
inhumane treatment by those for whom they toiled.

When we debated the Extension of Security of Tenure Bill, the opposition
parties opposed it. The DP was not to be outdone in its criticism of the
Bill. They joined in and argued why the poorest section of our society
should not have the security of knowing that they would not find themselves
dumped on a dusty roadside next to a farm, because the farmers do not need
their services after 20 years of service.

This criticism was from a party that never joined the deliberation in the
committee or any public hearing. I mention this because we find ourselves
in a similar position, where the DP and the FA called for a debate on the
Bill - the Land Affairs General Amendment Bill - before us today, yet they
agreed to the proposed amendments as set out in the Bill in the portfolio
committee.

A few questions beg to be asked if the DP and the FA are serious about our
land reform programmes. Or are they just opposing this Bill to score some
cheap political points? We are dealing with people here, not animals.
Children are also involved. Their education is affected during the process
of eviction. There is some form of learning breakdown.

The Bill before us contains some amendments to various pieces of
legislation, which are necessary to unlock the bottlenecks which seem to
prevent implementation of our land reform programmes. In relation to
amendments to section 16 of the principal Act, the Land Affairs General
Amendment Bill seeks to extend the timeframe stipulated in the principal
Act - which is the period in which to make applications for the acquisition
of land - which expires in March 2000. The Bill extends that date, and the
motivation given is that the department intends to embark on an extensive
campaign during this financial year, to inform labour tenants of their
rights to make applications in terms of the Land Reform (Labour Tenants)
Act of 1996. As such, opposition parties rightly agreed to all the proposed
amendments and that there would be no debate, but here we are debating
today. It reminds me of one of the disciples of Jesus, who was walking and
eating with him, but betrayed him in the end.

Here we have proposed amendments to the Extension of Security of Tenure
Act, which envisages plugging loopholes in the Act that were exploited by
some farmers. Section 19(3) of the principal Act makes provision for any
order of eviction instituted before December 1999 to be reviewed by the
Land Claims Court. The amendment seeks to extend this date to a date
determined by the Minister.

Abantu bakithi abavikelekanga. Baxoshwa noma nini kungekho ndawo lapho
bengaya khona. Lo Mthetho uyababonelela nangokuthi kube nendawo eyanele
lapho bezoya khona, hhayi ukuthi bashiywe endleleni njengalokhu kwenzeka
eDelmas naseBadplaas eMpumalanga nakwezinye izindawo. (Translation of Zulu
paragraph follows.)

[Our people are not protected. They are always subject to eviction even
though there is nowhere they can go. This Bill favours them as it
stipulates that there should be a place to which they are evicted; they
should not be thrown out into the street as has happened in Delmas and
Badplaas in Mpumalanga and in other areas.]

In fact, the new clauses will ensure that orders of eviction given before
December 1999 are reviewed.

Okunye ngukuthi kulabo bantu abanikezwe izincwadi zokuthutha abanye kubona
sebehambile. [Another thing is that some of those who have been ordered to
vacate their dwellings have left already.]

Even though orders are still awaiting review, this is causing instability
in the lives of the families.

Ngalokho-ke thina, njenge-ANC, siyawamukela lo Mthetho. Siyabonga kakhulu
ukuthi sibe noMthetho onjengalona, singabi njengalabo abathengisa uJesu
njengoJudas. [For the above reasons we in the ANC accept this Bill. We are
grateful to have a Bill of this nature since it shows that we are unlike
those who betrayed Jesus, the Judases.]

We agreed that we were not going to politicise agriculture, but this is
happening.

Abanye abakhona la eNdlini bamatasatasa bathatha wona lo Mthetho badlale
ngawo ngokwezepolitiki. Lo Mthetho wamukelekile. [Ihlombe.] [Some of us
here in this House are abusing this Bill for our own political agendas.
This Bill is an acceptable one. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, hon members
of the House, I would like to concur with those members who actually see
these amendments as strengthening our objectives of reinforcing the land
rights of those who were previously marginalised by the apartheid system.

I will not go into the details of the debate because this is what hon
members have already done. But I think it is important to highlight a few
issues, firstly, to indicate that there is no difference of opinion among
all the hon members of the committee on the content of the amendments, even
those amendments in the case of which it was indicated that consultation
was not enough.

As a Minister, on behalf of my department, I would like to apologise,
obviously, to those stakeholders whom we were not able to consult in time.
I do, however, wish to indicate that even after the portfolio committee
meetings, we did have a discussion with Agri SA, who indicated to us that
they would go along with the approach proposed by the chairperson - that
they would persuade the portfolio committee to re-examine these matters.
Even Agri SA itself is not opposed to the amendment per se. However there
are concerns about the time that the process may take in ensuring that the
processes followed are not disadvantaging the landowners.

I must, therefore, say that I am happy to note the constructive
participation in this debate of hon members such as Dr E A Schoeman, Mr M
Pheko, as well as my ex-Minister, Mr A I van Niekerk. And I think that, in
this instance, it is correct to say that even if we have disagreements on
some matters, it is proper actually to handle those in a constructive way.
But I must indicate that I was disappointed about the way in which hon
member A Botha dealt with this matter.

He was part of the discussion in the committee. He was also part of the
discussion with the chairperson outside of the committee, where agreements
were made on how this matter would be handled in the NCOP. It is very
unfortunate that he actually took the stand that he took in this Assembly
today. I hope he will reconsider his view and not put the DP in a position
that will not go a long way in helping us to advance our democracy. I
accept this Bill and I put it forward to members for adoption. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Party dissenting).

The House adjourned at 18:50.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     1.     The Speaker and the Chairperson directed the Secretary on 3
         February 2000, notwithstanding the provisions of Joint Rule 221,
         to send the official text (English version) of the Promotion of
         Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill [B 57B - 99]
         to the President for assent pending finalisation of the official
         translation.

                          MONDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2000

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government on
     the Fire Brigade Services Amendment Bill [B 63 - 99] (National Assembly
     - sec 76), dated 9 February 2000, as follows:


         The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
         considered the subject of the Fire Brigade Services Amendment Bill
         [B 63 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 63A - 99].

         The Committee further reports as follows:


         1. In view of the urgent need to restructure the Fire Brigade
              Board, the Committee focussed on the composition of the Board.

         2. The Committee feels that there are other aspects of the
              principal Act that should be reconsidered, and therefore
              recommends a review of the whole Act within a reasonable
              timeframe.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
     the Land Affairs General Amendment Bill [B 64 - 99] (National Assembly
     - sec 75), dated 9 February 2000, as follows:


         The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
         considered the subject of the Land Affairs General Amendment Bill
         [B 64 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 64A - 99].

         The Committee further requests the Minister for Agriculture and
         Land Affairs to furnish it by not later than the end of September
         2000 with a detailed progress report by the Department of Land
         Affairs on the dissemination of information to the public
         regarding the final date for the lodgement of applications for
         labour tenancy rights in terms of the Land Reform (Labour Tenants)
         Act, 1996.

                          TUESDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
     Committees, viz:
     Constitutional Review:

     Appointed: Bakker, D M; Beukman, F; Camerer, S M; Gaum, A H; Van
     Deventer, F J (Alt).

     Ethics and Members' Interests:

     Appointed: Blaas, A; Pretorius, I J.
     Discharged: Dowry, J J; Greyling, C H F.

     Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
     Disabled Persons:

     Appointed: Mbuyazi, L R; Witbooi, J.
     Discharged: Ackermann, C; Mars, I.
     Intelligence:

     Appointed: Olckers, M E.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:

    The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:


     Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:

     Appointed: Pretorius, I J (Alt).
     Discharged: Dowry, J J.

     Correctional Services:

     Appointed: Morkel, C M (Alt).
     Discharged: Pretorius, I J.

     Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

     Appointed: Van Wyk, A (Alt).
     Discharged: Pretorius, I J.

     Finance:

     Appointed: Blaas, A (Alt); Rabie, P J.

     Home Affairs:

     Appointed: Pretorius, I J; Van Jaarsveld, A Z A (Alt).
     Public Accounts:

     Appointed: Blaas, A; Rabie, P J (Alt).

     Report 13 of Public Protector:

     Appointed: Bakker, D M; Beukman, F (Alt).

     Rules:

     Appointed: Bakker, D M; Gaum, A H; Greyling, C H F.

     Safety and Security:


     Appointed: Gaum, A H (Alt); Geldenhuys, B L.
     Discharged: Pretorius, I J.

     Trade and Industry:

     Appointed: Beukman, F; Nel, A H (Alt).
     Discharged: Rabie, P J.

     Welfare and Population Development:

     Appointed: Olckers, M E (Alt); Van Jaarsveld, A Z A.
     Discharged: Pretorius, I J.

2.    Mrs R Z N Capa has been appointed as chairperson of the Portfolio
     Committee on Correctional Services with effect from 15 February 2000.

3.    Mr D A Mokoena has been appointed as chairperson of the Portfolio
     Committee on Home Affairs with effect from 15 February 2000.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         Vote 19 - Improvements of Conditions of Service for 1998-99 [RP
         143-99].

     (2)    Special Report of the Auditor-General on the Investigation into
         the Stockholding of the Department of Defence for 1998-99 [RP 33-
         2000].

2.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Unit Trust
         Companies for 1998.

     (2)    First Report of the Registrar of Short-Term Insurance for 1998-
         99.

     (3)    First Report of the Registrar of Long-Term Insurance for 1998-
         99.

     (4)    Fortieth Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of
         Pension Funds for 1998.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and to the Select
     Committee on Finance.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report of the Technology and Human Resources for Industry Programme for
     1998-99.
     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and to the
     Select Committee on Economic Affairs.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Petition of Mrs H E Liebenberg, widow of the former employee of the
     former South African Railways and Harbours, praying for a pension.


     Referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative
     Proposals and Special Petitions.

2.    The Minister of Transport:


     International COSPAS-SARSAT Programme Agreement dealing with provision
     of distress alert and location data in support of search and rescue
     operations, be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
     1996.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Transport.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    State of Small Business in South Africa Review for 1998.

     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of Support Programme for
         Industrial Innovation for 1998-99.

     (3)    Report and Financial Statements of Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
         Agency for 1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements.

     (4)    Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
         for 1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry:

4.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Veterinary Council
     for 1998-99.
     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the South African
     Airways Unallocatable Debt Bill [B 1 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
     75), dated 15 February 2000, as follows:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the South African Airways Unallocatable Debt Bill [B 1 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         JTM as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

                         WEDNESDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
    relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (i)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
              Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence and the Select
              Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs for
              information:


              Special Report of the Auditor-General on the Investigation
              into the Stockholding of the Department of Defence for 1998-99
              [RP 33-2000].


       (ii) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
              Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
              referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
              Administration and Select Committee on Local Government and
              Administration for information:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 19 - Improvements of Conditions of Service for 1998-99
              [RP 143-99].

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         11 - Defence, Trading Account for Medical Stock, Special Defence
         Account for 1998-99 and the Performance Audit on 1 Military Town
         Management [RP 134-99].


     Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration
     and report, and to the Portfolio Committee on Defence and the Select
     Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs for information.

2.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation:


         Report of the Department of Sport and Recreation for 1998-99 [RP
         200-99].


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation and the
     Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Financial
     Services Board Amendment Bill [B 62 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 15 February 2000, as follows:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Financial Services Board Amendment Bill [B 62 - 99]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         JTM as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 62A
         - 99].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the Amendment to
     Schedule to Basic Conditions of Employment Act, dated 15 February 2000,
     as follows:
          
         The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having considered a proposed
         amendment to Table One of Schedule Three to the Basic Conditions
         of Employment Act, 1997, referred to it, reports as follows:


              The Committee has taken note that the House, in terms of
              section 95(3) of the Act, may pass a resolution within 14 days
              of the date of tabling of the amendment (7 February 2000) to
              the effect that the amendment shall not be binding.

              The Committee is of the view that the amendment is in order,
              and recommends that the House take no further action.

