---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 May 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-05-18
---

THURSDAY, 18 MAY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                   INTERNATIONAL CANDLELIGHT MEMORIAL DAY

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I would like to take this
opportunity to note that today is International Candlelight Memorial Day
for those who have been victims of HIV/Aids, those who have died and those
who are living with it.

In view of this year's theme for this day - break the silence, honour every
death, value every life - I would like to take this opportunity to call on
all parliamentarians to find every possible method to assist in the
campaign for creating public awareness about this disease.

I would like to tell all South Africans who are living with HIV/Aids that
their approach to this disease is appreciated, but also encourage those who
have not yet come out and broken the silence about their suffering - ie
they might be suffering in silence - to see whatever positive signs there
are about breaking the silence regarding their status.

I would also like to encourage all of us to find ways of giving support to
those who are living with HIV/Aids.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms N D NGCENGWANE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with revulsion -


       (a)  reports of a white Randfontein farmer who forced his black
           workers to share accommodation with pigs after failing to evict
           them from his land; and

       (b)  that the farmer saw fit to cut off water supplies to the
           workers, while making sure that the pigs had enough water;


  (2) recognises that practices such as these are not only racist, but
       represent a flagrant violation of basic human rights; and

  (3) calls on all patriotic South Africans to live in a South Africa where
       there are no racial attacks, either on white farmers by black workers
       or on black farmworkers by white farmers.

[Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the political situation in Zimbabwe continues to
       deteriorate;

  (2) recognises that the only lasting solution to the crisis in Zimbabwe
       is the full restoration of democracy through the holding of elections
       which are regarded locally and internationally, as free and fair;

  (3) believes that South Africa cannot apply double standards with regard
       to Zimbabwe by insisting on proper democratic, constitutional and
       legal standards for all parties in our own country while condoning
       the opposite in Zimbabwe; and

  (4) resolves that the parliamentary observer delegation to Zimbabwe -


       (a)  should be trebled in size so that it is large enough to provide
           for effective oversight of the election;

       (b)  has full and free access to all parts of Zimbabwe; and

       (c)  has a clear mandate which ensures that it is not there simply to
           lend legitimacy and recognition to an electoral charade.

Mr E T FERREIRA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the killings that have taken place in the Eastern Cape by a
       member of the Public Order Police Unit of the SA Police Service;

  (2) expresses its condolences to the families, relatives and friends of
       all people who were killed;

  (3) requests the Department of Safety and Security to investigate the
       killings; and

  (4) calls on the senior management of the department -


       (a)  to beef up the psychological counselling of members of the SAPS;
           and

       (b)  to work on promoting the morale of each member of the SAPS.

Ms X C MAKASI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Black Sash yesterday described the living conditions of poor
           black South Africans as worse than it used to be under
           apartheid; and

       (b)  the Black Sash's national director, Hillary Morris, said that
           poor pensioners lived under sickening conditions and that
           nothing had changed;


  (2) recognises that the Government has embarked on an integrated rural
       development strategy and other poverty alleviation programmes;

  (3) acknowledges that these programmes have contributed to alleviating
       poverty amongst our people; and

  (4) commends the Government for pursuing several anti-poverty programmes
       focused on the poorest of the poor and designed to restore their
       human dignity and pride.

[Applause.]

Mnr F J VAN DEVENTER: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op
die volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) 'n ernstige beroep op die Regering doen om kennis te neem van die
       onrustigheid onder Suid-Afrikaanse eiendomsbesitters as gevolg van
       die Regering se ondeursigtige hantering van die voorgestelde Wet op
       Eiendomsbelasting;

  (2) versoek dat die Regering hom verbind tot die beskerming van
       eiendomsreg as die hoeksteen van 'n vryemarkekonomie;

  (3) ook versoek dat die jongste konsepwet vryelik beskikbaar gestel word
       aan lede van hierdie Huis, ander demokraties verkose
       verteenwoordigers asook ander tersaaklike belangegroepe; en

     4) hoop dat verdere bespreking van die wet op 'n deursigtige wyse sal
        geskied waar insette vir oorweging deur die Regering in die openbaar
        deur belanghebbendes gelewer kan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move:


  That the House -
  (1) makes an earnest appeal to the Government to take note of the anxiety
       among South African property owners due to the Government's
       intransparent management of the proposed legislation on property
       taxation;

  (2) requests the Government to commit itself to the protection of
       property rights as the cornerstone of a free-market economy;

  (3) also requests that the latest draft legislation be made freely
       available to members of this House, other democratically elected
       representatives as well as other relevant interest groups; and

  (4) hopes that further discussion of the legislation will take place in a
       transparent manner, in that inputs for consideration by Government
       can be made in public by interested parties.]

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -
  (1) acknowledges that democratic societies are based on the recognition
       of a diversity of interests, values and cultures;

  (2) emphasises that our young, fragile, yet vibrant democracy must be
       nurtured and utilised for real nation-building;

  (3) recognises that the advent of globalisation presents our country with
       opportunities and threats; and

  (4) calls upon the Government to put in place the necessary initiatives
       to promote dialogue and understanding amongst all the diverse
       cultures and interest groups in our country so as to contribute
       towards an understanding of and appreciation for a diversity of
       interests, values and cultures which will -


       (a)  contribute to nation-building and the development of national
           pride and mutual respect;

       (b)  improve understanding and appreciation across international
           cultural lines; and
       (c)  result in preparedness to face global challenges and to identify
           opportunities globally.

[Time expired.]

Mr N B FIHLA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) noting the murder of four people in Port Elizabeth and Uitenhage last
       night;

  (2) further noting that this crime was committed by a policeman, who
       later killed himself; and

  (3) recognising that women and children are often innocent victims in gun-
       related crimes, extends its heartfelt condolences to the families and
       relatives of the deceased.

[Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) supports the Government in its decision to stop all arms and
       ammunition supplies to Zimbabwe, including riot-control-related
       equipment until such time as a full and fair election has been held;
       and

  (2) calls on the Government to assist only with medical and humanitarian
       aid where requested.

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of the Azapo:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the land problem in Zimbabwe exists independently of
           personalities or which party is in power;

       (b)  the war veterans and commercial farmers are co-operating in the
           management of the land crisis in Zimbabwe;

       (c)  as a result of this co-operation some commercial farmers are now
           offering some of the land they hold for redistribution; and

       (d)  a date has now been set for parliamentary elections in Zimbabwe;


  (2) hopes that the newly elected government will take the process of land
       reform forward;

  (3) resolves to wish the people of Zimbabwe well in their endeavour to
       solve their own problems; and

  (4) urges all the peoples of Southern Africa to learn the lessons of
       Zimbabwe well.

[Applause.]

Mr A MLANGENI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the departing South African ambassador to the Netherlands, Carl
           Niehaus, was yesterday awarded the highest honour that can be
           bestowed on representatives of foreign countries by Queen
           Beatrix of the Netherlands; and

       (b)  Niehaus was honoured for his contribution in improving bilateral
           relations between South Africa and the Netherlands;


  (2) congratulates him on representing our country with distinction; and

  (3) calls on him to continue his excellent service to our country back on
       home soil.

[Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that long-serving Durban metro councillor Peter Corbett has
       resigned from the ANC and joined the DP;

  (2) further notes that Councillor Corbett, on resigning from the ANC,
       said that he could not remain with the ANC, charging that the party
       had abandoned nonracialism and claiming that ``many amongst the ANC
       leadership have become, increasingly, stridently anti-white and, less
       publicly, anti-Indian and anti-coloured'';

  (3) notes that Councillor Corbett today also said, ``I joined the ANC
       fully believing in the promised, nonracial and progressive future for
       the party of Luthuli, Tambo and Mandela. Regrettably, I have now
       reached the conclusion that the ANC has become tainted by
       unacceptable practices''; and

  (4) congratulates Councillor Corbett on his move and invites all ANC
       councillors disillusioned by the ANC's lack of delivery and tendency
       towards racism to join the DP.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that SAPS members were used by a farm owner in the
       Cramond area near Pietermaritzburg to stop the burial of Mrs Lembede
       by her family;

  (2) requests the Department of Safety and Security to instruct the
       Midlands senior police management to stop assisting and abetting the
       wrong action of this farmer in respect of the innocent family of
       Lembede; and

  (3) believes that the police must be taught how to handle sensitive
       matters such as the proper handling of the family members of deceased
       people.

Ms M VERWOERD: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the manner in which people of Wallacedene in the Western Cape
       were evicted;

  (2) further notes the Western Cape government's challenge of the Cape
       High Court ruling that the state has a duty to provide shelter for
       the children of evicted squatters;

  (3) recognises that this kind of eviction is detrimental to the
       children's health, safety and wellbeing; and

  (4) calls on the Western Cape government to follow the proper procedures
       as laid down by law when embarking on evictions.

[Applause.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  over and above the inability of the Department of Welfare and
           Population Development to manage its budget, theft and fraud are
           rife in the department;

       (b)  the New NP has uncovered the fact that during the past year a
           total amount of R12 425 000 of pension money was stolen in 782
           instances by 71 officials in five provinces; and

       (c)  the New NP calls on the Minister to report to the House what
           disciplinary steps are being taken against the guilty officials
           and what steps are being taken to recover this money;
  (2) calls on the Minister to set up a task team to investigate stricter
       measures of control within the department; and

  (3) believes that the Department of Welfare and Population Development
       should treat the poor, the pensioners and the disabled with more
       dignity and in a way that will improve the quality of life of these
       people.

[Interjections.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) acknowledges, recognises and reflects on public participation as a
       crucial element of the new system of democracy in this country;

  (2) notes, however, that South Africa has an electoral system which tends
       to create a gap between MPs and the electorate;

  (3) further notes that most public representatives are often not known by
       the people who elected them; and

  (4) calls on the Government to improve and facilitate public
       participation in governance and the parliamentary system of
       representation by, inter alia, introducing a constituency system of
       representation or combining both proportional and constituency
       systems of representation in order to make public representatives
       more accountable to their constituencies.

Ms S C VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes reports that medical waste incinerators are being operated
       illegally or do not adhere to safety standards, presenting a major
       health hazard;

  (2) believes that the responsibility for eliminating this hazard lies
       with the Government, industry and the medical profession; and

  (3) calls on these role-players to work together to come up with
       effective, speedy solutions to this problem.

[Applause.]

Mr E SALOOJEE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the meeting of the Conference of African Towns in Windhoek,
           attended by 1 500 delegates representing 43 African states; and

       (b)  the challenges posed to African urban communities by
           globalisation; and


  (2) declares its support for the sentiments expressed by Mr Badneddine
       Senoussi, the secretary-general of the Union of African Towns, that
       globalisation should be made to work for African cities and towns.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 17 - Independent Complaints Directorate, and Vote No 28 -
SA Police Service:

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker and hon members, today I
would like to acknowledge the presence of some of the MECs who are
responsible for Safety and Security in the provinces and, of course, the
acting Executive Director of the Independent Complaints Directorate.
[Applause.]

The Independent Complaints Directorate has completed its third year of
operation with an ever-increasing number of cases being brought to its
attention by members of the public. The increase in the number of cases
reported to the ICD during the 1999-2000 financial year, compared to the
same period the previous year, bears testimony to the fact that the ICD is
being recognised more widely than before.
During the 1999-2000 financial year, 4 380 cases were reported to the ICD,
as against the figure of 2 874 cases in the 1998-99 financial year. This
represents an increase of 52%. The increase in the number of reported cases
does not necessarily signal an increase in lawlessness on the part of some
members of the SA Police Service, but may be attributed to the increase in
the general awareness of the existence of the ICD and the services which it
is able to provide throughout the country.

At the same time, the number of deaths in police custody or as a result of
police action, decreased from 756 in 1998-99 to 681 in 1999-2000,
representing a decrease of 75 deaths or about 10% per annum. I must point
out that deaths in police custody are not necessarily just due to
negligence on the part of the police, but have been occasioned by such
factors as natural causes, suicide, injuries in custody and injuries prior
to custody, inflicted by vigilante action.

Deaths as a result of police action may be the result of shootings during
the course of arrest, during a crime, during the course of an investigation
or other causes. The number of police-related deaths is still unacceptably
high. In order to assist the SA Police Service, the ICD has embarked on
proactive initiatives to seek intervention strategies.

Recently, the ICD, together with the Centre for the Study of Violence and
Reconciliation, hosted a workshop to debate the development of a strategy
to reduce the risk of police-related deaths. Key role-players, such as the
SA Police Service and nongovernmental organisations, were present at this
workshop. A task team has been nominated to develop a final strategy which
will be presented to the Ministry in September this year.

It is crucial that the SA Police Service should not see the role of the ICD
in an adversarial light, but should see it in a complementary capacity to
their own, so that, together, they can co-operate in ridding the service of
corrupt elements. The ICD, therefore, must be regarded as a partner of the
SA Police Service in Government's efforts to fight crime within the Police
Service, so that the public is presented with a police service which
deserves and receives their respect.

I now wish to highlight some of the successes of the ICD, relative to the
acceptance of their recommendations by the Directors of Public Prosecution.
In the so-called ``BBC case'', two police members were convicted of common
assault and assault with the intent to do grievous bodily harm,
respectively. The sentencing hearing has been postponed until 31 May 2000.

Another incident occurred in Garsfontein, in which two police officers shot
and killed the complainant who had called them out to a housebreaking in
progress. Both officers have been charged with murder and the trial is due
to commence in the Pretoria High Court on 4 September 2000.

In the Ferreira case, three police officers were implicated in the unlawful
shooting of an unarmed robbery suspect in Cape Town. These officers have
been charged with murder and, alternatively, defeating the ends of justice,
and the trial is due to commence in the Cape High Court on 14 August 2000.

In another incident in which a Cape Argus reporter, Thabo Mabaso, was
assaulted so brutally that he lost the sight in his left eye, the nine
police officers implicated in the incident have been charged with assault
with intent to do grievous bodily harm and defeating the ends of justice.
The trial has not been finalised yet.

The ICD has committed itself to the pursuit of proactive strategies and
interventions which will assist the SA Police Service in its transformation
task and in identifying and remedying the underlying causes of certain
problems. To this end, the ICD is currently involved in various research
projects, amongst others, the development of a profiling strategy in order
to identify police members who are prone to violence, femicide committed by
police members with their service firearms and police complicity in the
taxi violence.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasise that the ICD is not out on a witch-
hunt to try to discredit members of the SA Police Service, but it is
assisting in the Government's effort to achieve the noble objective of
transforming the SA Police Service into a service which the nation will be
proud of. The fact that only about 30% of all cases that were investigated,
supervised or monitored by the ICD were found to be substantiated, is an
indication that the ICD is committed only to the promotion of proper police
conduct. The ICD therefore needs the support of the House and, indeed, the
whole nation. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Gibson, according to the speakers' list, you
are due to address the House. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I will take as many speaking turns as you
give me, but I think the hon the Minister is going to make both speeches
now, and I defer to him for the moment.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, pardon me! Thank you very much, hon Gibson.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker and hon members, the run-
up to the year 2000 instilled fear and despair in the minds of many people
and many South Africans. The prophets of doom predicted that the world
would come to an end, that the planets would collide with the earth and
that the millennium bug would chew away every important piece of computer
technology, resulting in major power failures and disruption of the water
supply. Even bank accounts would have been destroyed. But 1 January 2000
did arrive. We are now already in May and we are still here. Nothing has
happened and the prophets of doom have been proved wrong.
When it comes to crime in this country, we have our own prophets of doom,
our own millennium bugs. They only see doom and gloom. However, as with the
millennium bug, we are going to prove them wrong. The year 2000 will see
South Africa's own renaissance in our fight against crime and we will
succeed. Peace, stability and freedom from fear will prevail in our
country. Let all criminals of every shade and colour know that we shall
give them no quarter. There will be no place to hide.

Ons gaan hulle gas gee! [Gelag.] [We will give them blazes! [Laughter.]]

I want to dispel, once and for all, the perception that South Africa is the
crime capital of the world. I recently returned from a UN conference on
crime in Vienna, where the global crime situation was discussed. The United
Nations statistics clearly indicate that various countries in the world
have higher crime rates than South Africa. In fact, according to the
conference, some European cities have a higher incidence of crime than does
Johannesburg, and this is a fact.

According to the national intelligence estimate:
  ... security concerns resulting in localised pockets of violence and
  crime, as well as threats to human security in the form of poverty,
  unemployment and an inadequate provision of social services, must receive
  our undivided attention.

And this they will get.

The police strategic and operational plan for the next three years has been
developed to focus on crime tendencies, flash-point areas, threats and
challenges identified in the intelligence estimate. These include: to
secure the local government elections and major events in our country; to
address extremist right-wing activities, urban terrorism and vigilantism;
to eradicate corruption; and to make major inroads into organised crime
relating to vehicle theft and hijacking, drug trafficking, bank robberies,
cash-in-transit robberies, illegal plundering of our marine resources,
money laundering, hi-tech transnational crime, cyber crime, commercial
crime, illegal firearms, and precious metals and stones. Special attention
is also being paid to violent crimes, including gang violence, and social-
fabric crimes with a specific focus on violence against women and children.
In his speech during the opening of Parliament on 23 June 1999, President
Mbeki touched on various policy issues which should be taken into account
in developing our capacity to deal with crime and security. One of the most
important aspects referred to by the President is that multidisciplinary
interventions be introduced in areas of crime concentration, including all
crimes of violence.

President Mbeki also emphasised the correlation between poverty, crime and
race. In order to address crime and security in its broader sense, a
national security policy has been developed and is being implemented on the
basis of integrating crime prevention and combating with socioeconomic
upliftment. The strategic and operational approach of the SA Police Service
forms part of this broader national security framework. The
multidisciplinary interventions in affected areas that we are currently
implementing constitute one of the main vehicles of operationalising the
security and socioeconomic objectives of the Government.

The SA Police Service strategic plan for the period 2000 to 2003  comprises
four operational and two organisational priorities. The operational
priorities are organised crime, serious and violent crimes, crimes against
women and children and good service delivery. The organisational priorities
consist of improved budget and physical resources, as well as human
resource management. The main focus of our operational priorities is to
reduce crime to such an extent that the operational management of crime can
move from a reactive to a proactive approach, so that socioeconomic
development and other programmes to address the cause of crime can be fast-
tracked and so that communities can live in an environment free from fear
of criminal activities.

Our new operational plan, appropriately named Operation Crackdown, was
implemented as of the end of March this year. It consists of two main
strategies, namely the serious and violent crimes, or geographical
strategy, and the organised crime strategy. In order to make an immediate
impact on crime, 124 police station areas have been identified to be
targeted by means of intervention operations. Fifty per cent or more of all
serious crimes in our country occur in these areas. An additional 18
station areas have been identified where specific crimes and violent
tendencies are prevalent, including the hijacking of motor vehicles, bank
and cash-in-transit robberies, illegal possession of firearms, violent
crimes on farms and smallholdings, taxi violence, intergroup conflict, gang
violence, vigilantism, security threats such as urban terrorism, and crime
against women and children.

In order to ensure a concentrated and co-ordinated approach in the affected
areas, stations have been grouped together to form 68 crime combating
zones. The boundaries of these zones do not necessarily correspond with the
boundaries of police stations. Khondiphe amanzi apho, kwedini! [Give me
water there, my boy!] [Laughter.] In some instances, a crime-combating zone
falls within two or more police areas or even provinces. Crime-combating
zones also include station areas adjacent to the identified hot-spot areas
to prevent crime from spilling over to neighbouring stations.

A crime-combating task group has been established in each crime-combating
zone. The task groups comprise various role-players from the law-
enforcement and security environments such as the SAPS, the SANDF, Home
Affairs, the traffic police and intelligence agencies. Commanders have been
appointed for each crime-combating task group. In most instances, deputy
area commissioners will eventually serve as task group commanders after
their appointment to these posts. Operational officers have also been
appointed for each component of the task groups, including intelligence
investigations, stability and crime prevention.

The different task group components are performing operational functions
such as, firstly, compiling crime intelligence profiles of the areas,
including the who, what, when and how of crime, and secondly, co-ordinating
the investigative activities of all detectives dealing with serious crime
in the zones. Regarding stability, they conduct high-density operations
based on crime patterns and tactical intelligence, for example roadblocks,
air support, and cordon and search operations. Concerning reaction, they
act as a rapid response capability in the zones and trace wanted suspects.
In crime prevention, they introduce sector policing and communication,
conduct awareness programmes and mobilise communities. As part of this
plan, a major service delivery improvement programme is being implemented
to ensure that successes achieved in the short term are sustained in the
medium to long term. This programme entails the development of our human
resources and the channelling of additional resources, both human and
physical, to priority areas and units. Self-sufficiency is critical.
Our operations are already bearing fruit. From the implementation of the
geographical strategy on 28 March until 11 May, a total of 82 563 suspects
were arrested while 3 473 stolen vehicles, 2 509 illegal firearms, 38 206
kg of dagga and 68 019 Mandrax and Ecstasy tablets, inter alia, were
seized. While it is still too early to determine the overall impact of our
interventions, there have been some notable successes. In a number of
priority stations a reduction of between 12% and 20% in reported crime has
been recorded. Although the new strategy only officially commenced at the
end of March, a number of high-density operations already took place during
earlier parts of the year.

The first indications are that this approach is also starting to impact on
our crime tendencies in general. I would like to mention a few positive
developments. In the first three months of this year murder decreased by
22,1%, attempted murder by 9,9% and arson by 17%. Four of the eight
property crimes, namely housebreaking, business-stock theft, shoplifting
and the theft of motor vehicles, showed decreases between 1999 and 2000.
Drug-related crime cases increased between 1999 and 2000 by 18,3%. This is
a strong indication that the war against drugs, which is a big generator of
crime, is starting to pay off. This crime category is reflective of the
work being done by the SA Police to tackle this problem. These crimes must
be detected, because very few people report these crimes to the police.

Although robbery with aggravating circumstances is still on the increase,
there are some positive developments. For example, the four high-profile
types of robbery with aggravating circumstances - the hijacking of trucks
and cars, bank robbery and robbery of cash in transit - have all
stabilised. The fact that there was a significant increase in assault,
especially since the latter part of 1999, indicates that compulsory
reporting under the Domestic Violence Act is standing to pay off. This is
actually a positive development and will hopefully reveal, in time, the
full extent of this terrible domestic crime and social rot in our society.
Most assaults occur within our domestic environment.

Much is often made by certain opposition parties of attacks on farms and
smallholdings in an effort to score political points. The Government is
serious about bringing these deplorable crimes under control. The combating
of crimes against the farming community forms part of a geographical
strategy and we will continue to launch concentrated operations to abrogate
these heinous deeds. In the first three months of this year the violent
attacks on the farming community decreased dramatically by nearly 34%,
compared to the same period in 1999.

We should build on the lessons that we have learned to achieve these
positive results. I intend to improve the rural protection plan when
meeting with organised agriculture. The major focus of our efforts should
be to improve home and hearth protection and to establish rural cells on
every farm and smallholding. I will put a number of proposals to organised
agriculture to ensure success in this regard.

It is, however, not only the farming communities which are being affected
by violent robberies and attacks in their homes. This phenomenon is also
prevalent in urban areas and special focus is being placed on these crimes.
In addition to the geographical strategy, a process has been implemented to
identify syndicates most deeply involved in organised crime. The
neutralisation of these syndicates will lead to a major reduction in the
organised crime trade. This forms the basis of the organised crime
strategy. Since various organised crime syndicates operate in large
geographical areas, including areas across the borders of South Africa, we
are concentrating on the syndicate leaders, the runners of syndicates, the
areas where syndicates are committing crimes, the areas where they market
their stolen and other goods and the routes that they use to transport
these goods.

Regarding the corruption by crime syndicates of Government officials, as in
the case of the geographical strategy, organised crime-combating task
groups have been established under the command of skilled detectives. These
task groups bring the might of the state's organised crime-fighting
capacity together - the police intelligence agencies, Justice, the Revenue
Service, Home Affairs and others - to direct their resources against a
single threat. This will lead to success. Since organised crime syndicates
also operate over the borders of our country, partnerships have been
established between South Africa and our regional counterparts, as well as
with the whole Interpol community.

Joint operations are being launched on a regular basis. In this regard I
would like to mention a few. A special investigation team was assembled
during January to conduct an investigation into the alleged distribution of
counterfeit and stolen medicines on the South African market. Members of
this team were assembled from various police units in several provinces.
The investigation thus far has been conducted in close co-operation with
members of the Department of Health and the Department of Justice. Various
suspects have already been arrested. Counterfeit, expired and stolen
medicine to the approximate retail value of R100 million has been seized.
Indications are that the counterfeit medicine was imported from Asia.
Machines used for the repackaging of medicine and repacking material, as
well as 50 100 counterfeit medicine boxes, 13 100 counterfeit labels and 12
500 counterfeit packaging inserts, were also seized.

On 11 February, after two years of investigation, a joint operation between
the SA Police Service and SA Secret Service led to the dismantling of a
Mandrax plant in the Mozambican capital, Maputo. Methaqualone powder and
chemicals for the production of 13 million Mandrax tablets with an
approximate street value of R1 billion were also seized. Various suspects
have been arrested.

Since the middle of last week a SAPS team has been interacting with
Mozambican colleagues to destroy arms caches in our neighbouring country.
Major successes have already been achieved. For example, large numbers of
firearms, including AK-47s, PPSHs and other armaments, including landmines,
hand grenades, plastic explosives, TNT, RPG-7s, mortar tubes and
projectiles, and even an anti-aircraft gun, have been destroyed. We will
continue with these operations for the next few days. In all these
operations we have had excellent co-operation from our counterparts in
Africa and the rest of the world. As such it is also a central pillar of
our long-term investment in social crime prevention, in terms of which we
address the underlying causes of crime and the factors that exacerbate
violent crime. These factors include alcohol abuse, drugs, gangsterism and
easy access to firearms.

We are not only concentrating on high crime areas and syndicates. We have
introduced a specific operation dubbed ``1 001 Dalmatians'' in order to
arrest wanted persons for whom warrants have been issued. Tracing teams
have been established to track them down and remove them to where they
belong, behind bars, so that they can face trial. In the first phase of the
operation about 1 500 wanted persons are being targeted. Nearly 1 000 of
them have already been arrested and operations are being intensified. The
second phase comprises a continuation of the strategy to arrest about 30
000 wanted persons identified by the criminal records centre.

Many questions may have been raised about the arrest and deportation of
undocumented persons during operation. While we are not specifically
targeting undocumented persons as such, we are focusing on those involved
in organised crime and other criminal activities. However, failing to be in
possession of the required documentation is a criminal offence in terms of
our country's and every other country's immigration laws. To be selective
in the application of any law amounts to anarchy, and this will never
happen in South Africa. Therefore I will not apologise to anybody for
enforcing the laws of this land. The director-general's committee for
justice, crime prevention and security and the interministerial security
committee have decided to base our joint crime-combating initiative on the
geographical and organised crime strategies.

However, crime cannot be the responsibility of the law enforcement
environment alone. The causes of crime and crime generators must also be
addressed. Therefore crime is also being tackled in co-operation with the
social cluster departments. An amount of R54 million has been reserved to
technologically link all relevant departments in the integrated justice
system.

Much of our social crime prevention investment is focused on partnership
interventions, in support of the President's call for an integrated
approach to crime prevention and poverty alleviation in identified pilot
areas. First-phase implementation is in four provinces and focuses on eight
areas targeted for urban renewal. In four, Mdantsane, Motherwell,
Khayelitsha and Mitchell's Plain, local teams are already driving the
process.

The implementation of an urban strategy in the greater Johannesburg metro
will provide us with excellent lessons for local crime prevention that can
be used elsewhere. I would like to thank the national commissioner,
Commissioner Selebi, for the sterling work he has done in this regard.

Regarding personnel, apart from a number of new entrants appointed at
senior level, this financial year will see the training of 1 200 new
constables. [Applause.]
Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, it is a great pleasure for me to welcome
the commissioner and all his senior officers, to say how glad we are to
have them with us and how proud we are of the work they do.

Having said that, I want to say that the important people in the SAPS are
not the top brass, but the ordinary policemen and policewomen at our police
stations throughout South Africa. [Applause.] They are the people who are
at the interface between society on the one hand and the criminals on the
other. They are the people we have to remember. They are the people we have
to empower. They are the people we have to strengthen.

When the hon the Minister of Safety and Security was appointed, there was
an improvement in the morale of members of the SAPS. There was an
improvement in public confidence in the capacity of the SAPS to succeed in
the fight against crime. In fact, last year some research showed that 60%
of people in South Africa thought that the Government had some control over
crime, whereas previously a majority thought they had no control over
crime.

However, I regret to say that some of this is changing, and it is the hon
the Minister's fault, because he has made the fatal mistake of
overpromising and underdelivering on safety and security in South Africa.
Today the hon the Minister made many promises - many good promises and many
new promises. He also said about the criminals: ``Ons gaan hulle gas gee!''
I fear that the gas he had in mind was just hot air. [Laughter.] However, I
pray that he going to do more than gas the criminals with hot air; that he
is actually going to catch them and make them pay for it, and make them
realise that crime does not pay in South Africa.

Unlike the ANC, the DP takes an active interest in the state of policing in
our country. [Interjections.] Indeed, the DP launched a campaign to visit
more than 100 police stations throughout the country with a view to finding
out what progress has been made in the six years since the ANC began to
manage, or fail to manage, the SAPS. There can be no substitute for
sustained and effective policing at police station level, because it is
there that the police must succeed against the high level of ordinary
murders, assaults, rapes, housebreaking and theft of motor vehicles which
are committed every day in our country.

What the DP found was an eye-opener. How can we expect the SAPS to succeed
in the fight against crime when the conditions that we found at our police
stations, and at grass-roots level, are those which seem to be common
everywhere in the country? We expect our police to work in slumlike
conditions, in many cases with police stations that are entirely inadequate
and should not be the places where our police have to work.

The state of repair of some buildings is shocking. One example: One goes to
the Edenvale police station and there one has rising damp from an
underground fountain which floods the corridors of the police station. This
has been going on for years. It is not something that happened a minute
ago. [Interjections.] He pointed this out to us. He reported this to me,
but the Minister has done nothing about it. [Interjections.]

The number of vehicles is often insufficient. For example, one can take a
place like Brakpan, where the police have four vehicles for visible
policing, and the newest of those vehicles has 120 000 km on the clock.
Then what about the number of visible police engaged per shift at various
places all over the country? Another example is at Rustenburg, where 15
uniformed police are available for visible policing for a population of 370
000 people. Morale suffers because of the unbearable workload which we
impose on our policemen and policewomen.

The number of cases being investigated by each detective in most cases is
staggering, and they cannot possibly do justice to that number. One need
only go to my own police station, the Sandton police station, where there
is a case-load of between 90 and 120 cases for each detective. Do we expect
them to solve the problem with that sort of case-load? If one takes the
shortage of uniformed police detectives and civilian staff, at virtually
every police station one goes to they will tell one that their problem is
that they are seriously short of policemen and policewomen, and that if we
only would give them the staff which the police's own figures say they
should have, they would be able to do the job.

For another example, one can go to a place like Viljoenskroon. There is a
police station there which is 46% understaffed and has 51 vacancies.
[Interjections.] I could go on and tell hon members about every one, and I
invite hon members to deny that this is the situation. Hon members know
that it is true. That member comes from the Free State and should be
ashamed about the fact that he has done nothing to pressurise the Minister
to do something about it.

The ratio of police to population is shocking. The worst that I came across
is at the Katlehong police station, where the ratio is one policeman for
the 5 494 people living there. Can hon members believe a ratio like that?
Can hon members expect that there could be anything other than an
unparalleled crime wave? No one can deny that South Africa is underpoliced
or in anything other than a situation which deserves immediate attention,
and should have received that attention during this budget.

The previous Minister was fond of saying South Africa was not underpoliced.
He compared it with the rest of the world. I say that if one goes to the
police stations, one can see that we are seriously underpoliced, and we
will never get ourselves out of this kind of situation until that is fixed.
What is true for these stations that we visited - I have mentioned a couple
of them - is true all over South Africa. Any ANC members who know anything
about policing and who pay visits to police stations will agree with every
word that I have said. [Interjections.]
The Minister's failure to deal with the crisis at police station level has
meant that the victims of crime have been short-changed, because he has not
done what he promised to do. He tours around the country, bragging and
blustering and beating his chest and telling us all sorts of things, such
as this, about the crime-combating strategy:


  ... a successful campaign of the kind one is talking about must give
  South Africans a sigh of relief by early next year.

That was on 14 October 1999. How early this year is he talking about? Or
does he really mean early next year or the year after? [Interjections.]
Does he remember the bombers who were going to be in jail by Christmas?
Which Christmas?

Well, where is the sigh of relief? I want to hear about it. And where are
the bombers? While the victims of crime suffer, and their families weep,
the criminals go free. By now the Minister must surely have realised that
it takes more than a pair of dark glasses, a mean marine hairstyle and
tough talk to succeed in the fight against crime in South Africa.
[Interjections.]
Sometimes the hon the Minister reminds me of one of his predecessors, Mr
Adriaan Vlok. Vlokkie liked to climb into a camouflage uniform and go out
and stand at the blockades and roadblocks with his boys. I want to remind
him what happened to Mr Vlok. Be warned!

No matter how nostalgic the Minister may be about his days in the trenches,
the new-style military operation of the sort that has a sharp concentration
on an area is not going to work in the long term. I must say that, where it
does bring immediate relief and a pause, and where a whole lot of people
are arrested, then, of course, to that extent, it is welcome.

But I must say to the hon the Minister that those operations and shock
tactics do not work in the longer term, because once the operation is over,
the same police station is still - one just needs to go to Hillbrow -
filthy dirty; that same police station is still undermanned; that same
police station is still underequipped; and that same police station has not
got enough men to do the job to deal with the enormous population in that
area.

So the Minister's shock tactics were great for that night and that week,
but did not solve the problem. And while the operation was going on, a
number of police officers from all the surrounding areas were taken away.
They denuded all the other areas in order to concentrate their forces in
one place for a day, or night, or a week, and that is not a long-term
solution. We will not succeed in the fight against crime with a fire
brigade style of crime combating, designed simply to put out fires. That
strategy is flawed because it is like taking antibiotics for a raging
fever, but stopping the course just as the fever begins to subside and long
before the fever has been cured.

What we need are long-term solutions. What we need is to tackle this matter
where it has to be tackled, and that means we have to look at our budget
and ask: Does it provide the answers that we can identify to fix crime and
manage crime in South Africa? I regret to say that this budget does not
provide the answers because we know that, according to the police's own
figures, they are short of 7 000 people at police station level. It has
probably gone up and is closer to 8 000. Yet provision is only made to
employ 1 200 policemen to fill vacancies this year. With the number of
people who die, commit suicide, are killed, retire and resign, the number
of police officers is going down all the time instead of going up.

I regret to say that, for these reasons, the DP cannot support a budget of
R15,45 billion for this year. [Interjections.] If the hon the Minister
pulls up his socks, we hope that we will be able to support his budget next
year. I truly hope to be able to do that. But I want to say that, despite
this, the DP is fully supportive of the dedicated members of the SAPS who
put their lives on the line every day, and we extend our condolences to the
partners, to the families and to the friends of policemen and policewomen
who have died in the cause of fighting crime in this country.

We want to see a larger but more decentralised police force. We want to see
a redistribution of personnel by bringing them down to station level. We
want to see more civilians carrying out routine duties. We want to see
outsourcing of functions such as maintenance of vehicles. We want to
recruit the brightest and the best into the police force because we want to
be proud of it. We want to see the metro forces established now, not just
be promised for election purposes.
I believe that crime can be beaten in South Africa. I really believe that,
and I hope that the Minister really believes it. If we carry on a dialogue
- I will shout at him a bit and he will shout at me a bit - then perhaps we
will get some solutions so that we really do start beating crime in South
Africa. We really have nothing that is more important than that.
[Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Speaker, Comrade Minister, hon members, it is a pity
that Mr Douglas Gibson does not attend any committee meetings.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order!

Mr M E GEORGE: In the first place, when Mr McIntosh, who was doing well in
the safety and security committee co-operated and realised the importance
of fighting crime in this country, he was removed immediately by Mr Gibson.
[Interjections.] But the heavens protested. Immediately after he was taken
off the safety and security committee, he broke his leg. [Laughter.] I
think the heavens were really protesting. [Interjections.]

All parties in our committee agree, with the exception of Mr Douglas
Gibson, that crime is one of the biggest challenges facing our hard-fought-
for democracy. [Interjections.] It is not only South Africans who commit
crime in our country, but also people from neighbouring countries and many
other parts of the continent. It is logical that partnerships must be
formed with other African countries, or even beyond the continent, to
complement partnerships among national, provincial and local government,
churches, business, youth and other civil society groups. This huge task
cannot be relegated to party-political point-scoring or cheap propaganda,
of which Mr Gibson seems to be a champion.

It grieves me to observe that some prominent church leaders have now joined
Mr Gibson in using crime for cheap propaganda. The ANC, in supporting this
budget, wishes to make an appeal to all political parties to join hands in
this war against crime. It is not going to be a mere pointing of fingers,
it is going to be commitment to working and attending committee meetings.

Mr Gibson is already planning another protest, so he is not listening.
[Laughter.] [Interjections.] While there might be inadequacies in our fight
against crime, I want to say to Mr Gibson that it is equally irresponsible
to create the impression that nothing is being done. [Interjections.]

At this stage I want to commend the Minister for his tireless endeavours
and his commitment to taking the fight to the criminals. I want to
congratulate the new national commissioner, Mr Jackie Selebi, and the newly
appointed deputy commissioners and divisional commissioners. Their vision
and their plan will definitely knock down the levels of crime in this
country, if they are implemented.

I say ``if they are implemented'', because in the past few years there have
been good strategies and plans which ended up on paper only. In these few
months the national commissioner has demonstrated that he wants to tackle
crime head on. I want to say to the commissioner: ``Go for it'', and that
the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security will give him all the
support he needs.

Although statistics are not everything, it is important to know that some
battles have been won. The murder rate for the second half of 1999 and for
the first few months of this year continues to show a decline. The latest
monthly report of the SAPS shows that rape continues to show a stabilising
trend, but remains unacceptably high.

There is some concern that the incidence of farm attacks is again
increasing, following a period of calm after the rural summit held in
October 1998. We are all concerned about the situation, and no party can
claim to represent farmers. We must seriously consider another summit as a
follow-up for the one in 1998. I had an opportunity to talk to
representatives of Agri SA. They also expressed the view that no party here
in this Chamber can claim to be representing farmers. [Interjections.]

Statistics show that more than 200 members of the Police Service are killed
each year in the course of their duties. I want to say to the Minister that
the situation cannot be tolerated. Tough measures must be taken against
elements in our society who kill members of the Police Service.

It is good, proper and convenient to talk in this Chamber about statistics,
increases, decreases and stabilising, but what are the feelings and
perceptions of the people on the ground? There is a feeling among some
people that Government has lost control over crime. They believe that
Government is soft on crime and that criminals are treated with kid gloves.
The issue is not whether their perception is right or wrong. The question
is: What are we doing to bring down the levels of crime?

The Minister has announced a clear plan that goes beyond our borders for
the efficient and effective delivery of service. The SA Police Service will
have to do a few things. Discipline within the Police Service remains a
matter of concern. Absenteeism and sick leave through misuse of Polmed is
still a problem, though it is being addressed. Corruption within the Police
Service has not been dealt with effectively. Dockets still get lost and
police vehicles are still misused. There is enough evidence to suggest that
some members are involved in car theft syndicates, drugs, hijackings; and
there is even talk that the police is involved in taxi violence. I would
like to say to the Minister and the national commissioner that these rotten
apples must be taken out of the system as a matter of urgency.

While we deal mercilessly with the corrupt elements within the Police
Service, some incentives must be created for police members who are
prepared to go the extra mile. I would like to inform Mr Gibson that there
are many policemen and policewomen who are prepared to work and to lay down
their lives to protect the citizens of this country. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

Everything must be done to boost the morale of the police, as the Minister
has already done. The Independent Complaints Directorate and the
anticorruption units are doing a good job, and they must be supported. A
meeting with Public Works must be arranged soon to look at means of fast-
tracking the building and renovating of police stations. Regarding some of
the police stations - Mr Gibson used this again for point-scoring - much
needs to be done. There is a need to renovate and build police stations.

Lastly, all the efforts of the Minister and the national commissioner, the
police and this Parliament will be a dismal failure if there is no
community involvement. It is the community that buys stolen goods. The
criminals do not stay in heaven, or in hell yet. They stay among our
people. [Interjections.] Some parents benefit from crime committed by their
children. The community police forums must be established and strengthened
in all parts of the country. Even in terms of transforming the police,
success depends on the participation of the communities.
We must acknowledge the successes of the police under trying circumstances
in having to deal with dangerous criminals whose morale is very high, who
even break into houses of members of the police. These successes were led
by the Minister, who demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt that the ANC
Government does care. Operational Crackdown has led to 8 200 arrests
because of the commitment and the high morale of the police. I would like
to say to Mr Gibson that this has also proved that to deal effectively with
crime, one does not need a lot of money and a huge number of policemen and
policewomen. If we are properly organised, as the police are now and as has
been demonstrated by the new national commissioner, and we have a well-
trained intelligence service and detectives, we will be able to deal with
crime effectively.

To our people in the rural areas, townships and suburbs, I want to say that
the situation is under control. Do not believe what Mr Gibson says, as he
has been referred to as a prophet of doom and gloom. He is an alarmist.
[Interjections.]

With the Minister and commissioner Selebi, there is no way that crime could
get out of control. To the police I say that the war against crime was
declared by the President in his address to the nation. Crime may only have
been referred to in four lines of his speech, something which sceptics like
Gibson make an issue of, but it was a clear message to the criminals. If
mistakes are made in this war - I am talking about genuine mistakes - the
ANC Government will never abandon them. Our track record speaks for itself.

It must be understood that the police are dealing with desperate, senseless
criminals who have no respect for life or property. All of us stand to
benefit if we support the police. [Applause.]

Mnr E T FERREIRA: Mevrou die Speaker, as inwoner van Port Elizabeth wil ek
graag namens die IVP ons party se innige meegevoel betuig teenoor alle
familielede en vriende van die mense wat gesterf het in gister se tragedie,
waarby 'n polisie-inspekteur betrokke was.

Die IVP sal altyd die beginsel steun dat 'n onafhanklike liggaam heeltemal
los van die Polisiediens polisie-optrede moet ondersoek. Daar kan nie van
'n mens verwag word om jou eie familie ordentlik te ondersoek nie. Net so
is daar nie werklik sprake dat die Polisiediens hulself deeglik sal
ondersoek nie.

Na aanleiding van bogenoemde sal die IVP die begroting steun van die
Onafhanklike Klagtesdirektoraat. Ons is egter nie oortuig dat hulle in hul
huidige vorm en optrede óf onafhanklik óf neutraal is nie. Aan die
positiewe kant moet ons die direktoraat daarmee gelukwens dat hulle feitlik
nie meer gebruik maak van polisiegeboue om hul kantore te huisves nie.

Hulle moet ook gelukgewens word met sekere spesifieke polisie-optrede wat
hulle oopgevlek het. Daar is sekere polisie-optrede wat doodeenvoudig net
nie goedgepraat kan word nie, maak nie saak hóé simpatiekgesind 'n mens die
Polisiediens is nie.

Wat die onafhanklikheid van die direktoraat betref, is daar met reg 'n
groot vraagteken. Daar is blykbaar nog heelwat gewese polisiebeamptes in
hul personeel, en dit wek ernstige kommer dat tot 85% van hul sake deur
dienende SAPD-personeel ondersoek word.

Wat die grootste kommer wek omtrent die direktoraat, is dat hulle nie as
neutraal gesien word deur mense binne of buite die Polisiemag nie. Die
gevoel is dat hulle politiek gedrewe is, en dat hulle uit hul pad sal gaan
om polisiemanne en -vroue in die moeilikheid te bring wat hulle en hulle
politieke base voel nie politiek aanvaarbaar is nie. Wanneer 'n
transitorower of ander uiters gevaarlike misdadiger gearresteer word, is
hulle darem alte gretig om op die toneel te kom om te sien of die
gearresteerde persoon nie 'n geswelde wang of 'n skrapie opgedoen het
tydens die arrestasie nie.

Persepsies en realiteite is somtyds moeilik om te onderskei, maar
persepsies doen ewe veel skade aan 'n mens se beeld as realiteite. Daar is
'n persepsie hier in die Wes-Kaap onder sekere baie senior speurders dat
daar op baie senior vlak in die Wes-Kaap se direktoraat noue bande met
Pagad is. Hulle sê as 'n mens lede van Pagad gaan arresteer, dan wag die
direktoraat al amper daar vir jou. Hierdie persepsie, waar of vals, is glad
nie goed vir die beeld van die direktoraat nie.

'n Paar jaar gelede - ek dink dit was ongeveer in 1996 - het daar by die
Mandeni-polisiestasie in KwaZulu-Natal meer as 30 vuurwapens vermis geraak.
Die saak is aan die direktoraat in KwaZulu-Natal gerapporteer. Dit wil
voorkom of die direktoraat tot vandag toe nie vreeslik gretig is om met die
ondersoek te vorder nie. Is dit dalk om politieke redes dat daar nog nie
veel van die saak gekom het nie? Is dit dalk 'n geval dat mense wat hulle
wil beskerm dalk aan die kaak gestel kan word?

Dit is ook heeltemal duidelik dat die direktoraat hulself probeer inwurm
waar hulle nie werklik hoort nie. Tydens 'n werksessie met die
polisiebestuur in die Noordelike Provinsie wou die direktoraat selfs
betrokke wees by die bevorderings van polisiemanne en -vroue in die
betrokke provinsie. Dat hulle 'n aanbeveling kan maak aan die Kommissaris
van Polisie oor die bevorderbaarheid al dan nie van spesifieke persone in
spesifieke gevalle, is heeltemal aanvaarbaar. Direkte betrokkenheid by
algemene bevorderings oorskry ongetwyfeld die perke. Kan dit om politieke
redes wees dat hulle met bevorderings wil inmeng?

Daar is talle voorbeelde waarvan 'n mens gebruik kan maak om aan te dui dat
die Onafhanklike Klagte-direktoraat 'n baie lang pad het om te loop om Suid-
Afrikaners binne en buite die Polisiediens te oortuig van sowel hul
onafhanklikheid as hul politieke neutraliteit. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr E T FERREIRA: Madam Speaker, as a resident of Port Elizabeth, on behalf
of the IFP, I would like to express our party's sincere condolences to all
family members and friends of the people who died in yesterday's tragedy,
in which a police inspector was involved.

The IFP will always support the principle that an independent body entirely
separate from the Police Service should investigate police activity. One
cannot be expected to investigate one's own family properly. In the same
way there is no real suggestion that the Police Service will investigate
itself thoroughly.

Arising from the aforementioned the IFP will support the budget of the
Independent Complaints Directorate. However, we are not convinced that in
their current form and activities they are either independent or neutral.
On the positive side we must congratulate the directorate on the fact that
they virtually no longer make use of police buildings to house their
offices.

They must also be congratulated on certain specific police activities which
they have exposed. There are certain police activities which simply cannot
be condoned, no matter how sympathetic one feels towards the Police
Service.

As far as the independence of the directorate is concerned, a large
question mark justifiably exists. There are apparently quite a number of
former police officials on their staff, and it is cause for serious concern
that up to 85% of their cases are investigated by serving SAPS staff.

The greatest cause for concern regarding the directorate is that they are
not viewed as neutral by people inside or outside the Police Force. The
feeling is that they are politically driven, and that they will go out of
their way to get policemen and women into trouble who they and their
political bosses do not feel are politically acceptable. When an in-transit
robber or other extremely dangerous criminal is arrested, they are all too
eager to appear on the scene to see whether the arrested person has not
sustained a swollen cheek or a scratch during the arrest.

Perceptions and reality are sometimes difficult to distinguish, but
perceptions do as much damage to one's image as realities. There is a
perception here in the Western Cape among certain very senior detectives
that there are close ties with Pagad at a very senior level in the Western
Cape's directorate. They say that when one goes to arrest a member of
Pagad, the directorate is virtually waiting there for one. This perception,
true or false, is not at all good for the image of the directorate.

A few years ago - I think it was approximately in 1996 - more than 30
firearms went missing at the Mandeni Police Station in KwaZulu-Natal. The
matter was reported to the directorate in KwaZulu-Natal. It would appear
that to date the directorate is not very eager to progress with the
investigation. Is it perhaps for political reasons that not much has so far
come of the case? Is it perhaps a case that people whom they want to
protect may be shown up?

It is also quite clear that the directorate is trying to worm its way in
where it does not really belong. During a workshop with the police
management in the Northern Province the directorate even wanted to be
involved in the promotions of policemen and policewomen in the relevant
province. It is entirely acceptable that they can make a recommendation to
the Commissioner of Police on the promotability or otherwise of specific
persons in specific cases. Direct involvement in general promotions
undoubtedly exceeds the limits. Could it be for political reasons that they
want to interfere with promotions?

There are numerous examples one could cite to indicate that the Independent
Complaints Directorate has a very long way to go to convince South Africans
within and outside the Police Service of both their independence and their
political neutrality.]

Mr R P ZONDO: Madam Speaker, I have a few words of caution for the hon Mr
Gibson. Today he has really exposed himself by saying that he was only
relying on research. Failing to reason is in effect a punishment to
innocent people who come running to join his party. As a result, they are
hypnotised, not knowing where to go now. [Laughter.] I must indicate to him
that, if he keeps on with this type of approach, he is going to fall very
hard with his face level to the ground, as his political mentor Binyamin
Netanyahu did. [Interjections.]

I rise in support of this Vote. In the little time allocated to me, I want
to focus on a few issues which I think are very critical in our endeavour
to fight crime. These are crime intelligence and recruitment and training
for SA Police Service members in general and detectives in particular.

The SA Police Service has identified the major crime syndicates in this
country. According to the police, there are about 100 major syndicates
currently operating within South Africa's borders. It is these major
syndicates that are being targeted by the police and most of them are
highly infiltrated.

Since 1994, organised crime groups in South Africa have become increasingly
sophisticated. They are often well financed, heavily armed and dangerous,
which are issues that the Minister alluded to. Although drug peddling is
the dominant activity of these syndicates, they are also involved in all
sorts of other crimes including vehicle theft, hijacking, prostitution,
gambling and forgery.

The structures of these syndicates are often quite complex. In most cases
they appear to be legitimate business enterprises. Different syndicates may
operate together in networks to further one another's interests. No one is
more aware of these threats than the ANC. The ANC-led Government remains
firm and unequivocal when it comes to dealing with these syndicates.

In 1999, we introduced and passed the Prevention of Organised Crime Act.
Although there were loopholes in the beginning, this law has so far yielded
the desired results. It has proved to be a major deterrent to organised
crime because we want to hit criminals where it hurts most - in their
assets. We have adopted a zero-tolerance approach that says that no one is
going to benefit from crime.

The Government established the Assets Forfeiture Unit. The unit was set up
after the passing of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act in February 1999
to seize the proceeds of crime via the civil courts. Today, criminals
recognise very well that there is no breathing space for them. We are
moving swiftly to close down on them.

Recently, Commissioner Pruis and his dedicated team were here in Parliament
to address the portfolio committee. Amongst other things, they confirmed
that bomb attacks in the Western Cape, car hijackings and cash-in-transit
heists in Gauteng, and political violence in KwaZulu-Natal have decreased
dramatically.

The SA Police Service should ensure that multilateral agreements in respect
of co-operation and mutual assistance in the field of crime combating,
which was signed in 1997 by countries of the Southern African region, is
effected and is producing the expected results. We believe that these
agreements can help us deal with cross-border crimes, with specific
attention to syndicated crime.

Interpol has recorded impressive results in as far as the extradition of
suspects that are implicated in crimes such as fraud, drug trafficking,
child molestation and murder are concerned. They have extradited suspects
from countries as far afield as Australia, Portugal, England and Zimbabwe,
to name a few. There is no doubt that the problems are immense and
solutions are not easy to come by. But, at least, we have a plan and we are
committed to making it work.

We appreciate the fact that the SA Police Service is dealing with organised
crime in a holistic manner. In the past, organised crime was dealt with in
a disjointed manner, with each specialised unit investigating different
categories of crime, such as the smuggling of illegal firearms, car theft
or drug smuggling. A new strategy has been developed to deal with this
organised crime in a more organised and integrated manner.

Rather than focusing on individual categories of organised crime, the SAPS
has undertaken to unite all units into one unit that will focus on all
kinds of crime. What this means in practice is that detectives from all the
different specialised units will fall under the command of a single person.
This applies to internal units, such as the vehicle and firearms unit, and
individuals from outside structures such as Interpol. These people will
work together in identifying hot spots to ensure a co-ordinated and
holistic approach. Intelligence officers are now being appointed at all
police stations.

The SA Police Service has also made an important policy change in relation
to combating corruption within the police. In the past, the anticorruption
unit was a separate unit within the SA Police Service. The SAPS has now
decided that, because corrupt police generally co-operate with syndicates,
anticorruption units should now fall under the detective services. This
will facilitate co-ordination in terms of investigations.

We are aware of the fact that one of the serious problems facing South
Africa is an insufficient criminal intelligence capacity. We cannot
overemphasise its importance. We want to encourage the SAPS to take drastic
measures to address this. The first step towards addressing this problem
should be intensive detective training and intelligence gathering. In
addition, we recommend that a large number of the 2 400 new recruits who
will be recruited during this budget year should not only be trained to
become ordinary detectives, but should receive advanced detective training.

The most important measure of success of the police in dealing with crime
is the clearance rate of cases. It is disturbing to note that the clearance
rate of dockets declined between 1995 and 1998. We appreciate the fact that
the SAPS has developed strategies to deal with this problem. This includes
the implementation of an effective detective plan. Central to this plan is
a need to ensure that detective and intelligence officers are better
equipped.

I just want to mention another area which I think we really need to look
into. I want to tell the hon the Minister that there is a lot of concern
among our people on the question of crime. The critical issue is that there
is a general perception that our legal system favours criminals and not the
victims of crime. Section 35 of the Constitution entrenches a suspect's
right to silence. Suspects often exercise this right, resulting in
investigations being impeded and delayed. We would appreciate it if the hon
the Minister would open a public debate on this because, at present, the
public and the police feel disadvantaged by this whole issue. [Applause.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Mevrou die Speaker ...

Mnr J H MOMBERG: Wat het jy met die sewentiende te maak, Boy?

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Ek wil vir die ANC die waarheid vertel!
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans sentences follows.)

[Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker ...

Mr J H MOMBERG: What do you have to do with the seventeenth, Boy?

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: I want to tell the ANC the truth! [Interjections.]]

Madam Speaker, the previous speaker referred to the fact that the SAPS is
actually committed to a policy of zero tolerance, but the problem is that
there is not enough manpower to do justice to applying a policy of zero
tolerance. Petty crimes are being ignored and, at the end of the day, this
actually leads to disrespect for the law.

'n Spesiale woord van dank aan duisende toegewyde geregsdienaars wat elke
dag in die spervuur staan om misdaad te bestry. Namens die Nuwe NP betuig
ek ook my diepe meegevoel met families van polisiebeamptes wat in die
uitvoering van hul pligte dood is.

Moord op polisiebeamptes in Suid-Afrika is onaanvaarbaar algemeen. Oor 'n
tydperk van 18 maande is 354 beamptes vermoor, dit wil sê een elke 37 uur.
'n Polisiebeampte in Suid-Afrika se kans om vermoor te word, is vier keer
groter as in die Verenigde State van Amerika. Dié toestand kan nie
voortduur nie, en die doodstraf vir polisiemoordenaars behoort nou oorweeg
te word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[A special word of thanks to thousands of dedicated policemen who brave the
firing-line every day to fight crime. On behalf of the New NP I also wish
to express my deepest sympathy with families of police officers who have
died in the execution of their duties.

The murder of police officers in South Africa is unacceptably prevalent.
Over a period of 18 months 354 officers were murdered, ie one every 37
hours. A police officer in South Africa has a four times greater chance of
being murdered than a police officer in the United States of America. This
situation cannot be allowed to continue, and consideration should now be
given to the death penalty for murderers of policemen.]

Despite having a new Minister who has declared war on criminals, which he
did again today, and we appreciate that; despite having a devoted Deputy
Minister; despite having a national commissioner who makes a difference
wherever he goes; and despite having a chairman in the portfolio committee
who is very enthusiastic about combating crime, the New NP cannot support
the Vote, because crime has spun-out of control in South Africa.
[Interjections.]

People are hesitant to invest in South Africa because of crime. Skilled
people are leaving South Africa as a result of crime. In the mid 1960s, an
American journalist Allan Drury, wrote a book on South Africa called A Very
Strange Society. Nowadays, a more appropriate title would be A Very Sick
Society. South Africa must the only country in the world where a baby is
born with a bullet in its hip bone; South Africa must be the only country
in the world where two medics are shot dead whilst trying to save the lives
of others; South Africa must be the only country in the world where a young
girl of 14 is gang-raped, mutilated and then urinated on. We must find a
cure for this disease.

In the United States of America, there is an undisputable link between
crime and age. Young men between the ages of 15 and 24 commit, by far, the
largest number of crimes. An increase in the number of this age group leads
to an increase in the crime rate. A decrease in their numbers, of course,
has the opposite effect. If this is also true about South Africa, and I
think it is true, then we must steel ourselves for an increase in crime
levels for the foreseeable future, because this male age group already
constitutes nearly 10% of the total population.

The only solution is to change the hearts and the minds of the people, and
especially those of young people. They will have to be taught respect for
life and for property. Schools, churches and parents have a vital role to
play in this regard. Conflict resolution should be introduced as a
compulsory subject at school level. Only then will we be able to turn the
tide.

Approximately 600 police officers are leaving the service on a monthly
basis owing to low salaries. This has a negative impact on the morale of
the police. It will be appreciated if the Minister could tell the House, in
his reply, whether a commission appointed to do research on the salary
structures of the SA Police Service has completed its study and, if so,
what its findings were.

There are also other factors regarding the morale of the police, and these
other factors also necessitate urgent attention. The fact that 10 000
members of Polmed are addicted to antidepressants is symptomatic of the
high stress levels under which they have to operate. The tragic event which
occurred last night in Port Elizabeth, where an inspector shot four people
and himself, further illustrates this point. An immediate improvement of
the working conditions of the SA Police Service is essential.

Daar moet ook besin word oor die polisieverslag wat sê plaasmoorde is
gewone misdadigheid. In teenstelling met ander moorde, wat 'n dalende
tendens toon, is daar 'n skerp styging in die getal plaasmoorde. Van 1995
tot 1998 het plaasmoorde met 51% toegeneem, en die uiterste gewelddadigheid
wat plaasmoorde kenmerk, laat ook die vraag ontstaan of daar nie motiewe
ter sprake is anders as blote misdadigheid nie. Plaasmoorde behoort as 'n
prioriteitsmisdaad ondersoek te word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Consideration should also be given to the police report stating that farm
murders are ordinary criminality. In contrast to other murders, which show
a decreasing tendency, there has been a sharp increase in the number of
farm murders. Farm murders increased by 51% from 1995 to 1998, and the
extreme violence characterising farm murders also causes the question to
arise as to whether there are not other motives involved than mere
criminality. Farm murders should be investigated as a priority crime.]

Despite the Minister's remark that those who oppose the Firearms Control
Bill belong in an asylum, I want to raise the basic objections of the New
NP to the Bill with the urgent request that the Minister consider
redrafting the Bill with, of course, the risk of ending up in an asylum
himself. [Laughter.]

What is desperately needed in South Africa is a culture of responsible gun
ownership. I want to repeat that. What is desperately needed in South
Africa is a culture of responsible gun ownership. Unfortunately, the
contents of the Firearms Control Bill are not conducive to responsible gun
ownership. Quite the opposite is true. Once implemented, the Bill will turn
thousands of law-abiding gun owners into criminals, because excessive
administrative red tape will make compliance impossible.

It must also be pointed out that the underlying philosophy of the Bill is
totally flawed. Based on the presumption that the proliferation of illegal
weapons goes hand in hand with the proliferation of legal weapons, the Bill
then primarily targets legal gun owners. What should be targeted is the
illegal possession of firearms. It is estimated that 4 million illegal
firearms were smuggled into the country during the struggle. The illegal
trafficking in firearms plagues this region on a daily basis, and the
proposed Bill does little or nothing to address this problem. The Firearms
Control Bill will be discussed in depth when tabled in Parliament. It will,
however, be in everybody's interest if the Bill could be redrafted after
consultation with all role-players. A Firearms Control Bill that carries
the support of all stakeholders will be to South Africa's benefit.

Allow me a brief remark on shortages of trained personnel and equipment.
The New NP welcomes the fact that the Government has now, for the first
time, given details on the shortages being experienced by the SA Police
Service in a reply to a question by Mr Piet Matthee of the New NP in the
NCOP. In the light of the totally unacceptably high levels of crime in
South Africa, the New NP cannot accept the shortages in trained personnel
and equipment that can only be addressed over periods of four to five and
three to four years respectively. Government should regard the safety and
security of its citizens as its most fundamental duty and it should,
therefore, immediately find the money to address the said shortages within
the current financial year.

I have been told that institutions such as the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund could also be approached for the financing of
security issues, because these bodies now fully realise what a negative
impact crime can have on economic growth in a country.

Ek het `n laaste vraag aan die Minister. Van die 128 000 lede van die
Polisiediens is 30 000 ongeletterd. Die vraag is of van hulle opleibaar is.
Indien van hulle opleibaar is, wat doen die Regering om hulle op te lei?
[Tussenwerpsels.] Indien hulle nie opleibaar is nie, gaan die Minister van
hulle ontslae raak, gesien in die lig daarvan dat hulle nie produktief
aangewend kan word nie? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek wil ook verder weet watter uitwerking het die 30 000 lede wat volgens
persberigte HIV-positief is op die doeltreffendheid van die SA
Polisiediens. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[I have a last question to put to the Minister. Of the 128 000 members of
the Police Service, 30 000 are illiterate. The question is whether some of
them can be trained. If some of them could be trained, what is the
Government doing about training them? [Interjections.] If they are
untrainable, is the Minister going to get rid of them in the light of the
fact that they cannot be employed productively? [Interjections.]

I would also like to know what effect the 30 000 members who, according to
press reports, are HIV-positive, are having on the efficiency of the SA
Police Service.]

Also, allow me a few comments on the Independent ...

An HON MEMBER: Complaints Directorate.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: ... Complaints Directorate. Thank you! [Laughter.]

If the Independent Complaints Directorate is forced to do more and more
with less and less, as is currently the case, then the directorate will
eventually grind to a complete standstill. The fact that the operational
budget of the Independent Complaints Directorate has gone down in real
terms necessitates serious reconsideration regarding next year's budget
allocation. Despite the financial constraints and, yes, despite the
criticism raised here today, I think, at the end of the day, the ICD must
be congratulated on a job well done, and the New NP will support the Vote.

Deaths in police custody or as a result of police action are, and should
be, a priority for ICD investigations. Since the directorate started
operating three years ago, more than 2 100 people have died as a result of
police action or in police custody. Understandably, this alarming state of
affairs gives cause for strong appeals to the Minister of Safety and
Security to immediately implement the amended section 49 of the Criminal
Procedure Act, which prevents the police from using firearms unless their
lives are in danger. Needless to say, the implementation of the aforesaid
provision will place police officers at the mercy of criminals, and I
urgently ask the Minister not to implement the amended section, but,
instead, to promote the importance of protecting human life as a basic
value of the SA Police Service's culture.

In a report to the portfolio committee it was mentioned that the ICD, owing
to an increased workload, was compelled to reprioritise complaints. Over
and above police-related deaths, corruption within the SA Police Service
seems to top the list. In order to lighten the burden of the ICD ...
[Interjections.] But I am not disappearing. I am still here. Bear with me
for a few more seconds.

I have said that they were forced to reprioritise and I have said that
their main concern was police-related deaths, but corruption within the
Police Service is also high on their task list. But, to my mind, the
anticorruption units of the SA Police Service could be entrusted with this
specific function of corruption instead. In order to enhance the efficiency
of the anticorruption units, and given the fact that their core function is
detection, they have already been placed, by the national commissioner,
under the detective service and crime intelligence division, and they are
therefore well equipped to fight corruption.

The SA Police Service is, in any case, still investigating 71% of the cases
against them. In order to facilitate accessibility, a toll-free telephone
number is envisaged for the ICD, and the Minister should note that it is
really unthinkable that the current budgetary provision does not cater for
this need.

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, we know that the crime rate in South Africa is
unacceptably high. We are all aware of the violent nature of these crimes.
We all know the statistics. It has been referred to during this debate on a
number of occasions. None of it is new. Dwelling on it or repeating it
without offering solutions serves little purpose to assist in addressing
what we all acknowledge is a major challenge facing all South Africans.
Crime is our common enemy. It does not discriminate against any one person.
It does not know class, race or gender. Sufficient common agreement exists
amongst all of us that we urgently need to turn around the crime wave.

In the time that is available to me, I would like to focus on three issues
that the UDM believes must be addressed in order to make a difference in
the fight against crime. These are the staff component of the SAPS, the co-
operation and integration of all role-players in the criminal justice
system, and the responsibility of citizens in the fight against crime.

The budget under discussion shows an increase of R1,3 billion. This
increase, although we believe that it is not enough, is welcomed. We also
realise that solving the crime problem is not going to be achieved by
simply throwing money at it. The prioritisation and effective application
of the available financial resources, together with a meticulously
developed strategic crime-fighting programme that is both practical and
implementable, are what South Africa desperately needs.

We therefore welcome the multidisciplinary approach currently implemented
within the SAPS. This is a move that makes sense. In the past, one had the
idea that the 360% approach, where the police were facing one another with
shot-guns, was adopted. Now, at least, it seems that they are backing one
another, that one section knows what the other section of the police is
doing, and that they are supporting one another. This approach will receive
our support.

The size of the SAPS staff component has been a point of debate for many
years. Role-players, as we have also heard in this House today continue to
differ on what the ideal number of staff for the SAPS should be. The UDM
would like to urge the Minister of Safety and Security to do an audit that
would give clarity to this question. Let us stop the speculation. Let us
determine the ideal number of police staff that should be out on the
streets combating crime, and then let us work towards achieving that goal.

The SAPS's function is to fight crime. SAPS members must be trained and
deployed, first and foremost, to do exactly that. Simply talking about
releasing SAPS members involved in administration back into the operational
side must stop. Action in this regard is needed. Redeployment of these
members, to strengthen the actual crime-combating ability, must begin in
all earnest. It might not be necessary to increase the number of police
staff.

The Minister should announce how he will redeploy, what that number of
redeployments will be and by when he aims to do so. Serious consideration
should also be given to differentiating between the salaries of members of
the SAPS and the rest of the Public Service. The UDM would urge that those
members of the SAPS directly involved in crime fighting receive higher
salaries than those not directly involved, or their counterparts in the
Public Service.

A new promotional structure for the SAPS should also be considered. This
should enable a member of the SAPS to develop his or her career within the
environment of crime fighting and not necessitate that after a number of
promotions, the individual, with all the acquired experience, ends up
behind a desk doing administrative work.

This brings me to the integration of the criminal justice system. A
colleague of mine, the hon Frolick, asked the Minister of Safety and
Security a question regarding the rape figures in the Port Elizabeth-
Uitenhage district. Shocking statistics were revealed. Of the 867 rape
cases reported in 1998, committed against children under the age of 17,
only 67 resulted in a guilty verdict. Eight hundred rapists are walking the
streets and enjoying the benefits of law-abiding citizens. This example
illustrates the lack of adequate policing and proper co-operation between
the Departments of Safety and Security, and of Justice. The combating of
crime can only be considered to be successful once the criminal is removed
from the street and justice is served. Though there is greater co-operation
between the departments involved in the security cluster, there still is a
lot of room for improvement.
The Department of Justice needs to get its house in order. It is not
providing the quality of service that the public and the members of the
SAPS deserve. The morale of the SAPS must be negatively influenced every
time they see a criminal walking free after they have spent months to
apprehend that criminal. This revolving-door-like criminal justice system
forces many SAPS members to question why they should fight crime in the
first place. The corruption within the Department of Justice must be
eradicated. This department should set the example in the fight against
corruption, and not lead the corruption race. The other side of the coin is
that members of the SAPS should continually work closely with officials of
the Department of Justice in preparing evidence for the court cases. In
that way, a better prepared case will be the result, with an improved
opportunity for a guilty verdict.

If the majority of South African citizens are law-abiding, then we need to
mobilise those citizens to become part of the fight against crime. As long
as markets exist for stolen goods, criminals will continue with what is
obviously an easy profit-making opportunity. As long as the community
tolerates criminals and their activities, criminals will have a place to
operate from. If we can instil, within South Africans, a sense of
responsibility that comes with the privilege of being a citizen, then we
can make a real difference in the fight against crime.

In a report to hon Minister Asmal, it was suggested that learners at school
should pledge their allegiance to South Africa on a daily basis. We would
support that and would like to take it one step further. The UDM believes
that citizenship, and the responsibilities, rights and privileges
associated with it, should become part of the curriculum of learners. Let
us empower the next generation with the opportunity to contribute to the
wellbeing of our country and their fellow countrymen. The UDM will support
the Vote. [Applause.]

Mr Q J KGAUWE: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and members, this is the first
budget allocated under the leadership of an able black national
commissioner, Mr Selebi. Hopefully, it was thoughtfully done, taking into
consideration the skewed representation of the previously disadvantaged. We
are mindful of, and ought to address, the huge shortage of cars and
investigators so that the police are able to perform their work.

But it is surprising to learn that the Minister has given an undertaking
that farmers will be protected. It is surprising that the white opposition
parties are not able to come out strongly and say ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Where is the white opposition party?

Mr Q J KGAUWE: You are the white opposition party. [Interjections.]

They are not able to come out strongly and support the idea that black
farmworkers are being killed on a daily basis. [Interjections.] Recently, a
black person was painted, and the DP was the only party that stood up here,
and said ... [Interjections.] You are camouflaging whenever you say you are
democratic. It is a camouflage on your side. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Rubbish!

Mr Q J KGAUWE: Even if I might be talking rubbish, the DP never stood up
when people were staying with pigs under one roof. They were quiet enough.
[Interjections.] When a person was buried at the side of the road they were
quiet enough. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: The DP is not one of the other parties. This is the DP. We
have always stood up for individual rights. [Interjections.]

Mr Q J KGAUWE: No! [Interjections.] When blacks were tortured they were
quiet enough. When De Kock was given resources they were quiet enough.
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Now you are busy talking rubbish. [Interjections.]

Mr Q J KGAUWE: When Basson was here, you were there. [Interjections.] When
there are 5 700 police workers at headquarters who are resisting, or who
are reluctant to be moved out, or be redeployed, they are quiet enough. We
do not want to talk about all those things. [Interjections.]

We have the ANC, which has appointed a national commissioner. He is
surrounded by how many with unbearable attitudes, and racist police
officers who are his junior? [Interjections.] They have commissioners in
all these areas. We have got one black commissioner who is surrounded by
how many white deputies? [Interjections.] They should be happy that we are
able to train black police officers. Through this Government, we have been
able to train people who have managed ... [Interjections.] Now listen
first.

Admittedly, it is reported that South Africa has the highest crime rate,
and I am going to dispute this somehow. We have capital crimes and priority
crimes. We have murder and domestic violence. We need specialised people,
detectives with skills in order to investigate properly. There is a sense
of despair amongst the population. We are aware that we are faced with a
number of unemployed youth. We have many police officers who are poorly
trained, and there is much illiteracy in the ranks of the police. We have a
discredited Police Service. We should not forget that there was a complete
breakdown of trust between the community and the police.

In order to restore confidence and a good working relationship, a new
concept was evolved. What concept is that? The community policing forums.
The community and the police were married together, the purpose being to
establish a friendly relationship and a service, and to maintain a
partnership. The principles thereof were to promote co-operation between
the police and the community in fulfilling the needs of the community with
regard to policing, and to improve the rendering of police services to the
community they serve, and to improve equality, transparency and trust
within the communities.

We are tempted to believe that community policing requires different
practices and approaches. We do not have to observe a crime being committed
and we do not have to watch people committing crime. Do we commit crime
because the rewards of crime outweigh the rewards of leading a good life?
The way to change this is to punish the criminals.

We have shortfalls within the community policing forums, which I want to
highlight. We have MECs who have to give a directive to their provincial
commissioners for the formation and establishment of community policing
forums. Some MECs might not deem it necessary, and they might not give
these directives. If this happens, then community policing forums cannot be
established.

We have to look at the membership of community policing forums as well. Any
member of the broad community may belong to or can join a community
policing forum. There is a strong allegation that discredited members,
thugs and drug lords join these structures with a certain objective. In
Cape Town, we have the gang leader Staggie, who was a full-time member of
the community policing forum. When something is discussed relating to the
prevention of crime, such a person can take advantage of this information,
since he is privileged to receive that information.

We have community policing forums where members have to volunteer their
services. Often, the community policing forum lacks resources, since its
members are under no obligation to contribute. Admittedly, if the forum
does not have money, the members cannot carry out any activity a community
policing forum should be engaging in. This leads to the collapse of these
forums.

In rural areas, there are no community policing forums. If one goes to
KwaZulu-Natal, one finds that there are no such forums. Farmworkers are not
invited to join these community policing forums. In larger towns, we find
that white communities have functional community policing forums. The
membership is predominantly white and they refuse to join hands with their
black neighbourhoods. Whites are privileged, and if they so wish, they
could also join the community policing forums. Whites often belong to army
commandos, which receive resources from this Government. We are all quiet
about it.

Regarding transformation, one finds that in an area such as Setlagole,
there is no existing community policing forum. A small white minority with
an unbearable racist attitude refused to convene community policing forum
meetings with blacks, and blacks are being refused policing services in
that area. Blacks are forced to walk a long distance to Madibogo police
station in order to get service from the police. If one goes to
Delareyville, one sees that the area only serves people who live in
Delareyville, who are predominantly white. The surrounding areas are
predominantly black, and those people are referred to Atamelang police
station, in order to get service. The DP is saying to me that there is
transformation. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I want to commend
the Independent Complaints Directorate for the sterling work it is doing to
rid the SA Police Service of corruption, and to ensure that the police
treat members of the public with dignity and respect. Although we support
both Vote No 17 and Vote No 28, there are some concerns about Vote No 28
that I want to raise.

Firstly, the performance of many of our police officers is not
satisfactory. The public is told that one of the reasons for this is low
morale among the police. This budget does not address the causes of low
morale and how to bring about an improvement in performance and delivery by
the police.

Secondly, we have been told for years that the police are understaffed. One
would have expected the budget to include an allocation for overtime pay
for hard-working police officers and for recruiting new officers. That,
regrettably, has not been done. How can loyal and disciplined police
officers be expected to be motivated when they are not paid for overtime?
How can 14 detectives with only three cars investigate more than 3 000
cases, as in the case of the Nyanga police station? Police officers who are
doing clerical work must be replaced by ordinary clerks and civilians so
that they can concentrate on maintaining law and order and fighting crime.

It is unacceptable that corrupt police officers who have been suspended are
still receiving their salaries. The ACDP suggests that all suspended
officials should have their salaries suspended with immediate effect. The
Government is losing millions of rands every month on corrupt people when
more money should be given to those who are doing a good job for our
people. [Interjections.]

The state of many police stations in this country is also appalling. How
can the police be expected to be motivated to do their best when they are
crammed into offices that are in a state of disrepair. We are always told
that the Department of Public Works is dealing with the problem. Many
requests have been made for renovations at existing police stations, but
that has not happened. For the sake of progress and the improvement of the
conditions at our police stations, the ACDP recommends strongly that a
specific allocation for the maintenance and repair of police stations be
included in the SAPS budget. Let them be allowed to do their own repairs
and maintenance, because the Public Works has failed them.

Lastly, this budget has not made any provision for promotions. All workers,
including the police, need incentives and rewards. Those who study and work
hard to get better qualifications must know that their efforts will be
rewarded. Let those hard-working policemen and policewomen who deserve to
be promoted get their promotions.

We salute all the committed and disciplined police officers who have the
will to make a difference, but we also say that all those undisciplined,
lazy and corrupt officials must be dealt with severely. If they know that
they will lose their pay during their period of suspension, they will
ensure that they are not found on the wrong side of the law. We support the
Vote.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, I almost regret
that the previous speaker did not have more time. To allocate only two
minutes to the poor man to speak is, I think, unfair. [Interjections.]

It is not enough to speak the truth: it has to be the truth, the whole
truth and nothing but the truth. I believe that some of the statements we
have heard this afternoon are true, but they are not the whole truth. The
hon Gibson is perfectly correct when he says that he visited 100 police
stations and they were in a terrible state. There are actually 350 police
stations that are absolutely, unacceptably and disgracefully - in our view
- dilapidated, lacking in space, and so on.

However, about a year ago I opened 53 police stations in the rural areas of
the Eastern Cape, which were new, renovated and very beautiful. I invite
the DP also to visit those police stations, the beautiful ones which were
built - by the way, they were built in a record time of six months - with
the help of Public Works and following a fast-tracked tender system. We
should encourage that kind of thing. I believe that where the department is
creative and positive, we should support them.

I think it it hypocritical to say that we support the man on the beat, that
we support the ordinary police in their efforts, and then cut off the means
by which they can do that by saying that we will not support the Vote. How
are they going to operate? We have very important programmes relating to
training which have been successful. We have a detective academy to
increase our investigative capacity which, with the support of the FBI and
other organisations, is doing very well. How can we then cut off the money
if we want to enable that detective academy to operate?
Eighty-four per cent of our budget up to now has been devoted to personnel
costs, and only 16% to operational costs. We have been desperately trying
to get that balance right, ie to increase the amount of money that is
available for operational costs and to reduce the amount of money used for
personnel costs. What do we find? People say ``increase the number of
police, increase the personnel costs'', and they do not say a word about
the operational costs. So, we have to do a bit of thinking there.
[Interjections.]

Not so long ago, Mr Zbigniew Brzezinski - I hope members of the House have
heard of Mr Zbigniew Brzezinski; he used to be the national security
advisor to President Carter - wrote a book called The Technocratic Age, in
which he says that recent technological advances have placed Africa maybe
300 or 400 years behind the developed world. That is what he says. I do not
agree with him; I think that recent technological advances can enable us to
catch up with the developed world, but this is a very clever intellectual,
and I do not lightly dismiss what he says. He now believes that we are 1
000 years behind as a result of technological advances.

However, when I hear some of the statements we make in the House, we still
seem to be living in the age in which the number of hands, the amount of
labour, is the emphasis, and not technology. Modern technology, maybe, is
what is going to enable us to administer such things as the new
registration proposals in the Firearms Control Bill. We do not need 90 more
hands to come and deal with this. We need more computers. We need to
improve our database in the Police Service to make sure that things such as
fingerprints can be accessed, not in 40 days, but in three seconds.
However, that can only be done through modernisation.

I am appealing to the House: Please assist us to do that. [Interjections.]
Hon members must please help us to do that, and not turn round and say:
``Well, there are certain things which you cannot do, therefore we must
deny you a Vote.'' That is completely wrong. It would be correct if there
was a principled political position which people were taking, but one
cannot, merely on the basis of efficiencies, refuse a department the means
to improve itself, and to carry out its work.

I would like to pay tribute to the communities, and in particular to
Business Against Crime which has recognised the need for technology, and
has been helping to install the new surveillance systems by paying the
costs involved. I think Business Against Crime is taking an extremely
active and constructive approach.

I believe that the response of the public in our country to the new
Minister and to the new national commissioner has improved morale. We are
getting a far greater response from the public and from communities in
support of the fight against crime, and we must encourage that. This is the
approach we should adopt, and not a cleverly hostile approach, which on the
one hand claims to be supporting the fight against crime, and then on the
other makes it impossible for us to achieve our objectives.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, I just want to tell the Minister and the
Deputy Minister we do support the fight against crime wholeheartedly.

Our Constitution places an obligation on Government to ensure the safety
and security of our people. I cannot stand here and speak for the future,
like the Minister does, but I must measure and rate the past and the
situation as it is today. Thus, today I stand here with a message from the
majority of the people of this country, who, in one way or another, have
all been victims of crime during the past few years. It is a message to the
Minister of Safety and Security and our President: We are not on course. I
repeat: We are not on course.

Dit is net reg dat ons vandag weer let op die vlak van gewelddadige misdade
in plattelandse gebiede. Ironies genoeg is dit die krisis in Zimbabwe, waar
boere en plaaswerkers vermoor word, aangerand word, van eiendom afgesit en
geïntimideer word wat weer die probleem van plattelandse veiligheid
uitgelig het. Tussen Januarie 1991 en Desember 1998 was daar 142 moorde en
769 aanvalle op boere in Suid-Afrika. Hierdie is 'n baie hoër per-capita-
syfer as dié vir die hele land en gaan ongelukkig dikwels gepaard met
onmenslike marteling van die slagoffers.

Mense wat op plattelandse dorpe en plase woon, word oor die algemeen deur
misdadigers as sagte teikens gesien, en is dit inderdaad. Die taak van
polisiëring in plattelandse gebiede is baie kompleks, met die polisie wat
nie in staat is om plase behoorlik te patrolleer nie; dikwels nie
noodgevalle vinnig genoeg kan hanteer nie, as gevolg van die afstande ter
sprake; en selfs gereeld nie in staat is om sekere gebiede te bereik nie,
as gevolg van die verkeerde beskikbare voertuie, byvoorbeeld Citigolfs in
plaas van bakkies op plaaspaaie, en, ek aanvaar, seker bakkies in Sandton
en ander stede! (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is only right that we again pay attention to the level of violent
crimes in rural areas today. Ironically, it is the crisis in Zimbabwe,
where farmers and farmworkers are being murdered, attacked, evicted from
property and intimidated, which highlighted the problem of rural safety
again. Between January 1991 and December 1998 there were 142 murders and
769 attacks on farmers in South Africa. This is a much higher per capita
figure than that of the whole country and, unfortunately, this is often
coupled with inhumane torture of victims.

People who live in rural towns and on farms, are generally regarded by
criminals as soft targets, which in fact, they are. The task of policing in
rural areas is very complex, with police not being able to patrol farms
properly; often, not being able to deal with emergencies quickly enough,
because of the distances involved; and also often not being able to reach
certain areas, because the vehicles available to them are inadequate, for
instance, Citigolfs instead of pick-up trucks on farm roads, and, I assume,
probably pick-up trucks in Sandton and other cities!]

These problems were recognised at the summit on rural safety and security
in October 1998 and with the adoption of the rural protection plan. In
particular, the summit envisaged that adequate funding for the operation
and functioning of the criminal justice system in rural areas would be made
available. Yet this has not happened. Information about the incidence of
crime in rural areas is not collected, analysed and reported upon
timeously. The limited resources are therefore not used optimally. June
1999 is still the latest date for available information on crime in the
rural areas.

Tussen 1 Januarie 1999 en 30 Junie 1999, met ander woorde, binne agt maande
ná die beraad, was daar 69 moorde en 443 aanvalle op boere. Dit is binne 'n
tydperk van ses maande. In vergelyking met die agt jaar voor die beraad is
dit duidelik dat die situasie vererger in plaas van verbeter. Al die planne
het net wense gebly en ons boere op plase bly lammers ter slagting.

Hierdie beperkte hulpmiddele, mannekrag en lae moreel veroorsaak ook
probleme binne die polisie self. Dit bring my by die begrotingspos van die
Onafhanklike Klagte-direktoraat, die liggaam wat klagtes van wangedrag en
oortredings deur polisie ondersoek.

Dit is so, die polisie funksioneer in 'n ``rowwe buurt'', en moet dit doen
binne die veeleisende nuwe reëls van die spel. Ons kan verstaan dat sommige
lede voel asof hul hande afgekap is, aangesien kriminele wat nie gebonde is
aan dieselfde reëls nie bykans daagliks polisiebeamptes vermoor.

Meer as 200 polisiebeamptes word elke jaar in Suid-Afrika vermoor. Soos
hierdie frustrasies toeneem, sal al hoe meer lede verkies om die handskoene
uit te trek in die geveg teen misdaad. Ongelukkig is dit hier waar die agb
Minister self 'n aanhitser was, met die nuwe nasionale kommissaris kort op
sy hakke. Sonder om verantwoordelike leierskap te toon, het hy deur die
land gereis, en polisielede vertel hulle moet ``deal with criminals as a
bulldog deals with a bone,'' volgens die Finance Week van 22 Oktober 1999.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Between 1 January 1999 and 30 June 1999, in other words, in the space of
eight months after the conference, there were 69 murders and 443 attacks on
farmers. This was in the space of six months. Compared to the eight years
prior to the conference it is clear that the situation is deteriorating,
instead of improving. All the plans have remained nothing but wishes and
our farmers on farms still remain like lambs waiting to be slaughtered.

These limited resources and manpower and low morale are also causing
problems within the police itself. This brings me to the Vote of the
Independent Complaints Directorate, the body that investigates complaints
of misconduct and offences committed by police.

The fact is, the police function in a rough neighbourhood, and must do so
within the demanding new rules of the game. We can understand that some
members feel that their hands are tied, because criminals who are not bound
by the same rules, are murdering police officers virtually every day.

More than 200 police officers are murdered in South Africa every year. As
these frustrations increase, an increasing number of members will choose to
adopt a no-holds-barred approach in the fight against crime. Unfortunately,
it is here that the hon the Minister was himself an instigator, with the
new national commissioner coming a close second. Without displaying
responsible leadership, he travelled around the country and told members of
the police that they must ``deal with criminals as a bulldog deals with a
bone'', according to Finance Week of 22 October 1999.]

Maybe the hon Minister was motivated by the ``shoot-now-and-ask-questions-
later'', ``make-my-day'' approach made popular by Clint Eastwood in the
movie Dirty Harry.

Kom ons géé hulle gas, maar binne die raamwerk van die wet. Wat juis die
polisie van kriminele onderskei, is dat dit hulle taak is om mense te
beskerm, binne die reg op te tree, minimum geweld te gebruik en
verantwoordbaar te wees vir hul dade.

Dit is die rede vir die bestaan van die Onafhanklike Klagtedirektoraat.
Hierdie direktoraat is egter nie in staat om sy funksies na behore uit te
oefen nie, as gevolg van 'n 70%-tekort aan mannekrag, en 70% van die sake
moet terugverwys word na die polisie self vir ondersoek. Daardie einste
klagtes teen polisielede, byvoorbeeld dood in aanhouding word deur
polisielede self ondersoek. Verder is daar geen kantore in die Vrystaat en
Mpumalanga nie, waar huidig 80 gevalle van beweerde dood in polisie-
aanhouding of as gevolg van polisie-optrede ondersoek moet word.

Die direktoraat is totaal ondergefinansier. Die Mediumtermyn-
uitgaweraamwerk sal hersien moet word om behoorlike befondsing te verseker.
Slegs dan sal die verantwoordbaarheid van lede van die polisie verseker
word en die vertroue van die publiek in die Polisiediens herstel word.

Dit is nie net tyd om die moorde op boere en plaaswerkers stop te sit nie,
maar ook die moorde op polisiebeamptes, juis diegene wat ons moet beskerm.
Dit kan net gedoen word as ons behoorlik begroot om in die behoeftes te
voorsien. Dan, en slegs dan, wanneer ons die veiligheid en sekerheid van
almal in ons land kan verseker, kan ons beweer - nou so ongegrond - dat ons
inderdaad op koers is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Let us give them blazes, but within the framework of the Act. What in fact
distinguishes the police from criminals, is that it is their task to
protect people, to act within the law, to use minimum force and to be
accountable for their actions.

This is the reason for the existence of the Independent Complaints
Directorate. However, this directorate is not able to perform its functions
properly, because of a 70% shortage of human resources, and 70% of the
investigations must be referred back to the police for investigation, These
same complaints against members of the police, for instance death in
detention, are investigated by members of the police. Furthermore, there
are no offices in the Free State and Mpumalanga, where at present 80 cases
of alleged death in police custody or as a result of police action have to
be investigated.

The directorate is totally underfinanced. The Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework will have to be revised to ensure proper financing. Only then
will the accountability of members of the police be ensured and will the
faith of the public in the Police Service be restored.

It is not only time to put a stop to the murder of farmers and farmworkers,
but also the murder of police officers - the very people who must protect
us. This can only be done if we budget properly to meet these needs. Then,
and only then, when we can ensure the safety and security of everyone in
our country, can we allege - now so unfounded - that we are indeed on
course.]

I repeat to the hon the Minister that it is time to stop the killing of our
people and our police officers, the very people who give their lives to
protect us. Then, and only then, can we try to say that we are on course.
Doing so before that is nothing more than a naive illusion, a senseless and
cruel remark at the expense of the lives of our people, the very lives that
we ought to protect and secure. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Somlomo neNdlu yakho ehloniphekile, mhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe
[Madam Speaker and your august House, hon Minister], let me say, firstly,
that all of us owe a deep debt of gratitude to our police personnel, who
daily put themselves in the line of fire in order to protect the community.
Hundreds of policemen and policewomen lay down their lives each year in the
fight against increasingly ruthless criminals. I take this opportunity to
pay tribute to all those officers who have made the ultimate sacrifice in
the service of others. The whole House, I am sure, extends its condolences
to the families of those who have lost their lives. [Applause.]

I want to take this opportunity to raise a number of concerns about the
money currently being wasted and put forward some possible solutions which
I hope the Minister and his deputy will consider. Now I address the issue
of police equipment. Owing to the budget constraints on the SAPS, our
police officers are often sent out to confront dangerous criminals with far
too few resources at their disposal. There is a huge backlog in equipment
required, such as police radios, vehicles, bullet-proof vests, and the
like. The department has taken some steps to address these problems, but
there is still a long, long way to go. We all understand that resources are
limited and that is why we would like to spend far more on policing. We
have to live within the existing constraints. That requires us to be far
more imaginative than we have hitherto been in maximising the benefit of
the scarce resources that we do have.

I want to draw the Minister's attention to the very difficult situation we
face with regard to police vehicles. Much of the vehicle fleet is old and
badly in need of repair, meaning that many vehicles are off the road,
causing great difficulties for the Police Service. The allocation of
vehicles is also a problem. One will find some police stations without any
operating vehicles at their disposal, while other police stations will have
many vehicles surplus to their requirements, for example the police station
at Umlazi versus the police station at KwaMashu.

The police vehicle repair service is perhaps not the most efficient service
in South Africa. We hear of regular complaints about long delays in fixing
vehicles, with the spare parts not being available and maintenance being
poor. It is perhaps time we looked again at how we organise our vehicle
repairs. We understand that in the past the department did consider
outsourcing repair and maintenance of the police vehicle fleet, but could
not find anyone in the private sector who could take on the job at the
right price. But perhaps we need to come back to this issue again now and
look at how we can use private sector expertise to improve the repair and
maintenance of our vehicles.

I would be grateful if the Minister would be prepared to consider
outsourcing maintenance and repairs on a provincial basis. It may be that
the national approach to outsourcing has put off some organisations that
could not offer a national service, but would be able to operate on a
provincial basis. The IFP requests the Minister to look at testing the
market on this idea to see if provincial outsourcing could provide a better
service and prove more cost-effective that the current system.

The construction, maintenance and repair of police stations is another big
area of concern. Every member of this House probably has a horror story
that he or she could tell about a police station in his or her area. There
is a huge amount of work to be done in upgrading and repairing existing
police stations and building new ones, but the work does not seem to be
done as urgently as we would like it to be.

The department signed contracts for new building projects with the
Department of Public Works back in 1998, but these still have not been
carried out. I do not simply want to blame the Department of Public Works.
I know the department is under huge pressure with thousands upon thousands
of buildings on its books. There is no benefit in trying to apportion
blame. I want to see a solution, because the programme for building and
repairing police stations is absolutely vital and cannot continue to be
delayed in this manner. It is damaging to operational efficiency and it is
undermining the morale of police officers who have to work under such
terrible conditions.

We need a new way forward which will reduce the burden of the Department of
Public Works and kick-start the building programme. My party proposes that,
in future, the Department of Public Works should continue to be responsible
for maintenance, but that a new building project should be led by the
relevant department, in this case, obviously, the Department of Safety and
Security.

This would have twin benefits. Firstly, it would relieve Public Works of a
burden which they do not have the capacity to carry and would allow them to
concentrate only on the important job of maintaining buildings. Secondly,
it would allow individual departments to meet their requirements without
the burden of going through the Department of Public Works. I hope that the
Government will consider this proposal seriously, because it is clear that
we cannot allow the current situation to continue for a moment longer than
is necessary.

I want to come to the issue of representivity within the department. This
is a very tricky matter and it is important that we get it right. There is
a clear need for action to redress the injustices of the past, but we must
do it in such a way that we do not undermine the morale of the force.

We must accept that a given number of police personnel who are protected by
the sunset clauses negotiated at Kempton Park are functionally illiterate.
There are many thousands of such officers who may not be retrenched, but
who are unable to fulfil the requirements of taking a statement or of doing
other paperwork. We must look at how best we can utilise these officers
through deployment, for example, in a guarding capacity or other similar
roles. Nevertheless, the presence of these officers does impact on our
ability to build a truly representative force and we must recognise that.

We also need to accept that we now have one Police Service and that the
past must be put aside. There are reports that police officers from the
former SA Police are now being ditched and discriminated against in
affirmative action posts. This is unacceptable. Membership of the old SAP
is not a ground for discrimination.

We also note, on the grounds of reports, that Popcru members are being
unfairly advantaged over members of the other police union. If that is
taking place, it is not acceptable either. We also know that far too often,
when posts in the Police Service are advertised, members of the previously
disadvantaged groups fail to apply. As leaders, we must do all that we can
to encourage those qualified members of our community to apply for these
posts. Members of the Police Service must know that when a post is vacant,
they can apply and that no posts are reserved for a particular person.
Every member has the right to apply and receive a response.

The protection of our rural people remains a matter of grave concern to my
party. People in rural areas have traditionally had poor access to police
stations and have suffered as a result. Farmers also face a serious
security threat, particularly in KwaZulu-Natal, the Northern Province, the
Free State and elsewhere. At the moment, farmers and rural people are
feeling very vulnerable to crime and we must do all that we can to reassure
them that Government takes their security extremely seriously.

This is a very serious matter and we must ensure that the police, rural
communities and farmers work closely together to tackle this problem once
and for all. Every province therefore should be charged with drawing up
detailed rural protection plans, with the involvement of all stakeholders,
in order to develop an integrated approach to tackle this threat. KwaZulu-
Natal has already had one signed by Inspector Maseko and the officer in
charge of the Defence Force there.

There are also other concerns that I must raise regarding security in
KwaZulu-Natal. The killing of IFP members in the province continues and
there has been little progress in arresting the culprits. [Interjections.]
You know who! In addition, we have recently witnessed the murder of two
businessmen in Ulundi. Again, it appears that there has been no proper
arrest. How dare the police arrest a culprit and in five minutes' time they
release him saying that there is no evidence for him to be charged? How
dare the police do that? I hope that the SAPS will do everything in its
power to speed up the process to arrest the perpetrators so that they will
make people's lives, in a sense, safe.

I wish to turn to morale. The morale is low. We have insufficient time, the
productivity is low and everything is done slowly. However, the police are
doing everything in their power and we have to pay them more for what they
are doing. We have to increase the budget of the police so that they are
able to get good benefits. They are now paying for medical aid which they
did not pay for before. All that will improve their morale. We therefore
want to make sure that they get benefits which are due to them so that they
will be able to fight crime the way they are supposed to. We support the
budget. [Applause.]

Ms M M SOTYU: Madam Speaker, the South African Government has committed
itself to the eradication of any form of violence against women and
children. The Government has stated its intention to comply with the
provisions of the Beijing Platform of Action and to improve the protection
of children. Violence against women and children is a gross violation of
human rights. The Bill of Rights contained in Chapter 2 of the Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa Act, Act 108 of 1996, entrenches the right
of every person to equality, freedom and security of person.

Many women stay in violent relationships for the sake of their children
despite the fact that children are often better off in single-parent
households than in so-called nuclear families that are nonetheless violent.

Yiloo nto uninzi lwabantwana lushiya amakhaya lubhenele ezitalatweni,
lufike lukhuthuze, lufunxe neglu lwenze nazo zonke izinto ezingavumelekanga
phakathi koluntu. Oko kwenziwa yile mpatho igadalala badibana nayo
emakhaya. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[That is why many children leave their homes and take to the streets where
they embrace negative experiences such as mugging, sniffing glue and other
socially unacceptable behaviour patterns. All this is a consequence of the
bad treatment they experience at their homes.]

Many women are financially dependent on the abusers and therefore find it
very difficult to leave the abusive relationships for the sake of the
survival of their children.

Amakhosikazi nabantwana kufuneka bewazile amalungelo abo.
[Women and children should know their rights.]

The high level of physical abuse, economic abuse and witch-burning is
unacceptable. The level of sexual violence and abuse of women makes women
vulnerable to HIV/Aids infection. The HIV epidemic spreads mostly amongst
young women. Women with abusive partners are unable to refuse sex with
their partners. It is a woman's right to refuse unsafe sex. Mostly, victims
of rape and sexual abuse do not report these incidents to the police.

A national survey conducted in South Africa during 1998 found that violent
crimes, mostly assault, stood at 54% and sexual offences at 68%, but in
most cases the victim knows the attacker. The Domestic Violence Act, Act
116 of 1998, came into operation on 15 December 1999. It was designed as an
instrument to assist members of the Police Service to deal with the social
ills of domestic violence.

URhulumente uzama ngazo zonke iindlela ukulwa olu hlobo lobundlobongela
nolukwinqanaba eliphezulu. [The Government is doing its best to root out
this form of violence which is threatening to escalate out of control.]
The Commission for Gender Equality was put in place in all the provinces.
The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
of Women was also established to monitor and promote respect for gender
equality and the protection, development and attainment of gender equality.
We therefore say that the SA Police Service members should be sensitive
when dealing with female victims of offences such as rape and domestic
violence.

Late last year, and earlier this year, members of the portfolio committee
visited different police stations in various provinces on a fact-finding
mission in those areas. We are pleased to see that all police stations are
doing their best as far as these kinds of crimes are concerned. There are
comfort rooms for victims at some police stations, although these do not
meet our expectations. We believe that the budget allocated for this
purpose will be of great help. Members of the SA Police Service are faced
with an extremely difficult task in that they are exposed to a high
incidence of crime and violence on a daily basis.

Another factor that needs to be addressed is that of the high incidence of
police suicide. Research shows that the suicide rate within the SAPS was 6
per 10 000 police officers in 1991. In 1994 to 1995, it increased to 20
members per 10 000 police officers. Research within the SAPS has shown that
factors within and outside the work environment which were frequently
mentioned as possible contributory factors include depression, criminal
offences against members, interpersonal problems, financial problems,
marital problems, relationship problems, extramarital relationships and
divorce.

It is of the utmost importance to realise that the state of the mental
health of police officers is our responsibility in order to create a caring
and humane society whose law enforcement agents are in a position to
safeguard this nation's democracy with their lives. The need for drastic
intervention in the occurrence of police suicide was identified and listed
as a priority in the 1999-2000 list of police priorities and objectives. In
September 1998, the national suicide prevention project was launched to
develop and expand support services to every police officer. Let us all
join hands and assist the police in combating crime in South Africa.

To Commissioner Jackie Selebi and his staff members, I would like to say
that he should let nothing and no one stand in the way of implementing his
three-year plan. [Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, agb Minister, wanneer dit kom by
begrotings van veiligheidsdienste in 'n land wat so onveilig soos ons land
is, wil 'n mens dit altyd graag steun. As 'n opposisieparty sy stem teen
die begroting uitbring, beteken dit nie dat hy die departement die geld wil
ontsê nie. Dit beteken dat hy daardeur demonstreer dat hy ontevrede is met
sekere fasette van die Regering se beleid. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ons wil baie
graag sê dat daardie geld ten beste bestee moet word en dat genoeg geld met
die regte prioriteite toegeken moet word. Dit is ons taak om daaroor te
waak.

Teenoor die veiligheidsmagte, die SAPD, die Kommissaris en sy hele
polisiemag, wil ek die VF se groot waardering uitspreek. Ek wil ook sê dat
ons kennis neem van die groot getal moorde, van die spanning wat SAPD-lede
in hul werksomstandighede ervaar en ook van die spanning wat hul families
ervaar. Ons het groot waardering en begrip daarvoor. Die polisie tree
vandag eintlik op in 'n polisie-onvriendelike land, en daarom is hulle die
dank van ons almal waardig.

Ek wil in die paar minute tot my beskikking net twee belangrike sake
uitlig. Eerstens wil ek sê die plattelandse beveiligingsplan is besig om te
misluk as gevolg daarvan dat daar nie genoeg geld en prioriteit hieraan
gegee word nie. Tweedens wil ek sê, hierdie toestand van onveiligheid wat
op die platteland heers, maak van hierdie konsepwetsontwerp op wapenbeheer
eintlik 'n grap. Dit is onmoontlik om te verwag dat só 'n wetsontwerp
deurgevoer moet word.

Eerstens dan die kwessie van die plattelandse beskermingsplan. Normale
moorde in Suid-Afrika staan op 14:100 000. Moorde op boere staan op
93:100 000. Dit wil sê boere se risiko om vermoor te word, is sewe maal
groter as dié van ander mense.

Die spitsberaad van 10 Oktober 1999, waarna reeds vanmiddag verwys is, het
'n belangrike beraad geword, want daar is 10 baie belangrike sake by
daardie spitsberaad uitgelig. Dit was 10 weldeurdagte bevindings, en ek
gaan 'n paar daarvan vir agb lede noem.

Eerstens is daar by die beraad erken dat die oorsake van misdaad baie
kompleks is, veral dié van plaasmoorde. Dit het aangetoon dat die kultuur
van wetteloosheid en geweld in Suid-Afrika 'n oorsaak is en dat ons nie net
veiligheidsdepartemente by ons oplossingsbenadering kan betrek nie.

My vraag is of daar sedert daardie beraad al 'n behoorlike studie deur
kriminoloë onderneem is onder die duisende mense wat hulle skuldig gemaak
het aan hierdie soort oortreding. Het ons probeer bepaal wat die werklike
aard van hierdie saak is? Tweedens beklemtoon die verslag haatspraak, en sê
dit ons moet opsweping ook vermy. Is dit nie wat plaasvind hier in ons eie
Parlement nie?

Daar is die plattelandse beveiligingsplan wat sê strategiese voorsiening
moet gemaak word vir plaasbeskerming. Daar is die kommando's en die
reserviste. So kan ek voortgaan. Ons wil nie politieke punte aanteken nie,
maar ons gaan die ANC gas gee oor hierdie saak! [Tyd verstreke.]
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, when one is discussing
budgets of security services in a country that is as unsafe as ours is, one
always wants to support them. If an opposition party votes against the
budget, it does not mean that it wants to deny the department that money.
It means that the party is demonstrating that it is dissatisfied with
certain aspects of Government policy. [Interjections.] We would very much
like to say that that money must be spent the best way possible and that
enough money must be allocated together with the correct priorities. It is
our task to see to that.

I would like to express the FF's great appreciation to the security forces,
the SAPS, the Commissioner and his entire police force. I also want to say
that we take cognisance of the large number of murders, the stress which
SAPD members have to cope with in their working environment and also the
stress which their families have to cope with. We have great appreciation
and understanding for that. At present the police actually have to operate
in a police-unfriendly country, and therefore they are deserving of all our
thanks.

In the few minutes at my disposal I just want to single out two important
issues. Firstly, I want to say that the rural security plan is starting to
fail, due to a lack of money and prioritisation. Secondly, I want to say
that this situation of insecurity in our rural areas actually makes a
mockery of this draft Bill on gun control. It is impossible to expect that
such a Bill must be approved.

Firstly then, the question of the rural protection plan. Normal murders in
South Africa stand at 14:100 000. The murder of farmers stands at 93:100
000. That means that farmers are seven times more at risk of being murdered
than other people.

The summit of 10 October 1999, which has already been referred to this
afternoon, has become important because 10 very important issues were
highlighted there. They were 10 carefully considered findings, and I am
going to mention a few of them to hon members.

Firstly, it was acknowledged at the summit that the causes of crime are
very complex, and especially farm murders. It demonstrated that the culture
of lawlessness and violence in South Africa is a cause and that we cannot
only involve security departments in our approach to solutions.

My question is whether, since that summit, a comprehensive study has been
done by criminologists among the thousands of people guilty of this kind of
offence. Have we tried to establish the real nature of this matter?
Secondly, the report emphasises hate speech, and also tells us to avoid
incitement. Is that not what is happening here in our own Parliament?

There is the rural security plan, which states that strategic provision
must be made for the protection of farms. There are the commandos and the
reservists. And so I can continue. We do not want to score political
points, but we are going to give the ANC blazes with regard to this matter!
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, hon Minister, I would like to say from the
start that the SA Police Service is doing a sterling job against crime and
hardened criminals for whom life has become terribly cheap, and it pays a
heavy price for that. The FA commends their efforts, and those of the
Minister and the commissioner regarding the Police Service in South Africa.

The SA Police Service is, however, facing a serious dilemma which can only
be addressed at a managerial and political level. It is clear that a
massive manpower shortage is facing the service. The previous Minister
claimed that there were 140 000 policemen and policewomen in the service.
In January this year, Police Service sources estimated the police force
numbers to be be between 125 000 and 126 000, including the administrative
personnel. Perhaps the Minister could tell us what the position is today.

A larger effective police force personnel must receive the highest priority
from the Government and the Minister. In February this year, Minister
Tshwete stated in the National Assembly that about 37 000 members of the SA
Police Service were semi-literate. This situation is frightening and
shocking. No war on crime can ever be successful with 35% of the police
force having difficulty with reading or writing, thus making police
documents unusable. He said a further 11 000 members of the SA Police
Service could not react to emergency situations as they did not have
driving licences. This is an unacceptable state of affairs. Those who can
drive do not have vehicles, or petrol accounts have not been paid, thus
rendering the service worthless. This is a difficult thing to handle, but
it is a reality that the Minister is facing.

Now, if we look at the budget, although the budget for the Police Service
this year is 7% higher than last year's, according to the information at my
disposal, it addresses only 25% of the Police Service's personnel
shortages, 22% of its vehicle shortages and 50% of its equipment shortages.
The inability of the SA Police Service to operate fully discredits the
force and undermines confidence within and outside the force. The status
quo cannot prevail. We will have to do something.

The Minister's colleagues must give him more money. As a suggestion to get
more money, the FA would like to ask all Ministers and dignitaries who
place a heavy burden on the SA Police Service to provide them with
bodyguards, guarding their ministerial mansions and giving them chauffeurs,
to voluntarily give up this privilege so that these people can be deployed
where the need is greatest. Government dignitaries will then experience
what is happening to ordinary citizens in the streets in neighbourhoods of
South Africa. Once they have experienced the crime first hand, they will
willingly and without delay provide the Minister with the budget that he
needs to be effective. [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairperson, given that time is limited, may I also pay
tribute to the police who work under very difficult circumstances. It is
the PAC in this House that has moved a motion condemning killing of police
officers. I would also like to agree with the Deputy Minister about
technology. We need to transfer a lot of technology to the Police Force
because numbers alone are never going to be enough.

Having said that, the PAC's position on crime is one of zero tolerance.
Crime is a dangerous snake. It is destroying this country. Crime is
delaying economic development and the upliftment of the poor. Crime
subjects law-abiding citizens to fear for their lives and insecurity. It
cannot be dealt with by handling it with kid gloves. That is why the work
of the police, in particular, should be deeply appreciated by this nation.

When the PAC of Azania expressed the anger of the people of this country
regarding crime, some members of the ruling party made a political football
out of crime. [Interjections.] They vilified the PAC and seemed to be more
concerned about pain being inflicted on criminals than with the pain
criminals are inflicting on the law-abiding citizens of this country.
[Interjections.]

At that time, the PAC warned that if the ANC Government did not take
appropriate measures against crime, the people would resort to their own
ways of punishing criminals. Some of our women, in particular, are already
dealing with criminals in their own way. Two instances are enough to
illustrate this point. A woman was reported to have cut the tongue of a
rapist who forcibly kissed her. [Interjections.] Another woman was alleged
to have cut off the private parts of a rapist and disappeared with them.
[Laughter.] The hospital doctors appealed to her in vain to return the
man's ``thing''. [Laughter.] I will not tell members what that is, but
members know what this ``thing'' is, which always violates the dignity of
our women. [Laughter.]

The vilification of the PAC on crime, however, was a diversionary tactic.
The absurd tactic has not worked. In this Parliament some members have gone
further. They have spoken of chemical castration with regard to rape. Let
me say that the Minister of Safety and Security himself has talked about
amending the Constitution. This shows that the Minister of Safety and
Security has realised that crime in this country is not a joke to be used
as a political football. He has risen to the occasion.

I want to commend the hon the Minister for the commendable work he is
doing, together, especially, with the police commissioner and the SAPS.
Drastic steps are now being taken against crime. It is better to listen to
the PAC and the people late than never. The PAC supports the Vote. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, let us not prolong this.
That is enough. The following member is going to deliver her maiden speech.
[Applause.]

Ms D M MOROBI: Chairperson, our Government is committed to building a safe
country. In order to create a safe society we have to reduce the number of
firearms which so threaten the safety of our citizens, visitors and
children. There have been a number of initiatives, undertaken by both the
state and civil society, to address the problem of small arms
proliferation.

We do not know what the number is of illegal firearms in our country. We do
not know how many small arms are in circulation. But we do know that our
country is awash with weapons. We know that law-abiding citizens are daily
killed, maimed and threatened by firearms. And we regularly hear of
licensed arms being stolen, of guns being lost, and of accidents with
firearms causing loss of life. This easy availability of arms is a threat
to our dream of the African renaissance. We all know the range of crimes
which involve the use of guns.

In 1998, 85% of robberies were committed with firearms. Between 1994 and
1998 an average of 240 members of the SAPS were murdered, the majority by
gunshot. When one owns a gun, the chances are high of one's own gun being
used against a family member or friend in the heat of an argument, or of
causing an injury by accident.

Other crimes caused by reckless gun owners involve the killing of women by
their husbands or lovers. Some men are threatened by women who hold high
positions in their workplaces, for example being a doctor. These men know
that they will be beneficiaries of their wives' high insurance policies.
Gender power relations are a legacy of society. Men in particular cannot
accept the facts of gender balance. There was a march by one million women
in America for gun control measures. The women who are ruthlessly killed by
guns are breadwinners.

There are those who oppose gun control legislation, saying that licensed
gun owners are responsible and do not contribute to crime. But I would like
those who are against gun control just to listen to me for a few seconds. I
am going to give members information pertaining to where I come from, that
is Vanderbijlpark. Between January 2000 and April 2000 in Vanderbijlpark
the following incidents pertaining to guns occurred: 115 robberies, 23
instances of illegal possession of firearms and ammunition, 16 murders, one
bank robbery, 13 thefts of firearms, 14 instances of negligent loss of
firearms, one instance of illegal dealing in firearms and ammunition, and
40 instances of the pointing of firearms. So there is a tremendous need for
gun control.

Let us separate fact from fiction. The facts are that guns which are used
in crime are often licensed guns stolen from private citizens or from the
state. Then there are crimes committed by legal gun owners, as well as
those with guns smuggled into South Africa and sold at bargain-basement
prices. The fact is that there are too many guns in South Africa. We cannot
only focus on illegal firearms in reducing violent crime. We need to reduce
the overall number of firearms in circulation, and we need to make
ownership of a firearm an exception, rather than the norm, in our
communities.

The audit states that lack of control over firearms and ammunition is a
cause of grave concern. Between 1999 and February 2000 more than 227
firearms were reported stolen from the SANDF. This is totally unacceptable.
The SANDF must put its house in order.

We anticipate that gun control legislation will be put in place, but we
must do more. Our protection services - the police and the military - must
ensure that weapons no longer in service and confiscated weapons are
destroyed and that our border controls are effectively enforced.

The challenges in changing our trigger-happy culture are daunting, but some
progress has been made. The National Commissioner of Police has created a
special firearms control unit, which is situated in his Office and reports
directly to him. The illegal-firearms units of the SA Police Service have
seized 85 000 firearms between 1994 and 1998.

The SAPS budget for the year 2000-01 makes allowance for R57 million to
assist in the implementation of the Firearms Control Bill. An additional
amount of R82 million has been allocated for implementation, for the
following two years. This amount will allow the central firearms registry
to employ additional people and to upgrade the firearms register.

There is R57 million for the implementation of the Act, in addition to the
R17,5 million which is budgeted for the Central Firearms Register. At
present, there is no separate budget for the illegal-firearms units, owing
to the restructuring which is taking place in the area of firearms control.

While both the management of the SAPS at station level and the specialised
units are critical in tackling gun-related violence, the problem of crime
cannot simply be left to the department. The importance of the social,
political and economic context in which both petty and organised crime
occur, are central to the problem.

Our focus must not only be on more effective law enforcement, crucial as
that is, but also on building strong institutions of governance at all
levels of Government, and building a strong civil society, united in its
commitment to building a safe, caring nation.

Re re re a hlapanya hore, re le ANC, re ke ke ra hlola re tlohela naha ya
rona ka hara matsoho a dinwamadi. [We swear that we, as the ANC, will never
leave our land in the hands of vampires.] [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members and our police
officials, firstly, I want to congratulate D M Morobe on her maiden speech.
Congratulations. Malibongwe. [Let it be praised.] [Applause.]

In terms of section 205(3) of the 1996 Constitution, the objects of the
police services are the prevention, combating and investigation of crime,
the maintenance of public order, protecting and securing the inhabitants of
the Republic and their property, and upholding the law. However, the
question is: How is it possible to achieve the above when there still
exists a lack of co-ordination between the police and civil society?

The main reasons for a disjointed criminal justice system are the lack of
resources and qualified police officers. In order to beat crime, the
national Budget must accommodate the following requirements: Better
conditions between the police, the prisons and the courts; better
environmental design and urban planning including cleaner CBDs that are
equipped, for instance, with working and brighter lights.

Policing forces are in urgent need of a healthier lifestyle, more
especially psychological counselling, to counteract the trauma they are
confronted with during the execution of their duty. Education is the key to
good policing. Bursaries and financial assistance must be made available
for police officers to empower themselves with relevant knowledge and
training on the tertiary level. This will groom the police officers to
perform their duties in a well-informed and responsible manner.

Furthermore, education and training improves productivity, promotes
discipline, motivation and the ability to work in teams, and multicultural
sensitivity is developed. Although efforts have been made to reform the
criminal justice system, we still need more projects to be initiated, to
build modern and well-equipped police stations that will have the necessary
capacity to deal effectively with serious and sophisticated levels of
criminality.

Since 1994, South Africa has received significant donor assistance for the
core departments of the criminal justice system from foreign countries such
as Belgium, Sweden, the United States, Germany, Canada, France and the
Netherlands to assist in crime prevention and to reform the criminal
justice system. However, the availability of scarce resources was not used
effectively owing to the lack of strategic management skills to assess the
organisational needs critically. Therefore, it is important that the donor-
assisted projects are integrated into the mainstream of the police
bureaucracy to sustain transformation.

Victims of crime must be empowered through an effective, quality victim
support system to enhance investigation and service delivery. The victims
of crime most affected are women and children. South Africa is the rape
capital of the world. Therefore, the introduction of a new sexual assault
evidence kit must be speeded up, so that the implementation of better
training techniques and equipment will increase rape conviction rates.

The major problem faced by the police forensics department is that we do
not have an accredited academic course in forensics. A forensics academic
course in South Africa is an indisputable necessity, which the Government
must make unconditional efforts to make provision for. If accurate
information is available, more can be done to transform the SAPS.

Corruption is a sad reality within the ranks of the SAPS. Therefore the
Independent Complaints Directorate is tasked with the duty to investigate
offences and misconduct in an impartial and effective manner. However,
owing to the immense case load, the investigation of complaints is stifled.
[Time expired.]

Mr J M NGUBENI: Chairperson, hon Ministers and colleagues, the Independent
Complaints Directorate is a civilian oversight body with the express
mission of promoting acceptable and proper police conduct, and it is tasked
with proposing reforms and preventative methods to reduce the incidence of
behaviour that gives rise to complaints against the police. The ICD is
overwhelmed by the mammoth task of instilling public confidence, as well as
ensuring accountability and promoting a culture of human rights in the SA
Police Service.

Public confidence in the police has been eroded by the dark days of
detentions, torture, and state-sponsored killings. If the persons who
directly and indirectly governed during the time of the apartheid regime,
and who today position themselves as champions, guardians and custodians of
democracy, were truly committed to these democratic leanings, they should
have established an institution like the ICD a long time ago. Today our ANC-
led Government is a shining example of a vision that does not seek to
protect the state from abusing its citizens, but to build a safe haven for
all South Africans. Yes, to the cynics out there, that is our Machiavellian
crime and vision. We are guilty of attempting to entrench democracy in
South Africa.

The ICD has achieved remarkable results, given the scarcity of resources
which comprehensively demonstrates their commitment to building a better
South Africa. The reprioritisation of strategic objectives, planning and
focus, has enabled the ICD to significantly reduce the cases referred to
it. Moreover, it has successfully investigated the cases of death whilst in
custody or cases of police-related deaths. This approach has also enabled
the ICD to monitor or supervise investigations of cases taken back to the
SAPS.

However, this does not suggest that other crimes are of lesser importance,
like cases of corruption or misconduct. It must also be understood that the
SAPS has, within its own structure, units such as the anticorruption unit,
and disciplinary procedures which can complement the objectives of the ICD.
This process unfolds within the framework of not compromising the
independence of the ICD. Moreover, it would be counterproductive to project
the ICD as the supercop of the SAPS since this would lead to unnecessary
tension and conflict.

The ICD should be viewed as a vehicle which will carry transformation
forward. This also demands ICD protection of SAPS members in cases of
unfounded allegations. The focus of the strategy is to be proactive and not
reactive in highlighting the root causes of problems affecting certain
police members' conduct and to develop a profile of police officers prone
to violence. The latter task needs to be commended, because this definitely
produces results that would assist us in many years to come.

The number of people who die whilst in police custody is still unacceptably
high and is a serious cause for concern. These unfortunate incidents could
be dramatically reduced and avoided if measures and methods to detect
suicidal tendencies and illnesses were improved. Furthermore, we should
avoid incarcerating people with injuries. Whilst the ICD needs to jealously
maintain its independence and be so vigilant as to deal with issues of
crime, corruption and misconduct without fear or favour, it is also equally
important that the ICD recognises that to successfully achieve its
objectives, there needs to be an appropriate measure of co-operation with
the SAPS, as we all must realise that the overall objective is to fight and
eradicate crime as economically and efficiently as possible.

The fundamental problem of violent crime and police brutality should be
understood in the context of the violent exposure of the police in the
past. Furthermore, the perpetrators of violent crime are also a generation
that was exposed to an intolerable amount of violence in the 1970s, 1980s
and 1990s. This is the generation who, as children, were exposed to corpses
in the township and to consistent state-sponsored violence, hence the
propensity to commit unnecessarily violent crime.

Regarding the masters, crafters and beneficiaries of apartheid, one is
puzzled as to why they still ask about the lack of respect for life in our
country. This is the legacy they created. It is also the reason why people
look to soft solutions such as the death penalty - violent state tendencies
- or illogically look for scapegoats, such as making it seem as though
crime started with our country's liberation in 1994.

The ICD's few years of existence have imprinted a clear message to
criminals in uniform - that they should be exposed and punished. Further,
the ICD also recognises that these criminals in uniform demoralise the
honest, dedicated and brave policewomen and policemen of our country.
Fighting crime requires the participation and co-operation of communities,
because criminals do not live in mountains and thick forests, but in
communities. The evidence and information required about them is found
within these communities. The ICD should therefore promote itself to the
public and be accessible to the public.

Another compelling question is racism among some members of the SAPS who do
not want to accept change. According to ICD statistics, this area needs
urgent attention because, without a doubt, racism of any nature is
unacceptable. We cannot tolerate instances of reserved toilets, racial
attacks and racial slurs within our society.

We are fortunate today that we are able to enjoy the democratic rights and
traditions that we thought impossible a decade ago. For us to debate freely
and forward proposals, and to discuss all these matters within the public
domain, demonstrates the commitment and culture of transparency of the ANC-
led Government. It is unfortunate that our opponents enjoy cheap point-
scoring politicking rather than making a valuable contribution towards the
building of a crime-free South Africa.

Fighting crime is not about increasing numbers, but about proper training,
professionalism and strategic deployment of human and material resources.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, the hon the Minister has declared with great
pride today that South Africa is not the crime capital of the world and
that there is indeed the odd city in Europe with a higher crime rate. He
reminds me of the Blue Bulls supporters boasting in the streets of Pretoria
because at long last one team ended behind them on the Super 12 log.

Dit laat my dink aan Jannie wat met sy rapport by die huis gekom het en met
groot trots gesê het: ``Pa, ek het die beste gedoen van dié wat gedop
het!'' [That reminds me of Jannie who came home with his report and said
with great pride: ``Dad, I fared best of those who failed!'']

I appreciate the Minister's optimism, and I also have a dislike for the
prophets of doom to whom he referred. I am afraid, however, that the
problem with crime in South Africa is not the prophets of doom but the
statistics and realities of doom, and those one cannot get rid of with
eloquence or a cowboy-like approach alone.

The most important matter to be addressed in the SAPS is the manpower
situation. The greatest asset of any business is its manpower, its human
resources. The approved staff complement of the SAPS is, according to Sapu,
161 000, and the number of members in the service is a mere 124 000, a
shortage of 37 000. This should be addressed more aggressively. The
Minister of Finance has allowed an extra R1,1 billion this year in the
budget, but when the various hidden costs, like RDP projects and capital
costs, are deducted, the actual increase is a mere 5,7%, which hardly meets
the demands of inflation.

Bearing in mind the existing backlog of 37 000 members, the fact that some
40 000 employees who have qualified for promotion have not been promoted in
the past two years and the fact that overtime payments to members are
grossly inadequate, one may ask whether the Minister, with the current
budget, has a snowball's hope of reforming the SAPS into a body which can
fulfil the duty of protecting the lives and properties of our citizens.

In this regard, the AEB requests the following: Increase the budget of the
SAPS by a further 5%. Outsource all noncore functions and concentrate on
the basics of combating crime. Address the vehicle situation. An extra 15
000 vehicles could be made available to the police with the R300 million
intended for spending on a luxury aeroplane for the President. Give local
communities greater responsibilities and resources to take responsibility
for safety and security in their region. Get greater involvement,
especially from big business, to become real partners in the fight against
crime. There are lots of possibilities to be exploited in co-operation with
especially the short-term insurance companies, which would benefit greatly
from a lower crime rate.

'n Saak wat kritieke afmetings aanneem, is die plaasmoorde. Só lyk die
stygende grafiek van plaasaanvalle en -moorde sedert Maart 1997. Ek hou dit
op sodat agb lede kan sien. Aanvalle op plase het van 327 in 1991 toegeneem
tot 886 in 1999, 'n totaal van 4 730 terreuraanvalle sedert 1992. Laat ons
verder die feite onder oë neem: die wetgewing oor wapenbeheer sal ons
landelike gemeenskap nog weerloser laat.

Hierdie moorde het 'n spesifieke etniese gerigtheid, naamlik teen blanke
boere. Roof alleen is nie die motief nie. In menige geval het die
moordenaars niks geroof nie. Die ernstige graad van verminking is duidelike
bewys dat hierdie moorde gepaard gaan met 'n bepaalde afskrik- en
viktimiseringstrategie. Dit is meer as misdaad, dit is blatante
postrevolusionêre terrorisme. Is dit die manier hoe Suid-Afrika sy
grondvraagstuk wil hanteer?

In hierdie verband rig ek 'n aanklag teen die SABC. In die afgelope tyd
word elke geïsoleerde geval van wanpraktyke deur enkele boere aan die groot
klok gehang, en die geheelbeeld van duisende boere se goeie trou en
welwillendheid word verswyg. Dan val die ANC nog elke keer oor sy voete om
die geïsoleerde gevalle soos vandag by wyse van 'n voorstel in die
Parlement aan 'n nog groter klok te hang.

Sedert die vroegste tye was die mees grondliggende funksie van die staat
die veiligheid van sy burgers. Ons Grondwet, menseregte en die Afrika-
renaissance sal 'n illusie bly solank dié veiligheid nie verseker word nie.
[Tyd verstreke.] [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[An issue that is assuming critical proportions is farm murders. This is
what the ascending graph of farm attacks and murders since March 1997. I am
holding it up so that hon members can see it. Attacks on farms have
increased from 327 in 1991 to 886 in 1999, a total of 4 730 attacks of
terrorism since 1992. Let us also take a good look at the facts: The
legislation on firearm control will leave our rural communities even more
vulnerable.

These murders have a specific ethnical focus, namely on white farmers.
Robbery alone is not the motive. In many instances the murderers did not
steal anything. The serious degree of maiming is clear proof that these
murders are accompanied by a certain deterrent and victimisation strategy.
It is more than crime, it is blatant post-revolutionary terrorism. Is this
the way in which South Africa wants to deal with its land issue?

In this regard I am lodging a complaint against the SABC. In recent times
every isolated case of malpractice by one or two farmers has been
proclaimed from the rooftops, while the complete view of the good faith and
goodwill of thousands of farmers has not been mentioned. And the ANC then
also falls over its own feet to proclaim the isolated cases from the
rooftops by way of a motion in Parliament, as happened today.

Since the earliest times the most basic function of the state has been to
ensure the safety of its citizens. Our Constitution, human rights and the
African renaissance will remain an illusion as long as that safety is not
assured. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]]

Mr T M GONIWE: Chairperson, may I concur with Comrade Ndlovu in dipping my
flag to the memory of all those policemen and policewomen who have laid
down their lives in pursuit of a safe and secure environment for all South
Africans. Today my speech is dedicated to one of the ANC stalwarts who is
celebrating his 88th birthday, none other than Gatyeni Walter Sisulu. We
wish him a happy birthday. [Applause.]

Contrary to the claims by the makhal' ekuseni [whinging] brigade that the
SA Police is failing in its task, the police has, in fact, taken major
strides on the road to becoming a mean and effective law enforcement
agency. The Police Service we have today has made significant progress in
ridding itself of the shackles of its past. Policemen and policewomen are
beginning to take democracy and its imperatives seriously. Human rights,
transformation, equality, nonracism, nonsexism and gender sensitivity have
become common words in the vocabulary of our Police Service. It is not
surprising at all for the makhal' ekuseni brigade to disown the Police
Service.

Our Police Service is succeeding in changing its notorious image of the
past to a more human one. The new creature our Police Service is becoming
instils fear in the minds of its former masters. At a time when national
consensus is needed to strengthen the Police Service, we are inundated with
voices of dissent, whose main aim is to divide, weaken and demoralise our
men and women in uniform. Central to the new image of our Police Service is
the understanding of an integrated approach and strategy which takes into
account social factors like poverty and unemployment.

A police force like this frightens the DP, because it is increasingly
beginning to see crime and corruption for what they really are. It is a
Police Service which will never again be used to beat up and tear-gas
striking workers. [Interjections.] It is becoming a police force which will
not be used to lock up farmworkers when they engage in struggles to free
themselves from the farmers who oppress and exploit them. [Applause.] It is
a police force that is beginning to attach and accord the same value to and
respect for the poor women in kwaZakhele, Mdantsane, Lingelihle, Soweto and
Alexandra as it does the rich businessmen in Sandton, Houghton and
Bishopscourt. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: And in Bishop Lavis!

Mr T M GONIWE: It then should be understandable why the makhal' ekuseni
brigade wants to disassociate itself from a Police Service which seeks to
protect all citizens without discrimination. [Interjections.] The hon
Gibson has become a captive of his party's mischievous intentions, which
are to politicise crime and corruption through a cleverly crafted fault-
finding campaign. All this is in the interests of catching a few votes in
the upcoming local government elections. [Interjections.] Votes attained in
this manner are nothing but blood votes. [Interjections.]

The DP's lack of commitment to the safety and security of South Africans is
clearly evident in the Western Cape, where the DP is governing. Communities
on the Cape Flats and in black townships live and travel in constant fear
of their lives. The provincial government, of which they are part, refuses
to act decisively to end this. [Interjections.] Women, children and the
elderly are terrorised daily by gangsters in the black townships on the
Cape Flats. [Interjections.] I am sure that had this occurred in
Bishopscourt or Sandton, they would not have been so tolerant of it.
[Interjections.] They are demonstrating the kind of tolerance they
demonstrated during the apartheid raids in our townships. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: We did do something about it!

Mr T M GONIWE: We, in the ANC, are committed to ensuring the safety and
security of all citizens of South Africa. Our approach to combating crime
and corruption is in line with our overall vision for our country.
[Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: To do nothing!

Mr T M GONIWE: We are tough on the underlying causes of crime, such as
poverty and inequality. [Interjections.] We are equally tough on crime and
corruption. In order to effectively turn around the tide of crime, we
insist on the following steps: A drastic reduction in the number of guns
and ammunition in circulation and the introduction of tougher gun controls.

Maar ons weet tannie Meraai en oom Willempie het 'n klomp gewere daar op
die plaas. [But we know that Aunt Meraai and Uncle Willempie have a lot of
guns on their farm.]

Unfortunately the criminals target those very old, frail people whose guns
the opposition seeks to protect. [Interjections.] We want to introduce
harsher sentences for serious crimes and alternative sentences for petty
crimes, including electronic monitoring systems for some categories of
those on parole and probation. Tougher sentences! [Interjections.] This
week there was an example of a weeping rapist. He wept in the dock when he
was given a life sentence, because of the good work of the SA Police
Service. [Applause.]

We want to improve the conditions within the Police Service and review
their working conditions but unlike some of our detractors, we are
painfully aware that we do not have all the resources we would have liked
to have at our command. [Interjections.] The most serious crime of our
times is for the hon Douglas Gibson to come and be two-tongued here. He
opposes this Government. What if his opposition party had won? He opposes
the budget. Say, for some strange reason ... [Interjections.]
An HON MEMBER: He opposes everything!

Mr T M GONIWE: ... his opposition party wins the day - that would paralyse
the Police Service.

Mr D H M GIBSON: They would be so happy!

Mr T M GONIWE: I encourage Comrade Selebi to seriously consider doing
something about the hon Gibson. [Interjections.]

In conclusion, to demonstrate our transformed Police Service, I want to
share with hon members a recent occurrence where the police in Gauteng
consulted with gay people, told them that there was a threat of increased
violence against them and invited them to work together with the police to
protect themselves. That is the same thing we are saying to our nation:
Work together with us and work together with the police for the better
security of everyone. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, hon members, I would like
to complete the rest of my speech, because it refers to a number of
questions that have been raised by constructive debaters, not just howlers
... [Laughter] ... who see crime as a political issue. [Interjections.] I
am referring in particular to Ms Van Wyk, the hon Pheko, the hon Ndlovo and
of course ...

An HON MEMBER: Gibson? Hon Gibson? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER: No, no. [Laughter.]

I wanted to indicate that the broad strategic approach that we are taking
as a department is one which must have a lasting effect. We, as a
department, are convinced that this is not a departmental issue. It is an
issue for which responsibility should be shouldered by all the departments
in Government, the private sector and our communities as a whole.

There is absolutely no way, even if one had 1 million members in the SA
Police Service, that one could be on top of the crime situation if there
were no active participation, no active involvement by our own communities
in the provision of their own safety and security. [Interjections.] They
cannot be spectators. Everybody must be involved. I concede the important
point made by the Deputy Minister that in this day and age, one is not
talking about numbers.

The hon Gibson is still trapped in the old days when people used oxwagons.
[Laughter.] The computer provides the technology that counts. Along with
the Department of Education and the National Youth Commission, we have
undertaken - we are not planning to undertake, we have undertaken -
projects to reduce youth violence. These aim to support learners to stay in
school and to improve the resilience of our youth at risk, both of
victimisation and of becoming offenders.

In a shared leadership role with the Minister of Health, I am consolidating
a national multidepartmental strategy to deal with the hideous crime of
rape, focusing on prevention, victim services, investigation, prosecution
and court management, offender rehabilitation and partnership with civil
society. We are being assisted in this by people from the United Kingdom,
who are not just content to be talkers and fingerpointers, but who are
saying: Where can we help you?

They are unlike these people here who are happy to point fingers. The hon
Gibson and his ilk are waiting for that moment when they can celebrate the
failure of the Government of this country to come to terms with the crime
situation. [Interjections.] He prays day and night that we should fail.
[Interjections.] That is why he is taking the kind of position that he has
taken today.

The departmental programme, led by the police, supports the implementation
of the Domestic Violence Act. Firearms control is, once again, one of the
main focus areas receiving priority. Somebody talked about it here. I am
pleased to inform the House that the Firearms Control Bill has been
certified by the state law advisers, and will be introduced in Parliament
tomorrow. For this purpose, an additional amount of R57 million has been
allocated for its implementation during the current financial year. It is
going to work. It is going to pass in this Parliament, and we are going to
drag Gibson and his ilk along, kicking and screaming, to see it through.
[Laughter.]

This include provisions for the upgrading of the Central Firearms Register,
a new import-export system and the physical seizure of firearms from unfit
persons, as well as the appointment of designated firearms officers and
other relevant improvements. I have said this before, and I want to say it
again: The new Firearms Control Bill is not aimed at disarming law-abiding
citizens. Anybody who insists that we are disarming people is committing
mischief par excellence. There is absolutely nothing about that in the
Bill. Even the most illiterate person would tell one that there is nothing
in it about disarming civilians who are ordinary law-abiding citizens of
this country.

Again, they want to politicise the issue. At one point, they were saying
that it was a ploy to disarm whites. That is what they were saying. That is
the kind of mischief that one finds is created by certain members.
[Interjections.] The hon member knows who they are. [Laughter.]

I would now like to address some organisational matters relating to the
resources of our organisation. For the first time in the history of the
police, a system has been introduced to direct all the activities of
support divisions towards only one objective - to support our operational
plan.

Hon Van Wyk should note that apart from the 1 200 new constables that we
are going to be recruiting during the course of the year, an additional 600
civilians will be recruited to replace police officers doing administrative
duties, so that they can be deployed to fight crime. This is not something
that is being planned; it is something that has been approved. It has been
budgeted for and is happening. Over and above these appointments, 600
individuals will be recruited to perform static guard duty, again releasing
trained police members to fight crime. Approximately 300 new personnel will
also be appointed to ensure the implementation of the strategy to deal with
the proliferation of illegal firearms.

The majority of these members will be deployed to the priority areas that
we indicated earlier on and within priority units, to enhance the
implementation of our operational strategy. We have decided that the
detective service and crime intelligence will benefit most from these
endeavours, since they play a major role in both our geographical and
organised crime strategies.

Gibson should note that opposition parties have, on various occasions,
played a numbers game by drawing comparisons between the SAPS and the
police services of other countries. [Laughter.] Policing is not about
numbers ... [Interjections.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: We have allowed the hon
the Minister to do this quite often, but I would very much like him to
refer to ``the hon Gibson'', and not just to ``Gibson''. If he is going to
use the word ``ilk'' again when referring to us, he must refer to us as the
``hon ilk.''

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! You have made your point. We normally
refer to one another as ``hon members''. I would request the hon the
Minister to refer to him as ``hon member''.

The MINISTER: Yes, hon Gibson! Policing is not about numbers. It is first
and ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Continue, hon Minister. They are
disturbing you.

The MINISTER: Policing is not about numbers; it is first and foremost about
strategy, and we believe that we have found the correct recipe. I want to
mention a practical example. Gibson should not talk, because I will call
him by his first name. [Laughter.] Hon Gibson! [Laughter.]

I want to mention a practical example. Although fewer members were deployed
during the first five weeks of Operation Crackdown in comparison to
Operation Monozite last year - 3 500 to 5 100 respectively - Crackdown
produced significantly better results. In any event, international
comparisons of the ratio of police members to population numbers, indicate
that South Africa is well within accepted international norms. I hope the
opposition parties will in future focus their energy on discussing
solutions to problems. We can all count!

To ensure operational efficiency and maximum community support, the police
must be representative of our country's demographics. That is what we are
addressing - this issue was raised here. The department's targets for
achieving a more representative management cadre will be reached as soon as
the senior posts recently advertised have been filled, that is, 50% of all
senior managers from director up, will be from the historically
disadvantaged groups. At the level of provincial and divisional
commissioner, these targets have already been attained.

In the management echelon of the SA Police Service, we now have 9% women at
the level of director and above, as opposed to just 4% at the end of last
year. We will continue to address gender representivity at all levels
during subsequent appointments. Also, for the first time in the history of
policing in South Africa, we have two women who have been appointed to the
rank of divisional commissioner. [Applause.] They are both here today. We
are proud of them.

I agree with bab' uNdlovu that the killing of police members must stop. All
of us - the Ministry, the police, Parliament, the whole nation - must do
everything to protect our men and women in blue. Enough is enough!

On 25 June 1999, the President directed that steps be taken to review the
conditions of service of our members with a view to their improvement. He
said that this must help us to ensure that we raise the public status of
our policemen and policewomen, so that they are seen, correctly, as the
frontline guarantors of our fundamental right to life, safety and security.

Improving the conditions of service of members of the SA Police Service -
members have raised this issue - will have a positive impact on the morale
of members of the service and enable the SA Police Service to retain highly
skilled personnel. We are in discussion with the relevant role-players with
a view to putting in place strategies providing short-term, medium-term and
long-term solutions to this issue.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order Hon Minister, your speaking time has
expired.

The MINISTER: Even during the course of this week we are doing exactly that
kind of thing.

I would like to thank everybody who stood up in support of both these
Votes. Again, you are invited, Chairperson, to join us at a party after
these deliberations. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Steve! Steve!

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:32.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 17 May 2000
         took a decision, in accordance with Joint Rule 216, that the Local
         Government: Municipal Electoral Bill, 2000, be fast-tracked with a
         view to ensuring that the Bill can be passed by both Houses by 23
         June 2000.


         In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in both
         Houses for ratification.


     (2)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bill:


         (i)     Fire Brigade Services Amendment Bill [B 63B - 99] - Act No
              14 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 12 May
              2000).


     (3)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism on 18 May 2000
         submitted a draft of the South African Weather Bureau Bill, 2000,
         and the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs
         and Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
         Affairs, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Communications and to the Select
         Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises for information:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the South African Telecommunications Regulatory Authority
              for 1998-99 [RP 84-2000].

         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of the Ciskei Broadcasting Corporation for 1993-94 to 1996-97
              and the period ended 30 November 1997 [RP 79-2000].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy and to the
         Select Committee on Economic Affairs for information:


         (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Group Annual
              Financial Statements of Soekor (Pty) Ltd for 1997-98 [RP 78-
              2000].

         (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              of Enerkom (Proprietary) Limited for 1998-99 [RP 57-2000].


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
         Life and Status of Women for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Commission on Gender Equality for 1998-99 [RP 85-2000].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Labour and to the Select Committee
         on Labour and Public Enterprises for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Unemployment Insurance Fund for 1997 and 1998 [RP 77-2000].


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and to
         the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs for
         information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Agricultural Research Council for 1998-99 [RP 40-2000].


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health and to the Select Committee on Social Services:


         Report of the Department of Health for 1999-2000 [RP 75-2000].

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The following private member's legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker on 12 May 2000, in accordance with Rule
         234:
         (i)     Transfer of Convicted Prisoners Bill (Adv H C Schmidt).


         The legislative proposal has been referred to the Standing
         Committee on Private Members' Legislative Proposals and Special
         Petitions by the Speaker, in accordance with Rule 235.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     List of Shareholders of the South African Reserve Bank as at March
     2000.

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Report of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 1999-
     2000 [RP 68-2000].

