---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 March 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-03-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 MARCH 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:38.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 8 - Education:

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Mr Chairperson, hon members and comrades, it is
an honour to initiate the debate on the first Vote of this Parliament. I
invite hon members, in particular, to recognise the presence in the gallery
of the provincial MECs for Education, accompanied by their heads of
departments. [Applause.] They are here at my invitation to witness this
important debate and to convene afterwards for the special meeting of the
Council of Education Ministers this afternoon. I thank them for their
presence.
A Budget debate ought to be the most elevated exchange of opinions on the
important issues of the day. A debate on a Vote offers a great opportunity
for us to contemplate what education in our new democracy is for and what
it is not for.

So this is a good time to ask the question: Why vote public funds for
education services? Some might say: ``Well, why not? Is that not what
Parliaments are supposed to do?'' Others might say: ``That is a good
question. The education system is so riddled with problems and
inefficiencies that we should not throw good money after bad.'' Yet others
might say: ``Governments cannot manage education services. They should be
left to the private sector; they will sort them out.''

There is something to be said for the first two responses but very little
to be said for the third. But all three responses challenge us to think
more carefully about a matter that may seem so obvious that it is taken for
granted.

I will not recapitulate the story of our efforts to reshape and reform our
education system over the past six years. That has been done in my
department's 1999 annual report, which has been distributed to all hon
members. The report provides a comprehensive record of our stewardship of
the funds voted by Parliament in 1998-99 and a retrospective account of the
transformation of education during the first democratic administration,
whose term of office ended in mid-year. It gives a full account of the
setting of new priorities for the next five years under the banner of
Tirisano and particularly our implementation plan.

We ought, therefore, to look at the fundamentals of educational policy. I
should like to begin the debate today by quoting one of this country's
great teachers. She wrote:


  A flock without lambs is doomed. A herd without calves has no future. A
  people whose children are doomed to ignorance has no future. It is our
  children who are condemned to a world of darkness and ignorance, who will
  never fit in anywhere in the world after being shut away from the rest of
  humanity. If we all realise that, we cannot, no matter what the odds,
  stand idly by and let that happen. Where are the mothers in this hall who
  will say: ``Never! Not to my child!'' Where are the women of this nation
  who will say: ``Never! Not to my children?'' Have we less courage than
  the mother hen that will dare the falcon that swoops down on her young? I
  do not think so.

The teacher's name was Phyllis Ntantala Jordan, and her son sits with us,
in this House. This memorable speech was given in December 1953, and it was
a call to arms against Bantu Education. Much has changed since then, but
the essence of what she said still resonates across time and space with
special meaning.

Mr Chairperson, members of this House, parents, teachers, and learners of
this nation, while the Budget is a key policy instrument, it is human
beings who make it meaningful, and its outcomes are about people. For this
reason, I want to talk today about our mothers and fathers and our
inherited responsibility, and our commitment to public education and the
development of our country. When we say that people are at the centre of
development, we do not refer to some nebulous or vague group, but to actual
human beings, to arents, learners, students and teachers who are directly
affected.
Â 
Phyllis Ntantala's book A Life's Mosaic is a case study of human endeavour
and partnerships. It recounts her observations as a little girl growing up
in the old Transkei. It tells of how the community regarded the school
within their midst as their responsibility. Although among the poorest of
the poor, they helped the missionary build it, they taxed themselves to buy
building materials, they ploughed the teacher's fields for him - it usually
was a him then - and they made sure his pantry was never empty.

The father of another in our midst tells the story about how he literally
had to climb a five-mile-high mountain every day of his school life - even
if he was hungry, which was often; even if it was raining, which was often;
and miserable - to get from his home on the banks of the Tsomo River to the
nearest school. That man was Govan Mbeki and his son is our President. He
did it without fail and earned himself two university degrees by the time
he was 30.
And the father of yet another who sits in the House became the very first
African in this country of ours to register at a university in South
Africa, and the very first African to gain a university degree in South
Africa. His name was Prof Z K Matthews. He became a hero and a role model
to generations of South Africans, because he showed that with diligence and
perseverance, even with all the odds stacked against him, he could do it.
He could make it.

In the 1950s, on the eve of the imposition of Bantu Education, Prof
Matthews looked at his 18 grandchildren - one of whom is now the
Chairperson of the NCOP - and he said:


  Surely in their lifetime, they will see these remaining barriers
  surmounted. I think of this as I hear again in my memory the words I
  heard so often from my parents: `Education was the weapon with which the
  white man had conquered our people and taken our lands.' `It was often
  thought', my father would say, `that the white man had conquered because
  he had superior weapons, guns.' `No', he would insist, `the real reason
  for our defeat was the white man's education and the black man's lack of
  it.' Only by mastering the secrets of his knowledge would we ever be able
  to regain our strength and face the conqueror on his own terms.

Now times have changed since Prof Matthews wrote that. We no longer see
ourselves as conquerors and the conquered. We no longer see education as
the white man's preserve, as something we have to learn if we are to beat
him.
I am sure that every member of this House can recollect a time when public
provision of education to the majority of the citizens was bitterly
contested. ``We shall open the doors of learning to all'', was one of the
most heartfelt pledges of the Freedom Charter. No government of a
democratic South Africa can be exonerated from the burden of making good on
that promise. Prof Matthews, Phyllis Ntantala and Govan Mbeki have taught
us that knowledge has no colour, race or language.

So how did our education system evolve? The idea that governments have
responsibility for public education came rather late in the development of
modern nation states. The global pattern of the modern nation state has its
origin in Europe, and then America. In those countries, across most of the
centuries, in the millennium which has just ended, formal education, as we
know it today, was a privilege of aristocrats and well-to-do merchants. The
religious authorities were employed to undertake the teaching of the rich
and the powerful. Charity schools were set for the schooling of the poor.
So education mirrored the social divisions of the feudal and the early
capitalist classes.

The notion that the state has the responsibility to provide for the
education of its citizens has several different strands, and not all of
them are attractive or wholesome. So allow me to briefly to deal with three
of them.

Firstly, in the late 19th century the modernising imperialist state - of
which Prussia and then Germany were the models - saw public education as a
tool for state building. They wanted common schools to generate sentiments
of patriotism and national identity across the German-speaking peoples of
Europe. They wanted an army of soldiers who could understand their orders
and use its new technology of war, and skilled workers for the growing
factories.

Secondly, at the same time, in the robust young United States of America,
newly united and rapidly industrialising after the civil war, the idea was
propagated that public education was a seedbed of democratic liberties.
Every citizen had the right to go to school. Thus, a nation of immigrants
would become loyal Americans under one flag, and a nation of many states
spread across a continent would imbibe a common set of symbols and values.
Of course, every one of these sentiments in the United States of America
was traduced and betrayed by the slavery tradition and the successful march
of desegregation from the south into the American heartland, under which a
black was only three fifths of a man until the civil rights movement
exploded on the scene in the 1950s and 1960s.

A third model of public education was born after the Russian revolution. In
Marxist-Leninist thought public education would be the vehicle to advance
the message of social equality. Soviet education created a new socialist
consciousness in the minds of all its citizens, starting in infancy. Class
subservience and religious obscurantism would be challenged and overcome o
the ideological battlefield.

All three traditions were founded on the belief that public education
should be universally available, compulsory for all citizens, organised and
funded by the state. All three traditions infused public education with a
patriotic mission to advance the manifest destiny of their peoples, in
their countries and the world. So all three traditions had export models
devised by enthusiastic emulators in other countries or spread by conquest.

Let us acknowledge then, that the birth of public education systems as we
know them coincided with the birth of nation states in the modern era.
Public education was seen as an indispensable adjunct of state-building and
nation-building. It was enrolled in the service of a dominant state
ideology, whether authoritarian, libertarian, or a complex fusion of both.
In other words we are reminded that public education is a vessel into which
social values may be poured - a vehicle to be steered in the public
interest, however this is conceived.

So let us not romanticise public education as self-evident good. Nothing in
public affairs is self-evident. The social purpose it serves and the
integrity with which it is executed must validate every action of state.
This is especially the case with public education systems, because they
reach everyone and they traffic in knowledge, values and ideas.

So without doubt, the world we live in has been fashioned by the worldwide
influence of public education system. It has created the indispensable
foundation of modern states, democratised knowledge, opened up advanced
learning to countless millions and provided the intellectual sinews for the
development of modern technology and communication in a fast globalising
world. We know only too well about the havoc that the apartheid rulers
unleashed on the education system and everyone in it, and the effect of
much of the active and passive resistance to apartheid authority in
education.

I want to draw attention to the fact that before 1994, the fundamental aims
of public education in South Africa had never been formulated with the
welfare of all South Africans in mind. Such aims can only emanate from a
government and a parliament that command the consent of the people of South
Africa. Out of a racially fragmented society, we have had to create a
nonracial and a democratic system. So the challenge is to build a system
for a democratic society.

All our people shared in the historic compromise of 1994. This has given us
- in Government, Parliament, civil society and education institutions
throughout the country - an exceptional opportunity to think through the
purpose of public education in a democratic South Africa. To meet this
challenge - the challenge of living in the 21st century - let us give our
children real hope as the only way of advancing education. I began by
saying: Let us give our children real hope by ensuring the success of
active learning through properly organised outcomes-based education and
move away from the highly authoritarian, rigid, curriculum-driven system.

Members are aware that I have convened a strong team of experts to review
our implementation of outcomes-based education, namely Curriculum 2005. But
I remain convinced, as do all the teachers I have spoken to, in the
potential of outcomes-based education, if it is implemented successfully.
Why is this? Perhaps I can answer by quoting once more from Prof Matthews'
speech he made as Cape president of the ANC in 1955. He said: ``Independent
thinking has always been regarded by rulers as a dangerous thing.'' My
mother used to say that to me too. ``Independent thinking has always been
regarded by rulers as a dangerous thing to encourage among the common
people,'' Prof Matthews said.

Now, in the present, it is time for all of us who have a genuine interest
in the education of our nation to stand up and be counted. The future of
our flock and our herd is in our hands. We are all parents, we are all
teachers, we have all been students and the reality may be bleak. We have a
democracy with an extraordinary Bill of Rights and a Constitution which
protects and enhances the right to basic education. We have formal
equality, but many of our children remain doomed to ignorance of one kind
or another. Now, what is the remedy?

The Government blames the teachers, the teachers blame the parents, the
parents blame the students, the students blame the Government and in the
end, instead of working it out, everyone gives up and goes off to a shebeen
- as my colleague the hon MEC for Education in Gauteng recently discovered
to his horror in Tembisa - and drink themselves into oblivion. Those
children were not drinking and dancing during school hours because they are
evil, bad or stupid. They were doing it because even if they do not admit
it, they have given up hope. If we, the principal actors in the education
system, have one goal that bonds us, or must bond us, and unites us in
everything that we do, it is to give hope to our children. We must equip
our children with the skills to think critically and independently, for
this will help them to be productive members of society as much as will the
fundamentals of reading, writing and arithmetic.

In this democratic South Africa of ours, unlike in the South Africa in
which Prof Matthews had to live, the rulers are the people. We are their
representatives, and we have nothing to fear from independent thinking. We
know that it makes our people and our country stronger.

We cannot solve all the enormous challenges that we face, overnight, nor
over the past five years, nor over the next five years, but all of us,
institutions, administrators, and policy makers, owe it to our country that
we hold out hope to this generation and those to come. Therefore I want to
enunciate a statement of the scope and purpose of public education in our
country that I trust will command wide support.

South Africans are in the process of creating a new nation, a truly
inclusive South African nation. In this nation of diverse peoples and
traditions, South Africans are learning to trust one another, to revel in
the brilliance of our diversity, and to honour every strand of our cultural
and linguistic identity and recognise its contribution to the strength and
the vitality of the whole.

We are on guard against the persistence of throwback behaviour from the
dark past, in particular racial arrogance and hard-necked linguistic and
cultural exclusivity. Public education has a vital role in the building of
this South African nation. So, in the first place, public education must
serve the needs of the overwhelming majority of South Africans.

The prerequisite of success here is that the public education system must
be accessible to all. If facilities are not available close to where people
live or if, despite what the law says, high fees deter people from entering
public facilities, then we have problems that need remedy. However, I do
not believe that the answer lies with a Thatcherite-type voucher system, as
advocated by some, since our commitment must be to our education system as
a whole, and there must be no cherry picking of developing the so-called
better schools and the devil take the hindmost.

Secondly, public education must embrace South Africans of all races,
classes, religions and languages. Nondiscriminatory admission is one thing,
but actively creating a new inclusive model school, college, technikon or
university is another. The prerequisite of success here is for public
education institutions to examine their inherited institutional cultures,
consider their new responsibilities, and be prepared to ditch old baggage
and respond creatively to the changed circumstances.

Thirdly, the public education system must command public confidence. If
public education is not delivering the level of service that people
require, they will go elsewhere, as we know. Private providers of all
varieties are ready to exploit any perceived gap left by inadequate public
provision. Nevertheless, registered private providers have a constitutional
right to exist, but the duty of nation-building rests on public
institutions and a public system of provision. If they fail in their
education function, they fail utterly also as nation-builders. What is
more, as soon as the public system fails to represent the South African
people at large, its capacity for beneficial influence on the civic values
and virtues of our new nation will be severely diminished.

I have referred to civic values and nation-building. The public education
system is not a simple vehicle for the transmission of knowledge which,
regrettably, is fairly extensive, and still less for the passing of
examinations, however important these may be, but its main purpose is the
transmission of facts. In our highly competitive society we have an
obsessive interest in simply the passing of examinations.

It is the social institution through which the principal values of our new
nation and the key to our identity as South Africans are conveyed to
successive generations of learners and students. Therefore this matter is
so important that I recently invited Prof Wilmot James, the Dean of
Humanities at the University of Cape Town, to lead an expert team in the
investigation of values in South African education. I expect to receive
their report at the end of this month. I will make it public at once and
invite, particularly in this House, an active debate on its findings.

The remedy must be worked out. It is easy to find scapegoats. We must
resist this temptation to find scapegoats. We must simply do more and
identify the fault lines and the cracks. Let us give our children hope by
restoring the status of teachers in our society to what it was before. Let
us challenge our teachers to earn such a status so that our children can
look up to them the way we looked up to Prof Matthews and Phyllis Ntantala.


For example, we have here, possibly in this House, a young student,
Delisile Mdleleni, from the Orange Farm informal settlement in Gauteng, now
studying for a degree in information technology at the University of the
Western Cape who, against considerable odds and through skipping through
classes at school, obtained a matriculation exemption last year at the age
of 15 years. So, we do have victories, victories over the enormous
adversity of illiteracy, lack of jobs for parents and living in one of the
largest squatter camps in South Africa. She comes through those ashes and
matriculates at the age of 15. [Applause.] Her example gives our children
hope and her achievement must acknowledge the devoted activity of teachers
and the community.

Our focus on teacher development will be guided by the recently published
norms and standards for educators and by the evolving role of principals
and managers in our schools, because we must reinstate the role of
principals and managers in our schools.  We are committed to improved and
increased teacher development, school and financial management, and quality
enhancement, some of which will be funded out of the policy reserve fund of
R272 million, set aside by the Minister of Finance in his Budget for this
year.

Let us give our children hope by creating a further education and training
system that will equip them to meet the social and economic needs of the
21st century. This year we will introduce legislation to further integrate
the further education and training system into our overall framework. In
this respect we should not forget the contribution of the Business Trust in
helping to do this with a R120 million assistance programme within an
almost hidden area of education - the technical colleges.

Let us be honest. Nothing gives our children more hope than an education
system which provides the prospect of jobs and a productive life, if they
go through school successfully that is, and they will spend more time in
the classroom and less in the shebeen. Let us give our children hope by
making our provincial delivery systems work. There are enormous competing
interests for national funds, but education has been identified as a
priority by our Government, and, for that reason, 21% of the national
Budget, R3 billion more than last year, will be spent on education, nearly
80% of it in the provinces. Therefore we must support the provinces in
whatever ways we can.

However, Vote 8 contains no funds to support provincial education systems
other than conditional grants to assist provincial education departments to
carry forward innovative work in capacity-building and quality improvement.
The bulk of education spending, of course, is not overseen by this
Parliament but by the nine provincial legislatures which will make
appropriations out of the funds voted to them in the block grant to
provinces.

Therefore, there is a disjunction, often noted in this House, between the
political responsibility of the Minister of Education for the state of
education throughout the country, and the fact that the Minister does not
control, or even influence, provincial allocations for education. I am,
therefore, closing this gap, not with a constitutional amendment, but with
a vigorous interpretation of the constitutional doctrine of co-operative
governance.

The Council of Education Ministers, which I said will meet later today in
extraordinary session, is a vital organ for the execution of the national
agenda in education. The nine MECs for Education and I are forging an
excellent working relationship based on our national common programme of
action, Tirisano, backed by the provincial plans.

At our meeting today, we will give careful consideration to proposals by
the Financial and Fiscal Commission, that will address some of the worrying
features of the present allocation of provincial education funds. The FFC
proposal presents a hopeful development which, I trust, will bring relief
and hope to our largely rural provinces.

We have made headway in reducing the inherited financial disparities among
provinces in the provision of education. The new FFC proposals should help
us take forward that goal. What concerns me just as much is the persistence
of inequality in education provision within provinces. I give notice that I
intend to investigate the matter with my provincial colleagues as a
priority in the year 2000.

Let us give hope to our children by making schools the centres of community
life once more, as they were when Phyllis Ntantala was a child. I will give
hon members an example of this. A simple example of this is the way we are
trying to work in the Government, together. We are working together with
other Government departments to make the schools the centre. We are working
with the SA Police Service, with the Minister of Safety and Security and,
now recently, with the Minister and the Department of Sport and Recreation,
to co-ordinate other activities at school level around sport and physical
education - nowadays known, to use one of the new buzzwords, as human
movement studies.

School sport is, regrettably, largely, absent from the vast majority of our
schools. We intend to bring it back. The experience of other countries has
shown that school sporting activities lead to high-performance, competitive
sport. There is a direct relationship between school-sport activities and
competitive sport and, therefore, we are going to be part of this. Although
school sport is for fun, we are also for competitive sport. Today I want to
commit my department and this House to supporting the proud bid to host the
World Cup 2006 soccer tournament in South Africa. [Applause.]

I think soccer is not only the national sport, but it represents for the
large part of our young people, the greatest aspiration to perform not only
for the school or the province, not only for the country, but for the
people. Therefore, it is enormously important that South Africa should be
the site of this most important contest after the Olympic Games that we
know.

So I say, therefore, that we should give our children hope also by ending
the conditions of physical degradation in South African schools. Many of
our rural schools have no sports grounds, no sports facilities of any kind.
One cannot learn - and I think that this House should recognise this - in
the state of physical degradation in which many of our schools are,
especially those in the rural areas.

We can learn and teach with dignity. And I am saying now that, of course,
we will be making claims for the reconstruction, renewal and rebuilding of
many of our schools. We are expecting that more than R500 million will be
spent by the provinces in the coming year on school refurbishment,
although, as the President has indicated, our funds are not inexhaustible.
So we need to plan and spend wisely. At this point I should add my thanks
to the Minister of Finance for extending tax concessions to those who
donate money for public preprimary, primary and secondary schools. This
should be very much part of the reconstruction of the schools.

So too with our higher education system. Let us give our children hope by
implementing a higher education system that grasps the intellectual and
professional challenges facing South Africans in the 21st century. The
higher educational sector is in the process of undergoing a process of root-
and-branch transformation. The institutional framework is in place for
implementing major changes. The new programme-based funding system
envisaged by the Higher Education Act of 1997 will be phased in over the
next few years after careful preparation including the implementation of
the new higher education management information system.

The total allocation to higher education in the past three years has
increased by over R1,6 billion to R7 billion, which is 93% of the total
allocation for Vote 8 for this department - an amount which constitutes 14%
of the education budget and which compares favourably with even OECD norms
and countries, and the OECD countries are the top 25 countries in the world
in terms of economic development. This allocation includes an increase of
over R15 million for the National Student Financial Aid Scheme. We are the
first country in Africa to spend over R450 million this year on a financial
aid scheme. Since 1994 almost R1,7 billion has been allocated by the fiscus
to student financial aid.

By June the Council on Higher Education will present me with a report on
the future size and shape of the higher education system. This is a long-
awaited event. I am pleased that the chairperson and the chief executive
are here with us. I am confident that this report will help us to close the
long and miserable chapter of apartheid-education planning that began 40
years ago. The Council on Higher Education report will set the scene for
major structural changes in higher education, and I expect to take to
Cabinet my proposal on those changes very soon after receiving the report.

However, let me say that we want some stability in our higher education
system. How can one explain a trade union taking industrial action last
week, because they did not like the principal of that particular
institution? How can one explain students corralling a vice chancellor and
kidnapping him the other day? There is no explanation which is explicable
or understandable in a democratic order.

Let me say quite clearly here: With all the authority that this Parliament
will give me, I will not countenance behaviour of this type. We will expect
value for money from our higher education system - real value for money.
[Applause.] It must be made quite clear that here there is no time for
these intellectual freeloaders in our society. They must be fully aware of
this, because higher education is enormously expensive and we must bring it
to larger and larger numbers of people. There is no free ride anymore.

Let us give our hope to the rural youngster who want to go to higher
education. We want to give hope to our children with special needs, of whom
there are nearly a quarter of a million in our country. We have an emerging
White Paper to cater for education for learners with special needs. That is
not to suggest that we need to develop two separate school systems as we
have had up to now. We need an integrated single system with special
sensitivity and provision for those students who require it.

Let us also give hope to our preschool children and their parents through
our early childhood development initiatives. We have to grapple with our
commitment to 10 years of compulsory education, which includes the
reception or Grade O level. We shall be looking to innovative and creative
ways and solutions to address our needs in this area, with the hope that
within the next few weeks the Minister for Welfare and Population
Development and I will be able to make proposals as to how we will meet our
basic obligation to the Grade O students.

Let us give our children hope, finally, by dealing urgently and
purposefully with the HIV/Aids emergency in and through the education and
training system. We should also recognise that there are enormous problems
of values that our children are facing in our schools through precocious
and early sexual activity, across classes, across races and regardless of
region. We cannot be unaware of the implications of precocious sexual
activity and the possibility of HIV/Aids.

I would like to thank everybody here: the House, for its interest in
education, and those who - through their hard work and effort - have
contributed to a renewed commitment to making a success of education. There
is no doubt that there is a new tone, a new atmosphere, a fresh wind
blowing across education today. The last year has been one which has
presented great demands on my department, with a new management style and
the appointment of a new director-general, Mr Thami Mseleku, who has pushed
our staff to work even harder. Of course, we would expect our Public
Service to rise to even greater heights in search of more efficient, more
sensitive and more responsive governance, although I should add that there
are those who are already there who more than fulfil that commitment. I am
going to say how they fulfil it.

Ten days ago I visited a school in Atlantis, a very deprived area of the
Western Cape. I was pleased to see teachers in their classrooms at 17:00,
preparing for a parents meeting at 19:00. This is, in fact, a successful,
working school. So we must also recognise that there are public servants
who are, in fact, more than meeting their norms. We need to celebrate our
teachers, our doers as well.

I would like to thank the Deputy Minister, Father Smangaliso Mkhatshwa, and
all the staff of the department, particularly Dr Trevor Coombe, who will be
retiring later this year, especially for his contribution to the education
policy debate in the pre-1994 period and, more importantly, for taking that
debate into Government after 1994. [Applause.] He has been a source of many
ideas, much inspiration and much-valued policy analysis over the past six
years.

I also want to thank the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Education, Prof Mayatula, a good shepherd of the committee, because the
portfolio committee and the chairperson have been very much part of the
renewal of the education system in the past six or seven months.

The response of the business community, particularly through the Business
Trust, and other significant individual support systems, has been of
enormous assistance to the department. International development co-
operation and assistance from donor governments and agencies has been, and
continues to be, a resource of considerable value. These meet our niche
needs in the country.

There have also been many members of the public who have helped in a
voluntary capacity, because we must now rebuild the value of voluntary work
in our schools and communities, and who have given us advice and assistance
in one manner or another. Part of that voluntary work has been run by the
Council on Higher Education. We do not pay members of the Council on Higher
Education, something unusual in South Africa. They are very much part of a
voluntary contribution, a feature in education.

I submit to the members of this House, parents, learners and teachers of
the nation that, with our Tirisano programme, we have the foundations in
place to turn the situation around, and to bring hope to our children and
to our country. Our overriding goal is to build a national public education
system that will fit South Africa for the 21st century, a system of which
South Africans can be proud. Only South Africans can do it. Working
together, we South Africans will do it. [Applause.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister of Education, Prof Kader
Asmal, hon members and invited guests, allow me to start this presentation
with a quotation from Epicurus, who said:


  It is better for you to be free of fear lying upon a pallet, than to have
  a golden couch and a rich table and be full of trouble.

Many South Africans, as we table this Budget, are very hungry, illiterate
and staying under bridges or in shacks, but one thing is sure, they are
free, at last. Their dignity as persons has been restored. They know that
however poor, illiterate or disabled they might be, this is their
Parliament. We are their representatives, and they too can, and will, be
here tomorrow.

On the day of the main Budget, I was visited by the leadership of the SA
Council of Churches and the Ecumenical Service for Socioeconomic
Transformation, to discuss the Education budget. Last Friday, 10 March
2000, the Portfolio Committee on Education had a wonderful workshop on the
Budget, where different structures were freely expressing their views about
the Budget. This is a testimony to the link of this important institution
with the people on the ground. I will come to their representations later.

Why is it important for both the hon members and the citizens of our
country to understand the facts and figures of the Budget? Why is
transparency of utmost importance? If they know what the country can
afford, and how much is allocated to what programme, they will stop
assuming that Government money is infinite. They will stop being strangers
or, better still, slaves in their own country, dependent on the whims of
either the Minister of Finance or the Government. As fully-fledged
citizens, they will be in charge of their own destiny. We are all free and
equal, irrespective of our status in life.

Allow me to highlight a few statistics in the 2000-01 Budget. The total
expenditure for this year is R233,5 billion. The consolidated national and
provincial spending on education is R50,7 billion; spending by the national
Department of Education is R7,5 billion; total transfers to provinces, that
is equitable shares, is R94,4 billion; consolidated grants to provinces is
R12,2 billion; conditional education grants to the national department and
the provinces for financial management and equity enhancement is R272
million; the contingency reserve, a portion of which is to be used to
repair damage caused by devastating floods, is R2 billion; the levy on the
payroll assigned to skills development funds is R1,4 billion; and projects
focused on HIV/Aids prevention will get R75 million.

To these figures we must add the anticipated contribution of the private
sector to education as a result of the Finance Minister's proposal that,
and I quote:


  The tax deductibility of donations be extended to preprimary and primary
  schools, children's homes, organisations caring for the aged and those
  which focus on HIV/Aids.

These figures, especially when read together with both historical and MTEF
figures, show transparency at its best. As it were, they show that the
pantry is open for all the family members to see that, that is all the food
we have. We will have to share and be content. I will come back to some of
these figures later.

The budget figure that will be tabled for approval by this House today is
the national Department of Education's allocation of R7,5 billion. This is
due to the fact that the national Department of Education has a policy-
making and monitoring responsibility in terms of the Constitution and the
education Act, but no executive powers over the money transferred to the
provinces. All executive powers are vested in the provincial education
departments. However, there are various committees, such as the Council of
Education Ministers, the Heads of Education Departments Committee and the
national and provincial treasuries, which are trying to co-ordinate and
manage this issue in the most efficient way possible.

Despite this constitutional arrangement, today's debate will be all-
embracing, covering both higher education and schools. It is our duty and
responsibility to also debate whether, through the national Budget, the
provinces will be able to meet the national norms and standards, especially
the directive contained in section 29(1) of our Constitution, which states:


  Everyone has the right -


  (a) to a basic education, including adult basic education; and

  (b) to further education, which the state, through reasonable measures,
       must make progressively available and accessible.

Mine will be to give a broad picture of the impact of this budget. My
colleagues will add more flesh in the different areas. What are some of the
people's concerns about this budget? I must hasten to say that their
concerns are the ANC Government's concerns, and we are already doing
something about them. The nine priority areas covered in the Tirisano
document cover most of these concerns.

I will confine myself to the schools sector. Firstly, one of the concerns
is that the provincial budget has not increased in real terms. Let us
always remember that we have a given envelope of resources, in this case,
the R233,5 billion, and we have to live within our means. Education as a
sector is already given the biggest share of 41% in the equitable share
formula. That very formula is being reviewed by the Financial and Fiscal
Commission as we speak. I will explain that later.

Secondly, there is a concern that the Education budget is not needs-based,
leading to inequitable distribution of resources. The Government has long
been deeply concerned about the inequitable distribution of resources. The
new Financial and Fiscal Commission proposals are now being discussed with
the hope that they will be implemented in the 2001-02 budget. I would like
to highlight some of these proposals, as contained in the document on the
FFC's preliminary recommendations for 2001, which are referred to as a
costed norms approach for the division of revenue.

In relation to the education grant the following factors are proposed:
Firstly, socioeconomic cost factors, the proportion of special learners,
the age structure of pupil population, the prevalence of poverty and
rural/urban residence. Secondly, other factors are overenrolment, learner-
educator ratios, the average level of educator remuneration and independent
schools. The norms and standards of funding of public schools are also
intended to address this problem. Thirdly, there are general concerns about
the infrastructure backlogs as detailed in the Schools Register of Needs.
The general perception is that the Government is not doing enough.

Over and above the report of the Schools Register of Needs, the Portfolio
Committee on Education visited the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal in
November last year. Its report is contained in the ATC of this House dated
9 March 2000. I would like to encourage members to read that ATC. It was
disheartening to see that some of the schools that were destroyed by the
tornado in 1997, in the Eastern Cape, had not yet been repaired owing to
budgetary constraints.

It was heartening, however, to learn that the Eastern Cape government has
allocated R55 million for the renovation of schools hit by disaster, the
rehabilitation of dilapidated classrooms and for building new classrooms,
and that this amount will be ring-fenced. However, it is important to note
that this is a drop in the ocean when one considers a shortage of over 23
000 classrooms in the Eastern Cape alone, and their annual natural
disasters.

The national department sent teams to these provinces to make personal
assessment and make film video footage of the situation. These reports were
tabled before Cabinet in February this year. Strategies are now being
devised to tackle this problem. I would like to take this time to make a
special appeal to the private sector to respond positively to the tax
relief offer and to assist in the reconstruction of infrastructure in the
poor rural provinces, so that, in the name of Tirisano, this infrastructure
problem is addressed from all angles. I fully agree with Barrat when he
says: ``If they, the poor, do not eat, we, the rich, cannot sleep.''

There also seem to be doubts about the commitment of the department to the
Adult Basic Education programme. This cannot be further from the truth.
This is one of the priority areas that have been identified by the Minister
in the setting up of the National Literacy Agency that he has just
mentioned. The introduction of the skills levy, the R1,4 billion, and the
establishment of sector education and training authorities under the
National Skills Authority offer a major opportunity for targeting massive
increases in Abet provision. The Umsobomvu Fund should be another
significant source of Abet funding.

There is also a general concern about the lack of involvement of the
department in the preprimary school sector. It is true that the department
is only involved in the pilot projects in Grade R, sometimes referred to as
Grade O. However, the department is now expanding its responsibilities to
the age group 0-5, the preschool group, through the work of an
interdepartmental committee for early childhood development. Since no
specific legislation exists to govern early learning, the department will
give attention to the feasibility of an early childhood development Bill.
It is important to note that in countries like Zanzibar and Equatorial
Guinea, the governments have taken over the running of preprimary schools.

Concerning HIV/Aids prevention, there was a general appreciation of the
allocation of R75 million for the fight against HIV/Aids.

Concerning the National Skills Development Fund, the levying of a 0,5% on
payrolls, which is expected to yield R1,4 billion for the national skills
development strategy, will go a long way in changing the skills scenery in
our country. It will benefit both those who are at school and those who are
out; those who are in industry and those who have been retrenched.

Concerning the contingency reserve, the sum of R2 billion that has been set
aside as contingency reserve is acknowledged. The statement by the Minister
of Finance that we expect to allocate a portion of this reserve to repair
damage caused by the devastating recent floods, is highly appreciated. It
is understood that the term ``recent floods'' is inclusive of all natural
disasters.

The stage has been set for delivery. Let us all roll up our sleeves and
volunteer our services. It is better to do something for nothing than to do
nothing for nothing. Let us try to achieve more with our limited resources,
always cognisant of the fact that the source of desire is never filled nor
fully satisfied.

I would like to take this time to thank the members of the portfolio
committee for their commitment and determination as we, together, work hard
to sort out the problems of the country. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairperson, the hon Minister made brief reference to the
history of the transformation of education in our country over the past six
years. I also need to make a brief reference to it. I do not have the time
to go into detail, unfortunately. The Minister had some 40 minutes.

The Minister's five-year education plan certainly has a great deal to
commend it, but South Africans have certainly become used to having five-
year plans thrust at them, the most recent of which is that of Prof Bengu,
the former Minister of Education, whose plan it was, quite frankly, to
transform education as fast as possible whether what was created as a
result of that rapid transformation was workable or not.
Against this background our present Minister has to work, picking up the
pieces of what was little more than communist or socialist engineering ...
[Interjections] ... in an attempt to put in place a new system which would
create real equality and real opportunity for all South Africans in our
education system, giving the children the hope that the hon Minister has
spoken about this morning. Now even this hon Minister has indicated his
frustration with what he found by indicating recently that while many of
Prof Bengu's plans may have been well intentioned, they were, at best,
rushed. The truth of this is that many of the education policies of the
past five years have failed. [Interjections.]

Of course there are those - and I do not think the hon Minister is one of
them - who say that it was necessary to give a strong overdose of
transformation at the beginning of the new process in order to create a
critical mass of thinking, thus ensuring that the discourse on education
was changed forever. This is vague and insincere because, at the end of the
day, these failed plans resulting from this thinking have come at huge cost
and failed opportunity from which we as South Africans have to begin again.


Minister Asmal's plans have real potential, but it is now in the
implementation that the real test will come. The Minister talked about
teacher development and placed a great deal of emphasis on it. That is
good. But the issue of teacher discipline is an immediate problem. The
Minister has stated in his policy that one of his objectives is to ensure
that all schools have leadership and management with a vision and sense of
purpose to promote and enhance learning and teaching. He has given a number
of performance indicators including the undertaking, by management, of
regular classroom visits and the review of educator performance. This is
good and we endorse it, because it is essential in an education system.

However, quite frankly, as long as Sadtu is able to continue with its
moratorium on classroom visits by principals, superintendents and others,
and is able to call for educators, strikes at the drop of a hat, school,
and education in general, will fail. And as long as educators are allowed
the freedom to do as they like in terms of education discipline, our matric
results will continue to be appalling. We have to insist that our educators
are disciplined and that they then pass the sense of discipline onto the
learners. This is the real challenge.
The Minister has indicated that he intends taking action. He must control
the trade unions, instil proper discipline in our schools, among our
educators and learners, and then we will begin to see the difference. This
will be giving our children the real hope he talks about. However, there
are many other challenges. I have time for only two. The hon Minister has
mentioned one, the question of illiteracy. When he took over the Education
Ministry in 1999, he promised to eliminate adult illiteracy in five years.
This is a hugely ambitious target. Throughout the world, adult illiteracy
has been a difficult problem with often disappointing results. But it can
conceivably be done with sufficient time, effort and resources, together
with an effective strategy.

Nearly one year on from the Minister's promise, there is, quite frankly,
little sign of anything happening. But today he has come up with some new
plans. We also have some plans which we sincerely hope he will endorse.
What we have at present is a tottering bureaucracy of the NQF, which was
meant to embrace adult education with its catch-all centralisation plan.
But adult basic education has become lost in the complexity of a framework.
Poor and rural illiterates do not have a hope.
The answer to adult illiteracy is not a system which is so difficult and
costly to administer that even New Zealand, with better resources and a far
smaller population, is struggling with it. We need to have a national
campaign which has literacy as a central feature rather than a neglected
side-show. Now, if there is to be any progress, adult literacy must become
a high profile political campaign. The message must be spread at every
occasion and by every means. This must be accompanied by a realistic
national strategy which gives every illiterate person the opportunity to
change his or her life.

The DP proposes, as a first step, the appointment of a Deputy Minister
specifically for adult education. We already have a Deputy Minister of
Education, but his role has not been revealed to us and his functions,
quite frankly, are obscure. We therefore propose that he be replaced by a
powerful and respected expert, seconded from the private sector if
necessary, who will take charge of adult education. This person will be
responsible for implementing a strategy for adult education which combines
flexibility at a microlevel and focuses commitment at national level.

We do not believe that the rigid structure of the NQF can allow for the
adaptability to local needs and conditions which adult education projects
must have to succeed. Projects must be carried out at local level, by local
people. But the campaign also needs a national voice. The Deputy Minister
for adult education will be this voice for a range of projects directed at
putting opportunities in the hands of the poorest of the poor.

The final point I want to raise is the serious predicament that many
private higher education institutions find themselves in following their
failed registration at the beginning of the year. Many institutions that
did fail have been operating in South Africa for decades and have built up
reputations for offering degrees and diplomas of high quality and/or
international credentialling - not the fly-by-night operations that experts
in the field believed the process was intended to penalise.

But there can be no doubt that institutions were confused by the process
and have, I earnestly believe, been the victims of circumstances that they
had not previously encountered. In addition, poor communication and a lack
of clear information from the department, but in particular from SAQA, led
to many registrations being inadequately completed.

These institutions are now suffering and I urge the Minister to consult
with them in an attempt to resolve the crisis. While we accept that no
substandard institution should be allowed to exist, there is no doubt that
many good institutions are also the victims of a process that was not
adequately thought through and for which proper channels of communication
were not opened. I say to the Minister that he cannot allow many of these
institutions to die. He needs to take action.

In conclusion, the hon the Minister said: Let us give our children real
hope. We agree with him. Whether Curriculum 2005, for example, is the
solution, is doubtful, as the Minister seemed to imply it was. But we agree
with the sentiments. Let us give our children real hope. But this means
moving forward with care and concern, making sure that the plans we
introduce are workable and in the best interests of the children whom we
are putting them in place for.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson and hon members, I stand here today to
participate in this debate with all the hurt and the indignity of the past.

The dehumanising aspects of the old education system are still with us.
When we are involved in the task of ridding ourselves of the dehumanising
education policies, those who were never touched by this dehumanisation,
those who never experienced the hurt and indignity of the inhuman policies
of the past, will never understand the IFP's support or nonsupport for some
of Government's policies. [Applause.]

We understand their ignorance, but they stand unforgiven if their
nonunderstanding of our policy stance is deliberate political posturing.
The article by the DP's national director of strategy which appeared in the
Financial Mail of 3 March 2000 falls into the category of those who are
either ignorant of the IFP policies or those who are politically malicious.
This article by the DP identifies three directions open to opposition
parties. It says, and I quote:


  Firstly, co-option by ANC, as with Inkatha. Secondly, constructive
  engagement with the ANC, as with the New NP. Thirdly, vigorous
  opposition, as with the DP.
To assert that the IFP has been co-opted by the ANC is a gross
misunderstanding of the South African political situation in general, and
the black polity in particular. [Applause.] The history of the bloody
conflict between the ANC and the IFP is well known or should be well known.
The casualties of this conflict were the blacks who constitute the majority
of the two organisations.

To normalise South Africa, the relationship between the ANC and the IFP had
to be normalised, hence the painful process of reconciliation was begun by
the two organisations. [Applause.] I am saying it was a painful process
because, right at the beginning, the leadership of the IFP realised that we
were going to pay some heavy prices in this process of reconciliation. One
of the heavy prices we are paying is the distortion of who we are and what
we are by the likes of the DP. It is interesting that the DP's article
appeared under the title: ``Leon plans five-year roadshow in black areas.''

To us, the IFP, reconciliation is not a strategy as it appears to be to the
DP. We cannot put it on and take it off like a raincoat, depending on the
political weather. [Applause.] It is, on our part, a principled stand and
not part of the roadshow. We are propelled forward by our philosophy of the
revolution of goodwill.
Â 
Asibukisi ngokuhlupheka kwabantu. Babukiselani ngokuhlupheka kwabantu?
[Ihlombe.] [We are not showing off about people's misery. Why are they
parading about people's suffering? [Applause.]]

Members know that political parties can be likened to a good restaurant
which keeps on modifying its menu to maintain its clientele and attract new
customers. [Laughter.] The IFP has its own distinct education policy which
it keeps on developing as it responds to the education challenges which
face the country.  Perhaps the DP is seeing this IFP policy document for
the first time. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: I will organise a workshop in which we will explain the
IFP policies to Mr Ellis. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

South Africa is not a homogenous society, hence the IFP's policy of
pluralism which underlies the IFP's vision for South Africa. Our policy of
pluralism implies not only the recognition of cultural diversity and its
richness, but also support for a range of different institutions which
cater for the specific needs and desires of communities and civil society.
The principle of pluralism in education has two major parallel
implications.

Firstly, matters should be governed and administered by the lowest level of
Government, hence the IFP support for the devolution of matters to
provinces. We view education as a function which is an extension of family
and community life and should thus be organised at a level which is closest
to community life, which is the province.

The second implication for our policy of pluralism is that maximum scope
should be allowed for voluntary initiative by the communities themselves,
under national norms and standards. This allows for the existence of more
than two types of schools, as stipulated by the SA Schools Act.

We have always argued for private initiative, because we realise the
inability of the state alone to provide education. It must, however, be
remembered that we, as the IFP, could not oppose the SA Schools Bill in its
entirety when it was piloted in this House, because its objectives were to
rid the education of our country of the racist laws which governed the
education system in the past.

If our support for a piece of legislation, which had as its objective the
unification of an otherwise fragmented and racist system, is seen as co-
option, so let it be. [Applause.] We do not apologise to anyone, least of
all to the DP. In 1997, the Education department conducted the school
register of needs survey. We applauded the department for this survey
because it showed the Government's commitment to equity.

We support the department's efforts which are aimed at closing the gap
between the two types of South Africa - the one with the well-staffed and
functioning schools, and the other with schools the majority of which are
dysfunctional. We have always called for the establishment of an
equalisation fund, which is similar to a fund which Germany established
when its wall of shame came tumbling down.

There is still a wall of shame in the South African education system. Two
Education portfolio committee delegations visited the Eastern Cape and
KwaZulu-Natal provinces in November 1999. I was part of the delegation
which visited KwaZulu-Natal. The physical degradation of some of the
schools which we visited was very shocking and depressing. These schools
were not at all fit for human occupation. The provinces just cannot cope.

Four years after the publication of the school register of needs survey,
not a single school has been built by the provinces. Between 80% and 90% of
the provincial budget is taken up by personnel expenditure, with nothing
left for capital work, hence the perpetuation of the wall of shame. We are
calling for a redress fund.

We have studied the department's Tirisano implementation plan with keen
interest. On 23 February 2000, I personally led a six-person delegation
which met the Minister in his offices here in Cape Town. There too, we
listened very carefully to what the Minister said. I want to say to the hon
Minister that we walked away from that meeting with greater hope of getting
our education right. Do they not say that a nation without a vision
perishes? We, however, have hope.

However, the Minister's vision will be tested in getting the basic things
right in our education system. Let me mention a few of these basic things.
The role of inspectors of education in the management of our education is
one of these basic things. I know that in our quest for a better deal in
education, inspectors of schools were discredited as people with Nazi-style
leadership - those black shirts, or the SS. However, we urge that an urgent
re-examination be undertaken. I know. I was an inspector of schools myself.
One of the descriptions given of inspectors was that they were men carrying
suitcases full of teachers' mistakes. [Time expired.]

Nk P N MNANDI: Sihlalo, oNgqongqoshe abahloniphekileyo, abahlonishwa,
maqabane nezihlobo, ngonyaka odlule enyangeni kaLwezi sasimi lapha phambi
kwenu sizokhuluma mayelana nokwakhiwa kwesikhwama sezimali sokusiza
abafundi bemfundo ephakeme kuzwelonke.

Esakubeka kwakhanya bha ngukuthi uHulumeni kaKhongolose unomlando ojulile
nezimpande ezijulile ekuletheni inguquko ngesikhulu isivinini kuleli zwe.
Isisekelo salo mlando omuhle kangaka sabekwa ngo-1955 ngabantu balapha
eNingizimu Afrika kuSomqulu weNkululeko yeZwe lapho bathi khona amasango
emfundo ayokuvuleka kubantu bonke ngokulinganayo. [Ihlombe.] UKhongolose
usalokhu ehambe njalo ngalowo mgudu akakaze kuze kube manje achezuke
nakancane. Nabantu bakufakazele lokho uma bembuyisela kuHulumeni
uKhongolose ngo-elethu.

Nembala-ke uhlelo lweSabiwomali esikhuluma ngalo namhlanje oluphathelene
nemfundo ephakeme lukufakazele lokhu ukuthi uKhongolose uzimisele. Kukhanye
bha ngenkathi kubekwa la, nguNgqongqoshe wezeziMali, ngokusobala ukuthi
isikhwama lesi uye wasithi gcize nge-13% ngaphezulu. Thina-ke
bakaKhongolose asibongi siyanconcoza kulokhu. [Ihlombe.] Sithi lolu
wuphaphe esigqokweni sikaNgqongqoshe uTrevor Manuel.

UKhongolose unikeziwe igunya ngabantu ukuthi azilethe izinguquko kuleli
zwe. Umyalezo usuphumile. Kubonakele kwiSabiwomali ukuthi nembala
uKhongolose akasoze ahluleka. Ngokwenyusa lesi sikhwama asingabazi ukuthi
yilaba abalandelayo abazosizakala kakhulu kunakuqala: abafundi abaqhamuka
ezindaweni zasemaphandleni, abafundi abantulayo, abafundi abakhubazekile,
abafundi besifazane nabafundi bezinhlanga zonke kuleli. Halala ANC!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILE: Halala!

Nk P N MNANDI: Nakuba uHulumeni kaKhongolose ekwazile ukuqhamuka nosizo
olunje, siyabona futhi siyavuma ukuthi zisekhona izinkinga kumbe izihibe
kwizikhungo zemfundo ephakeme kuleli. Inkinga enkulu nokuyiyona eyisihibe
ngukuthi kumele abafundi baqale ngokukhokha imali yokubhalisa, ebizwa nge-
registration fee. Le mali isikhathi esiningi icela kuma-R2 000 kuya
phezulu.

Le mali kumele umfundi ngamunye ayikhokhe ngaphambi kokuthi akwazi ukuthola
isikhala sokungena enyonivesi. Lokhu nje kukodwa kuvala ngci amasango
kumfundi ophuma ekhaya elintulayo. Lokhu sikwazi kahle kangcono ngoba
iningi lethu lapha eNdlini liphuma lapho. Kulokhu sithi ibhodi elengamemele
isikhwama siyalinxusa ukuba libheke lolu daba ngeso lokhozi. Siphinde
sinxuse zonke izinhlangazo eziphethe uhlelo lwemifundaze kwimfundo ephakeme
ukuba zibheke ukuthi zingaqhamuka namaphi amaqhinga okusiza abafundi
ngezimali zokubhalisa.

Namanyunivesi mawabheke ukuthi angaqhamuka kanjani namaqhinga okwenza
ukuthi le mali ibe yingxenye yesikhwama sokusiza abafundi, khona
enyonivesi. Okunye okufanele sikubeke la ngembaba namhlanje yikhona ukuthi
abantu bonke bakuleli zwe kumele bakhumbule ukuthi asinayo imfundo ephakeme
yamahhala kuleli zwe, kodwa uHulumeni kaKhongolose ukwenze konke
okusemandleni ukuthi abafundi bafinyelele kwimfundo ephakeme engcono.

Ngakho uMongameli wezwe noNgqongqoshe wezeMfundo bawuhlabile umkhosi
wokuthi sonke masibambane kulo mshikashika wokuletha imfundo engcono
nelinganayo kuleli. Bathe: Mfundi, mzali, mfundisi, mphakathi,
somabhizinisi, nathi sonke, masibe nogqozi nofuqufuqu nentshisekelo
ngekusasa lesizukulwane sase-Afrika khona sizokwazi ukufeza amaphupho
okubumba i-Afrika ivuke kabusha.

Siyabonga ukuthi uHulumeni uphindile futhi wayibeka induku ebandla ngokuthi
ayifake futhi imali esikhwameni sokulwa nokungalingani kwezemfundo ephakeme
kuleli, ebizwa ngokuthi yi-redress fund. Siyawezwa amahebezi aqhamuka
kulabo abasabelethe ubandlululo kuleli. Bathi uHulumeni noNgqongqoshe
wezeMfundo sebefuna ukuvala izikhungo zemfundo ephakeme ezindaweni zabantu
abamnyama. Cha-bo, akunjalo. UNgqongqoshe uthi kumele kube khona uguquko
kwimfundo ephakeme jikelele kuzwelonke.

Ngenxa yokuthi zikhona ngempela izinkinga ezadalwa nguhulumeni
wobandlululo, njengamanje kunesigungu esibekiwe ukuthi sicwaninge futhi
sicubungule ukuthi kungenziwa kanjani konke lokhu ukuthi phela siyithathe
le mfundo ephakeme ebeyingeyabangcono, ilingane kulo lonke izinga. Lokho-ke
uphezu kwako uNgqongqoshe.

Izoguqulwa yonke, kumanyonivesi abamhlophe nawabamnyama kuqhanyukwe necebo
lokulinganisa imfundo ephakeme. Kubafundi sithi: UHulumeni oholwa
nguKhongolose uyazikhandla ekwenzeni izinga lemfundo ukuthi lithuthuke
kuleli zwe. Nabo kumele badlale indima yabo, bayeke ukuthi njalo uma
bevukwa ngamadlingozi bacekele phansi impahla nezakhiwo. Hhayi-bo. Abafundi
mababe yisibonelo. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] (Translation of Zulu speech
follows.)

[Mrs P N MNANDI: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, comrades and
relatives, in November last year we were standing here in front  of you as
we were talking about the creation of a national  financial aid fund for
students.

What we clearly put forward was that the ANC Government has deep history
and roots in bringing about quick changes in this country. Such a good
foundation in its history was laid in 1955 by South Africans in the Bill of
National Freedom, where it was stated that gates for education should be
opened equally for all. [Applause.] The ANC always keep on walking in that
lane, it has never turned off. Even the people of South Africa confirmed
this when they overwhelmingly voted again for the ANC Government.

Of course the budget of higher education that we are discussing today
confirms the ANC's commitment. It became absolutely clear when the budget
was put on the table that the hon the Minister of Finance has increased it
with 13%. We in the ANC are very grateful for this. [Applause.] We say this
is a credit to the hon Minister, Trevor Manual.

The ANC has been mandated to bring about changes in this country. The
message has been given. It has been proved in the Budget that the ANC will
never fail. By increasing the Budget we are sure that the people who will
benefit the most are the following: Students from the rural areas, needy
students, disabled students, women students and students of all races in
this country. Congratulations to the ANC!

HON MEMBERS: Congratulations!
Mrs P N MNANDI: Although the ANC Government has succeeded in bringing such
assistance, we concede that there are still problems in the  institutions
of higher learning in this country. The most crucial problem is that
students should start paying registration fees. Most of the time this fee
is in the region of R2 000 and more.

A student is expected to pay this fee before he or she is admitted to a
university. This alone closes the gates completely for a student who comes
from a poor family. We know this better than anyone else, because most of
the people in this House have experienced the same situation. Therefore we
appeal to the board that monitors this fund to look at this issue
seriously. We also appeal to all organisations that control bursaries for
tertiary education to look at what solutions they can come up with in order
to assist students with registration fees.

Universities too must try to come up with strategies to make this fee a
part of the fund that is created for assisting students at university
level. Another thing that we should state clearly is that the people of
this country should remember that we have no free education at tertiary
level. However, the ANC has done all that is possible to make it possible
for students to receive a tertiary education.

The President and the hon the Minister of Education have proclaimed that we
should all work together in an attempt to bring about a better and equal
education for all. They have said: "Learner, parent, teacher, community,
business people, and all of us should be encouraged and be enthusiastic
about the future of the coming generations of Africa so that we will be
able to make our dream of rebuilding Africa, a reality".

We notice that the Government has for the second time done extremely well
by putting more money into a redress fund which aims at redressing the
inequality in our education in this country. We are aware of the rumours
spread by those who are still carrying apartheid on their backs in this
country. They say the President and the hon the Minister want to close down
black universities. This is not true. The hon the Minister says some
changes should take place in the institutions of higher learning all over
the country.

Since there are real problems, which were created by the  apartheid regime,
now there is a council that has been tasked to  investigate what should be
done to enable us to transform education, so that it will be equal at all
levels. This is what the hon the Minister is working on.

A new plan to equalise tertiary education will be devised and education in
black and white universities will be changed in its entirety. We say to
students: ``The ANC Government is working hard towards improving the level
of education in this country.'' They are also expected to play an important
role in this campaign. They should not destroy property whenever they are
emotionally frustrated. We warn them. We expect them to be exemplary
students. [Time expired.]]

Adv A H GAUM: Mnr die Voorsitter, John F Kennedy het gesÃª:


  Our progress as a nation can be no swifter than our progress in
  education.

As gekyk word na ons powere vordering op onderwysgebied, lyk die prentjie
vir ons nasie maar donker. (Translation of Afrikaans follows.)

[Adv A H GAUM: Mr Chairperson, John F Kennedy said:
  Our progress as a nation can be no swifter than our progress in
  education.

If we look at our poor progress in the area of education, the picture for
our nation looks sombre.]

Amidst this dark picture, it is regretted that in real terms, the Education
budget has been cut by 2%. Since 1997, the real spending on education has
dropped by 1,3% annually. If the population growth of 2,2% per year is
taken into account, the real per capita drop of 13% has taken place since
1997.

If education budgets remain static in real terms, the decline in personnel
expenditure, as reflected in the budget, means that we will loose 11 000
teachers. This loss can rise to 25 000 if utterances in the ELRC that the
average personnel spending should be reduced to 85% of the Education budget
become reality. Amidst problems with overcrowded classes, empty classrooms
such as the computer classroom of KwaMakhutha High School in KwaZulu-Natal,
and a threatening shortage of up to 16 000 teachers within the next two
years, this spells disaster, and quality education for all will remain a
pipe dream. The Minister should note that we need more teachers, and not
fewer.

Benewens misdaad, is daar geen groter en belangriker uitdaging vir Suid-
Afrika as die onderwys nie. Dit moet ook gereflekteer word in die wyse
waarop die begrotings van Onderwys en Veiligheid en Sekuriteit bereken
word. Ons moet eers ons land se werklike onderwysbehoeftes vasstel en dan
bepaal hoe hierdie behoeftes gefinansier kan word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Apart from crime, there is no bigger and more important challenge to South
Africa than education. This should also be reflected in the way in which
the budgets of Education and Safety and Security are calculated. We must
first establish our country's actual educational needs and then determine
how these needs can be financed.]

At times countries should spend a far greater percentage of their Budgets
on education in order to ensure future benefits. Given the state of crisis
in our education system, this is such a time. The Budget should be the
implementation tool for Government's policies and plans. Yet, it is clear
that, except for the additional R272 million for teachers' professional
development and to support the culture of learning, teaching and service
campaign, the Budget will make no real contribution towards implementing
Minister Asmal's Tirisano plan.

For example, the second priority on the Minister's list of priorities is
breaking the back of illiteracy among adults and youths within five years.
However, the budget reduces the allocation in this regard from R2 billion
to R1,87 billion. We reckon that breaking the back of illiteracy with
reduced budgets sounds a bit optimistic. The third priority states that
schools must become centres of community life and that we must put great
effort into ensuring that school governing bodies are given the support
they need to become strong and viable. However, no money is made available
by the budget to train governing bodies. It appears that Government is not
willing to put their money where Minister Asmal's mouth is.

While we welcome it that the deductibility of donations will be extended to
preprimary and primary schools, we are very concerned about the phasing out
of Government funding of preprimary education. We have not seen much of
Government's plans to substitute public funding of preprimary schools with
public funding of the so-called Grade O. On the contrary, we note a more
than 50% cut of current and capital expenditure for early childhood
development. At present, early childhood development funding is minuscule,
being less than 1% of the budget. Government is still dragging its feet on
the full implementation of early childhood development programmes.

Intussen is die Regering besig om pre-primÃªre skole dood te maak, pleks
daarvan om bestaande pre-primÃªre skole te gebruik om met die implementering
van ``EDC'' te begin. Volgens provinsiale omsendbriewe word pre-primÃªre
poste afgeskaf wanneer hulle vakant word. In sodanige gevalle kry die skole
'n belaglike R2 per leerder per dag, tot op 'n maksimum van R10 000 per
klas. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In the meantime the Government is killing the preprimary schools, instead
of utilising existing preprimary schools to start with the implementation
of ECD. According to provincial circulars preprimary posts are abolished
when they become vacant. In these instances the schools are receiving a
ridiculous amount of R2 per learner per day, up to a maximum of R10Â 000 per
class.]

This whole situation is exacerbated by the fact that the school-going age
has been increased to six going on seven, leaving many children who are
school-ready without any stimulation and development. Meanwhile, my
information is that more than 40% of the learners who wrote matric last
year on taxpayers' costs, were older than 20 years. International education
research shows that investing in early childhood development improves the
effectiveness of the entire education system. As SADTU puts it, South
Africa's high failure and drop-out rates are in part the result of the
failure by the Government to take early childhood development seriously. We
call on the Government to rescue early childhood development by, at least
in the interim, continuing to adequately subsidise our preprimary schools.

All this having been said, the New NP believes that the time has come to
reconsider the kind of educational reforms we are undertaking in this
country. We have had too many rules and resources reforms, and almost no
incentive reforms. On the contrary, this Government has taken away the few
incentives teachers had - such as notches, ranks and the acknowledgement of
qualifications - and has not honoured its promise to replace it with
performance-related grading and promotion.

While rules and resource-based reforms have failed internationally to
significantly improve the quality of education delivered by government
schools, our Government is sticking to them. The absence of effective
incentives on the part of those who consume and those who produce education
explains the poor results we have.

We need parental school choice, greater competition for students amongst
schools, more local and decentralised decision-making, and greater
accountability for results and performance. Effective reform requires
accountability. In the words of Governor George W Bush, someone should be
praised when schools succeed and someone should be responsible when they
fail.

We should accept that standards will not be met simply because they have
been declared. Without consequence for failure, standards are all bark and
no bite. Without rewarding and providing resources for success, standards
are all hope with no prayer. Accountability is empty without local control.
High costs, lack of choice, low quality, widespread inefficiency and
rampant dissatisfaction are the result of a virtual state monopoly in
education. We need more decentralisation and less Government control.

We must also recognise the central role of competition in achieving better
schools. Where we find failure, we should give parents different options
such as charter schools and greater school choice. A charter school is a
public school that agrees to meet certain performance standards in exchange
for greater freedom from the state. It accepts accountability for results
in exchange for autonomy in the choice of methods for achieving those
results. These schools are authorised via charters by government
authorities. If it does not perform up to academic standards in its
charter, the charter can be revoked by Government.

The national Government should fund only what works in education and only
those methods and ideas that prove their power to close the achievement
gap. We should stop using taxpayers' money to reward failure. If schools do
not improve, there should be a final point of accountability. At the end of
three years, if a school does not make progress, we should make the money
which is spent per learner at that school directly available to parents.
These vouchers can be supplemented with universal tax credits allowing any
taxpayer to contribute to the education of children and receive a rand-for-
rand tax credit. Then parents should be allowed to choose tutoring at a
different public school, charter school or a private one. This will allow
parents to choose hope over failure.

We cannot continue to trap children in schools that do not teach and will
not change. The goal should be to strengthen public schools by expecting
performance. The goal should also be to make sure that Government no longer
pays schools to cheat poor children. More competition and more choices for
parents will raise the bar for everyone. Every child in South Africa must
have a first-rate education because there are no second-rate children and
no second-rate dreams. [Applause.]

Mr S J DE BEER: Chairperson, on behalf of the UDM, I want to congratulate
Prof Asmal on his appointment as Minister of Education. In this field of
great importance to the future of our people in South Africa, where we are
facing enormous challenges, his appointment is indeed a ray of hope. His
understanding of our educational problems and his willingness to bravely
search for solutions have met with general approval. We wish him well in
his efforts. Mr Thami Mseleku is the new director-general and we also want
to wish him well and congratulate him on his appointment.

The Education budget for the financial year 2000-2001 shows an increase of
R500 million or 1% compared with the previous year. If this increase is
compared with an estimated inflation rate of 6% to 8%, in real terms, there
is a reduction. This is a disappointing fact if one takes into
consideration all the needs that have to be addressed in this field. It
also makes it so much more imperative that funds be properly managed and
controlled, so that they reach their goal.

The future stability and prosperity of South Africa will depend on the
level and the quality of education and skills training of all its citizens.
These will make the greatest contribution by far to growth and equity in
our society. In a dynamic, interrelated world, education can only fully
contribute within a context of creative collaboration amongst all role-
players in the field of education. Education authorities, educators,
learners, parents, entrepreneurs and unions need to take hands now more
than ever before and work towards a more effective dispensation.

Unions must be seen as partners to ensure clear communication, and must be
enabled to do capacity building for their members to ensure that they
remain professional within a dynamic, globally involved African context.
Educators are the keys to world class education and their role must be
emphasised. The educators' role may not be reduced to a number in a ratio
for funding purposes. They must be given the opportunity to answer to the
community they serve without having to give up their professionalism.

In submissions regarding the Education budget to the portfolio committee,
unions last week indicated that many of the grandiose programmes initiated
by Government will be nullified if the present low teacher morale in all
communities is not effectively addressed.  Last year, teachers' motivation
was at an all time low. Teachers must perceive that their posts are more
secure than has been the experience for the past five years.
Rationalisation, redeployment and the months of uncertainty and tension
over salary increases had a devastating effect on teachers' morale. The
related two-day strike in the third quarter also alienated teachers from
the department. These issues must be brought to a close as soon as
possible.

In the rural areas of the Eastern Cape, for instance, redeployment had a
severe negative effect on family life, where newly qualified teachers could
not be employed. This process not only depressed teachers to be deployed,
but further frustrated those young teachers who had hoped for employment.

Another stark warning was sounded by the Joint Education Trust who, last
year, did research into the state of school education. They said:


  Unless the quality of teaching is improved through massive in-service
  training and money is pumped into resources, especially textbooks and
  teaching materials, the school system is headed for collapse. The
  greatest and most immediate need is for teachers and pupils to be in
  their classrooms, engaged in real teaching and active learning.

Pupils are not learning to read and write. Many are leaving school as
functional illiterates. Many schools use only 40% of the maximum teaching
time because of absenteeism, teachers and pupils leaving early, and schools
starting after the beginning of term and closing early. One consequence of
this situation is a steady decline in the pass rate. Twenty years ago, 38%
of school graduates obtained grades good enough to qualify them for
university. Last year's figure was 12,5 %. The actual number of school
graduates eligible for university has dropped by almost a third since the
ANC came to power. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, hon members, the Minister
has given a very broad kaleidoscope of our agenda in trying to transform
education in this country. I am going to focus on the teacher development
programme.

In the early 1980s, in the sacrosanct name of education, the apartheid
regime conducted one in-service course after another of propaganda and
indoctrination, especially for black teachers.  Because these were God-
forsaken exercises, they often took place in God-forsaken places. One such
course, vividly recalled by a teacher who was there, was conducted at a
desolate place called Zandspruit.

He recalls that particular one because every morning they were expected to
sing and pray in front of the South African flag,  which would subsequently
be hoisted, with the white instructor standing ramrod straight and saluting
that multicoloured cloth. After a day or two of this humiliation, this
teacher raised an objection - an act which was to have him monitored and
later, with other accusations against his teaching and political
activities, detained. He subsequently wrote, in protest against that
oppressive flag hoisting, a poem entitled ``Zandspruit, please don't ask
for my allegiance''.

The courses that I refer to were a reinforcement to the large-scale
brainwashing that was taking place at apartheid teacher training colleges,
where a pedagogy of oppression refined into an art form was fed into future
teachers. That was teacher training and development in the halcyon days of
apartheid; a travesty of the nobility of the teaching profession; an insult
to the intelligence of especially black teachers.

I must say that democracy is truly remarkable, if one considers that today
we have to talk education with the very people who so flagrantly abused it.
We also have to debate it with their ideological soul mates, who believe
that they should adopt schools in order to score political points. For
these people's benefit, let us extract two salient issues from today's
introduction of the Education Vote.

One was cast in the form of the question why public funds must be voted for
education services. The other was the assertion that public education must
command public confidence. In pursuing these issues, we must begin by
learning from history and categorically say that public funds must
definitely not be voted for the kind of militaristic training and
hypnotisation of teachers that led to a teacher hollering in indignation:
Zandspruit, please don't ask for my allegiance.

We must also say that public funds must not be voted into education so as
to create schools that will become political hunting grounds for parties
that have reached the zenith of rightwing growth and now face stagnation.
We should confirm the Education Ministry's position. Public education must
command public confidence. We should also indicate that much of that public
confidence will stem from a teaching staff that is prepared for the unique
challenges of the 21st century.
In our context, that is a teaching personnel trained, upgraded or retrained
in the pedagogy of the liberated. This is a teaching cadre committed to the
imperatives of nation-building through our transforming curriculum. The
Government is aware that in pursuit of that kind of teaching force, but
also as an ongoing education quality assurance measure, a financial
investment is needed. Consequently, R272 million is specifically allocated
for teachers' professional development and the Colt's campaign.

We in the Ministry welcome this amount as a sign of the ANC-led
Government's practical commitment to the professional development and
welfare of our national resource, our teachers. In 1996, with the National
Teacher Audit concluded:


  The quality of teacher education is the biggest challenge confronting
  South Africa at the close of the century.

  In order to tackle the quality challenge, the inherited inequalities
  across institutions and sectors, must be eliminated. High quality teacher
  development is required for all serving and would-be teachers.

Through the new financial year's education allocation referred to above, we
are continuing our response to the National Teacher Audit's finding on the
critical need for teacher development. We shall release a White Paper on
policy on educator development in June. The envisaged policy document shall
be linked to the norms and standards for educators that we have recently
published. It clearly defines the kinds of competencies expected from
teachers of South African children.

While, however, that process continues, we will continue to target the 85
501 unqualified and underqualified teachers for upgrading, so that they may
deliver better quality education. We have discussed this matter with the
educator unions. We are mindful of the experience these teachers have
gathered over time, so we are investigating ways in which we can address
their training needs against the background of the recognition of prior
learning.

We are determined to break the back of underqualification and no
qualification at all in the teaching service. Consider the fact that only a
little more than a two years ago, Edusource reported that there were 112
000 unqualified and underqualified teachers in South Africa. That was 31%
of the teaching force. Today's 85 501 figure translates into 23,9%. Against
the highest standards of delivery set by this Government, that is still
inadequate, but it does prove that something positive is happening. We
intend to build on this momentum.

In-service training via short accredited courses will continue as our
vehicle to retrain our teachers on teaching and learning strategies,
including high level skills demanded by an outcomes-based form of teaching
and learning. Completion and fruitful implementation of the courses will be
supported by a reward and incentive system for good practice.

All the initiatives at play are underpinned by a commitment to producing an
ethical and professional educator corps. Raising professional teacher
standards is at the heart of our existence as a Ministry charged with the
educational health of our nation. That is why we must reiterate the
obligation of our teachers to join their statutory professional body, the
SA Council for Educators. We wish to indicate that all our diverse
interventions on teacher development should ultimately converge at a point
where our teachers will be able to identify their own developmental needs.

The past history has hamstrung a sizeable number of our teachers. Current
history is empowering all our teachers. The future will liberate the minds
of our teachers so that they may become the determiners of their future and
their own development. A key strategy towards the future of a pedagogy of
the liberated is developmental appraisal - a tool which enables a critique
of teachers to assist them objectively to identify their strengths and
weaknesses so as to become better at their professional craft and
character.

This kind of appraisal will be paralleled by the crack unit, recently
announced, to focus on dysfunctional high schools. Please note that this
unit is a far cry from the peculiar and discredited ``gogga'' [small
insect] system of apartheid inspectors, whose reports often depended on how
much they were entertained and feted in the schools. We are serious about
our education system, we are serious about the quality and role of our
teachers in that system. We shall, therefore, not play war games with it.
We shall not party-politicise it and compel our teachers to protest.
Zandspruit must please not ask for my allegiance.
The education of our children is not a political football. Our teachers are
not a political playground. Against the onslaught of past political
shenanigans and skulduggery, they have upheld the little honour they could
salvage of their profession. We place our recognition of this on record and
call upon them to walk that proverbial extra mile with this Government as
we reclaim and raise, in consultation with them and their unions, their
professional standards.

I just want to comment on the speech made by Mr Ellis. We are all aware, of
course, that the experts of apartheid devised the most vicious system of
social engineering. During the apartheid era some members of the DP slept
cosily in bed with apartheid, so much so that they even failed to wake up
and see that this country had changed, that a new revolution was blowing
through the corridors of power. [Applause.] That is why the hon Ellis
suspects the ANC-led Government of doing the same. I say to Mr Ellis, no,
he is wrong. Mr Ellis must wake up.

Mr M J ELLIS: I am wide awake.

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Chairperson, he must remember that each and every
policy we have passed has been as a result of a consultative process. We
have spoken to parents, educators, learners, business and religious
organisations, and we have had public hearings of which we have been part.
He comes here and tells us about social engineering, which implies that
there is a secret agenda somewhere, that there are the activities in which
we engage secretly and in private, without any transparency whatsoever.
But, he is my witness that the opposite is the truth.

We have empowered our people, now more than ever before. We have empowered
parents, especially through the South African Schools Act. The DP's
jeremiads have become quite a mantra, quite a bore to say the very least.
Mr Ellis reads a litany of problems in the schools. He is, obviously, a
prophet of doom.

Mr M J ELLIS: Not at all.

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Chairperson, has Mr Ellis heard about the positive
steps we have taken to address some of these challenges that he is talking
about? Has he heard about Tirisano, for instance, and the five programmes
that are going to be implemented? Has he heard about the ongoing course
campaign which is designed to restore the culture of learning and teaching
in our country? One cannot restore a culture in one or two days, not even
in 10 years. It is a process, it is not an event. Mr Ellis, please wake up!
[Interjections.]

Has Mr Ellis heard about the education ``izinkundla'' ``Makgotla'' [forums]
that we are holding in a number of communities where we invite all people
interested in education. We invite communities, not only the educators, the
learners, district officials, which, of course we do, not only MECs and not
only business, but we also invite religious organisations, traditional
leaders and everybody else, in other words, to make education once and for
all the most important agenda for the people of this country. [Applause.]

Because the Government believes in democracy, it wants people to
participate. Has Mr Ellis heard about all these initiatives? I am sorry, I
do not think so. Inspectors and district officials are very much part of
these very exciting initiatives that we have undertaken in order to ensure,
as the Minister has said, that there is hope for our children. There is
hope for our people, especially as far as education is concerned.

On this day, in the debate on one of the most critical Votes, it is only
appropriate that we salute good and dedicated teachers as heroes and
heroines, as patriots par excellence. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, the future of our
nation depends very much on the quality of education our children receive.
Education has once again received the lion's share of Government spending,
that is R50,7 billion, which is an indication that our present Government
acknowledges the importance of a quality education for each child.

The Budget has highlighted certain major areas of concentration for
empowerment in education. A key focus will be to restore the culture of
learning and teaching within our education institutions, and we commend
that. An important factor in this regard will be to provide for the
professional development of teachers. We welcome the Minister's call,
earlier this year, to experienced mathematics and science teachers to
return to the teaching profession. There is a serious shortage of science
and maths teachers in our schools. The poor matric results of last year are
worrying, but the ACDP commends all those teachers who, under difficult
circumstances, taught their pupils diligently every day.

The promotion of the culture of learning and teaching is a noble ethos and
should be supported by all of us. As for the issue of discipline, the ACDP
still believes that corporal correction should be brought back into our
education system. [Interjections.] The ACDP also congratulates and commends
the thousands of parents who have registered with the Department of
Education to home-school their children. Home schooling is a growing and
successful educational phenomenon in South Africa. Home schools are
producing excellent academic results, and the problems experienced in some
of our state schools, such as vandalism, alcohol abuse by teachers and
pupils during school hours, teenage pregnancy and promiscuity, are not
problems faced in our home schools.

This Government is the first government to have legalised home schooling,
and we also hope that the Government will make it easier for parents to
home-school their children.

Dr P W A MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, die vraag is, hoe belangrik is
onderwys vir Suid-Afrika se toekoms? President Mbeki praat oor die Afrika-
renaissance en dat hierdie eeu Afrika se eeu moet word. Die VF sÃª as
onderwys in Suid-Afrika misluk, gaan Suid-Afrika in die toekoms misluk, en
as Suid-Afrika misluk, sal daar geen Afrika-renaissance wees nie. Nou is
die vraag, wat moet Suid-Afrika doen om nie te misluk nie? Wat moet ons
doen om op tegnologiese gebied nie verder agter te raak nie?

Die antwoord, sÃª ek, is dat ons beter moet presteer in natuurwetenskappe.
Ons leef in 'n wÃªreld van satelliete, rekenaars en moderne digitale
tegnologie. In Europa en Amerika word die navorsing en kennis op hierdie
terreine binne enkele maande verdubbel. Feit is, slegs ongeveer 20Â 000 van
die land se matrikulante het verlede jaar wiskunde en natuur- en skeikunde
met matrikulasievrystelling geslaag. Dit is 4% van die totaal. Hieruit word
geskat dat ongeveer maar 3Â 000 swart studente is. Dit is 'n halwe
persentasiepunt van alle matrikulante.

President Mbeki kla dat daar so min swart ingenieurs en swart
natuurwetenskaplikes in Suid-Afrika is. Hy noem dit as 'n voorbeeld van
rassisme. Volgens ANC-propaganda is die rede eenvoudig apartheid en die
destydse bantoe-onderwys. Dit is egter nie so eenvoudig nie. Agb lede kan
maar na dieselfde tendense in Afrika gaan kyk, waar daar geen bantoe-
onderwys was nie.

Ek het hier die syfers van die persentasie wit, bruin, IndiÃ«r- en swart
kandidate wat van die sestigerjare tot die negentigerjare met
matrikulasievrystelling geslaag het. Hierdie syfer, veral as ek na die
swart syfer vir natuurwetenskaplike vakke kyk, daal nog steeds. Nou sÃª die
VF die antwoord lÃª by moedertaalonderrig. Hiermee maak ek nie 'n politieke
stelling of probeer goedkoop VF-politiek aan agb lede verkoop nie; ek maak
'n goed nagevorste onderwysstelling. Om 'n abstrakte vak soos wiskunde en
natuurwetenskap in 'n tweede of derde taal aan studente te probeer
verduidelik, mÃ³Ã©t lei tot swak prestasie.

Ek daag die Minister en die onderwysowerhede uit om my met 'n eksperiment
verkeerd te bewys. Kom ons neem vir die doel van die eksperiment 'n groep
Zulu- of Sothosprekende studente en bied vir hulle wiskunde en wetenskap in
hulle moedertaal aan tot in matriek - dit is tot by graad 12 - en dan
vergelyk ons hierdie studente se resultate met 'n kontrolegroep wat in
Engels, wat meestal hulle tweede en derde taal is, onderrig ontvang, en dan
kyk ons waar eindig ons met die eksperiment.

Japan domineer die Ooste op tegnologiese en ekonomiese gebied. So domineer
Duitsland Europa op tegnologiese en ekonomiese gebied. Ek het van daardie
universiteite en skole besoek. Hulle studente word deur middel van Duits of
Japannees, hul moedertaal, onderrig. Daar is nie sprake dat hulle studente
deur middel van Engels of enige ander taal onderrig word nie, en hulle
studente presteer baie goed in abstrakte vakke soos wiskunde en
natuurwetenskap.

Waarom is ons dan so behep met Engels as onderrigtaal? Daar is 'n groot
verskil tussen om Engels as 'n onderrigtaal, oftewel ``language of
instruction'' te gebruik en om Engels net as 'n vak te neem. Ek het Engels
as vak geneem en ek glo dit is baie belangrik. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek het
egter my studie tot op doktorale vlak in Suid-Afrika in Afrikaans voltooi.
Hierdie kombinasie het dit vir my moontlik gemaak om met na-doktorale
studie in Amerika voort te gaan.

Agb lede kan 'n bietjie probeer om met Engels by 'n Duitse universiteit te
gaan inskryf. Hulle gaan 'n mens eers 'n taalkursus in Duits laat voltooi
voor hulle jou gaan toelaat. Ons kort meer wiskunde- en
natuurwetenskaponderwysers in Suid-Afrika. As ons met die wÃªreld wil
meeding, kort ons veral baie meer swart wiskunde- en
natuurwetenskaponderwysers. Sonder moedertaalonderrig in hierdie vakke gaan
ons nie slaag nie.

Ek wil tog die Minister gelukwens dat hy hierdie dilemma besef en prof
Michael Kahn van die Universiteit van Kaapstad aangestel het om hierdie
probleme te ondersoek. Uit prof Kahn se eerste reaksies wil dit ook voorkom
asof hy die argument oor moedertaalonderwys begryp. Ons sal vorentoe moet
sien of hy die probleem op hierdie wyse gaan oplos.

Voor ek die Minister egter te gou prys, wil ek oor die universiteite praat,
en dan veral oor Afrikaanse universiteite. Dieselfde argumente as wat ek
hierbo genoem het, geld ook daar. Die Minister se uitspraak hieroor en oor
die taal van onderrig bekommer ons. Hy skuil tans agter kortsigtige
Afrikaanse rektore wat allerlei verskonings uitdink waarom Afrikaans nie
belangrik op universiteitsvlak is nie.

Die formule van hierdie Minister se departement waarvolgens universiteite
gesubsidieer word, werk hoofsaaklik met getalle; hoe meer studente, hoe
meer geld kry die universiteit. Deur nou Afrikaans Ã¡l meer af te skaal ten
gunste van Engels, kry hierdie universiteite meer studente en meer en meer
geld van die staat. As hierdie proses met die huidige getalle kinders op
skool voortgaan, sal daar oor 15 jaar geen Afrikaanse universiteite wees
nie.

Hierdie is nie 'n rasseargument nie. Die meerderheid Afrikaanssprekendes in
Suid-Afrika is tans reeds swart, dit nou volgens die ANC se definisie. As
die Minister en die Regering eerlik is dat ander tale en Afrikaans
belangrik is, moet daar aanpassings in die subsidieformule kom. Die formule
moet 'n mens nie penaliseer omdat jy in Afrikaans doseer nie. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairperson, the question is, how important is
education for South Africa's future? President Mbeki talks about the
African renaissance and that this century must be Africa's century. The FF
says that if education in South Africa fails, South Africa will fail in the
future, and if South Africa fails, there will be no African renaissance.
Now the question is, what must South Africa do to avoid failure? What must
we do to avoid falling further behind in the arena of technology?

I say that the answer is that we must perform better in the natural
sciences. We live in a world of satellites, computers and modern digital
technology. In Europe and America the research and knowledge in these areas
double in a matter of months. The fact is that last year only approximately
20Â 000 of the country's matriculants passed maths and physical science and
chemistry with a matriculation exemption. That is 4% of the total. It is
estimated that of these only approximately 3Â 000 are black students. That
is half a percentage point of all matriculants.

President Mbeki is complaining that there are so few black engineers and
black scientists in South Africa. He mentions it as an example of racism.
According to ANC propaganda the reason is simply apartheid and the then
Bantu education. However, it is not that simple. Hon members can look at
the same trend in Africa, where there has been no Bantu education.

I have the figures here, from the sixties to the nineties, of the
percentage of white, brown, Indian and black candidates who passed with a
matriculation exemption. This figure, particularly if I look at the black
figure for science subjects, is still dropping. The FF now says that the
answer lies in mother-tongue education. In doing so I am not making a
political statement or trying to sell hon members cheap FF politics; I am
making a well-researched education statement. To try to explain abstract
subjects like mathematics and physical science to students in a second or
third language, must lead to poor performance.

I challenge the Minister and the education authorities to prove me wrong by
way of an experiment. For the purposes of the experiment let us take a
group of Zulu or Sotho-speaking students and offer them maths and science
in their mother tongue until matric - that is to Grade 12 - and then
compare these students' results with those of a control group who receive
instruction in English, which is mostly their second and third language,
and then let us see the outcome of that experiment.

Japan dominates the East in the technological and economic arena. In the
same way Germany dominates Europe in the technological and economic arena.
I have visited some of those universities and schools. Their students are
taught in German or Japanese, their mother tongue. There is no question of
their students being taught in English or any other language, and their
students perform very well in abstract subjects such as maths and physical
science.

Why then are we so obsessed with English as the language of instruction?
There is a big difference between using English as a language of
instruction and merely taking English as a subject. I took English as a
subject and I believe that it is very important. [Interjections.] However,
I completed my studies to a doctoral level in South Africa in Afrikaans.
This combination made it possible for me to continue with post-doctoral
studies in America.

Hon members are welcome to try to enrol in a German university with
English. They will first make one complete a language course in German
before they will admit one. We need more mathematics and physical science
teachers in South Africa. If we want to compete with the world, we need
many more black mathematics and natural science teachers in particular.
Without mother-tongue education in these subjects we are not going to
succeed.
I would still like to congratulate the Minister on the fact that he
realises this dilemma and has appointed Prof Michael Kahn from the
University of Cape Town to investigate these problems. From Prof Kahn's
initial reactions it would also appear that he understands the argument for
mother-tongue education. In future we will have to see whether he is going
to solve the problem in this way.

However, before I praise the Minister too quickly, I would like to talk
about the universities, and about Afrikaans universities in particular. The
same arguments that I mentioned above are valid there as well. The
Minister's statement in this regard and about the language of instruction
concerns us. He is currently hiding behind short-sighted Afrikaans rectors
who are devising all manner of excuses why Afrikaans is not important at
university level.

This Minister's department's formula in terms of which universities are
subsidised, deals primarily with numbers; if there are more students the
university receives more money. By now scaling Afrikaans down to an
increasing extent in favour of English, these universities are gaining more
students and more and more money from the state. If this process continues
with the current number of children at school, in 15 years there will be no
Afrikaans universities.

This is not a racial argument. The majority of Afrikaans speakers in South
Africa are currently already black, and that is in terms of the ANC's
definition. If the Minister and the Government are sincere about other
languages and Afrikaans being important, there have to be adjustments in
the subsidy formula. The formula should not penalise one for lecturing in
Afrikaans. [Time expired.]]

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Chairperson, the address of our Minister of
Education, Prof Kader Asmal, was like the breath of fresh air he has
introduced in education since assuming his term of office in June last
year. I want to pledge to the Minister, in the first place, our support as
members of the ANC study group on education in his quest to create a viable
education system for the 21st century. It was in this spirit that we urged
the Portfolio Committee on Education to undertake a programme of study
tours to our most poverty-stricken provinces so that we can support his
call of action in respect of making education in the provinces work.

The Minister's commitment to breaking the back of illiteracy has our
fullest support. The hon Mr Mike Ellis of the DP has unfortunately come to
this podium today to pontificate to us at length about the importance of
literacy. In the first place, he could not contain his obvious glee at what
he regards as the Minister's apparent failure to eradicate illiteracy
within one year, yet in the only province where the DP controls education,
the Western Cape Province, there is a massive cut in the funds voted for
literacy and Abet.

So how can we take the hon Ellis seriously about appointing a Deputy
Minister for literacy when the DP themselves cannot put their money where
their mouth is in the Western Cape by taking literacy as seriously as they
claim to view it. We regret that this once again reflects the different and
skewed focus of education in a province governed by the New NP and the DP.
[Interjections.]

It also comes as no surprise to us within the ANC that the DP attacks the
National Qualifications Framework. The DP has never shared the ANC's vision
of an integrated education and training system, because they aspire towards
an elitist academic-based education system. [Interjections.] The NQF forms
the basis of our integrated education and training system. [Interjections.]
Problems are bound to occur within the NQF from time to time, but we would
rather concentrate our efforts in addressing those problems than abandoning
our vision for an integrated education and training system.

The Minister has also expressed himself very strongly against racial
arrogance and hard-necked linguistic and cultural exclusivity. In this
House, I have already referred to the reference by the MEC of education in
the Western Cape, Ms Helen Zille, to Harold Cressy as a predominantly
Muslim school, where apparently, in her view, Jewish students should not
go, and Herzlia as a Jewish school, which, in her view, apparently, Muslim
students should not be allowed to attend, and that is now well known in the
education debate. [Interjections.]

While the law provides for equitable and voluntary religious observance at
school, it is impossible to describe a school, in terms of our law, in
religious terms. In general, therefore, there are no Muslim, Catholic,
Protestant, Hindu or Jewish schools in the Government school system. The
only exception is a small number of public schools on private property
owned by a religious organisation. Despite Ms Helen Zille's profuse
objections and explanations about this matter, she still has to explain how
her policy works in practice. [Interjections.] Does she have a list of
Muslim, Jewish, Catholic and Protestant schools to which she would refer
students of those particular faiths?

If this is her attitude towards religion, what, I ask, will her attitude be
towards race? What would she do if a white child was referred to a special
school in Guguletu? The answer is clear; her mind is already geared in
terms of the racial and cultural stereotypes of apartheid. These are the
levels, for the hon Mr Ellis' information, to which liberalism in the DP
has sunk.

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: The dividing line between what they would like to
believe is recognition of diversity as opposed to racist practices has
become very thin. [Interjections.]
Mr M J ELLIS: You always talk rubbish, Reggie!
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Mike Ellis, allow the member at
the podium to have his say. Even if he is speaking rubbish, it is his own.
[Laughter.] You can speak your rubbish when it is your turn to come to the
podium. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: May I have another turn, Mr Chairman?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: You will not have a turn from me,
sir. If you have had your turn, you have had it. Please be seated. Continue
with your speech, Mr Van den Heever.

Mnr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Mnr Gaum van die Nuwe NP gaan uit sy pad om 'n
donker prentjie van die onderwys te skilder. Ek het nie geweet die lewe in
die nuwe Suid-Afrika is so donker soos hy dit hier uitbeeld nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Wat betref sy jeremiades oor die geld wat daar kwansuis
nie is vir die opleiding van skoolbeheerliggame nie, kan ek hom sÃª hy soek
daardie geld op die verkeerde plek. Die geld vir die opleiding van
skoolbeheerliggame moet hy in die provinsiale begrotings gaan soek. Hy soek
dus op die verkeerde plek. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Mr Gaum of the New NP is going out of his way to
paint a sombre picture of education. I did not know that life in the new
South Africa was as dark as he is portraying it here. [Interjections.] With
regard to his lamentations about the money which apparently does not exist
for the training of school governing bodies, I can tell him that he is
looking for that money in the wrong place. He must look in the provincial
budgets for the money for the training of school governing bodies.
Therefore, he is looking in the wrong place.]

The hon Mr Gaum also complains about the fact that the budget in real terms
is less than before. Many people, including experts on finance in this
country who have no connection with the ANC, will tell him that the issue
is not about more money, but about the building of systems and the building
of capacity. It is about how one uses that money rather than how much it
is. South Africa already spends the greatest percentage of GDP in the
world, on education, and the hon member's appeal for more money misses that
point entirely.

Mr Gaum also complains about large classes and a shortage of teachers. Mr
Gaum should note that large classes are more likely to be the result of a
classroom shortage than a teacher shortage. We have more teachers than
classrooms in this country. We need more classrooms, and merely to say that
we need more teachers misses the point.

In my constituency, in the Great Karoo, the three high schools in Beaufort
West had the following results in last year's matric examinations. The ex-
Model C school in the town, HoÃ«rskool Sentraal, had a 100% pass rate. The
school in the coloured community, HoÃ«rskool Bastiaanse, had a pass rate of
82%. The school in the predominantly African community, Mandlenkosi High
School, had a pass rate of 75%. Obviously, the spread of the results is a
reflection of the varying degrees of privilege and discrimination suffered
by schools as a result of the divide-and-rule policies of apartheid.

However, upon further investigation, one will find that of the three
schools, the greatest improvement has been brought about at Mandlenkosi
High School, because the pass rate at that school was around 50% in the
past and the 75% pass rate in 1999 constitutes an improvement of 25%. We
are grateful that the Western Cape MEC, Ms Zille, has recognised that, in
terms of her dealings with that school. Regrettably, these improvements
among disadvantaged schools with regard to the matric results are seldom
recognised by the mainstream media and opposition parties.

If one carefully controls access to one's matric class, one can ensure a
high matric pass rate. If one takes only clever kids at one's school, one
will have a high matric pass rate. If one only allows the really bright
students to do subjects on the Higher Grade, while insisting that slower
learners do subjects on the Standard Grade, then one will have a higher
pass rate. This is the kind of engineering that very often takes place, and
nobody notes the clever sleight of hand in engineering these matric
results. And yet these matric results are always used to bash the efforts
of the Government at transformation.

This year's budget has been aligned with the first cycle of Minister
Asmal's five-year Tirisano plan. With regard to public schools, attention
will now be focused on school effectiveness and teacher professionalism,
building the leadership and managerial capacities of school management
teams, increasing the supply of learner support materials, and on
strengthening the role of governing bodies in school governance.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson, hon members, education is a two-way
process which depends on mutual understanding and co-operation among those
involved in it - hence slogans such as ``Education for Tirisano'' and
``Education for Popagano'', which indicate reciprocity. Education can be
used for nation-building and for raising cultural awareness. All these
require resources of a human, material and financial kind.

Some 7,2% is shown as an increase, while expenditure has increased to 8,1%
in the current budget for teachers. That leaves the remuneration of
teachers below the inflation rate; and such decline in the expenditure on
teachers leads to low morale among them, and creates a threat to this
Tirisano project.

It is not acceptable to leave early childhood development to
philanthropists. Investment in early childhood development, as proved
elsewhere - and even in South Africa - has a positive effect on the
effectiveness of education in general. The new admissions policy will see
many youngsters without formal instruction, as early childhood education
will be the preserve of the well-heeled only.

A reduction from R7,6 billion to R6,2 billion, in respect of higher
education will hit the historically disadvantaged institutions most. The
whole matter will be further exacerbated by the incorporation of colleges
of education in this sector. The National Student Financial Aid Scheme, the
acceptance of which was fast-tracked through Parliament last year, should
be helpful to deserving students as intended, and not subject them to
having to show proof of admission. They should rather get an award on the
basis of their performance in Grade 12 midyear examinations and then strive
to get registration with a bursary in hand.

It sounds, however, too optimistic to hope to break the back of illiteracy
with reduced funds. In 1996 it was estimated that there were some 12
million potential Abet learners, and the fact that some Abet centres in
some provinces have been closed down with remuneration still owed to some
educators makes the whole issue more complex. It can only be hoped that the
skills development fund will be utilised in this sector.

The joint venture among the Education, Health and Welfare departments in an
effort to educate people about HIV/Aids is welcome. However, it should not
be limited to pupils in Grade 5 to Grade 9 only. The Department of
Education should also have a special amount put aside for such campaigns.
It becomes regrettable when people in high places in education are
themselves reported as not being honest with their partners and do not even
use the condoms that they speak about.

The UCDP welcomes the introduction of the planning section in the
department and we hope that this will be cascaded to the provinces. We also
applaud the fact that educators across the board will be trained in
management skills.

Finally, while we applaud the enthusiasm of the Minister, and his good
intentions, we regret that disparities will remain for some time. [Time
expired.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, education is the future. It shapes the future
of the individual, the community and the nation. Without good, sound
education there is just no future to talk about. The Department of
Education holds the future for all of us and therefore deserves serious
consideration and maximum support from all of us.

The Minister of Education has thrown everything he has into this. In our
communities there is an upheaval. Teachers are naturally the first to
discern and hear of it. They are getting the message that only hard work
from them can turn the wheels of the revolution in education. That is non-
negotiable.

Just last week on Saturday in Sekhukhuneland I met people from different
parts of the province and all of them were saying that for the first time
they see their children actually busy preparing at night. They are
beginning to get the message. Some, of course, are reacting out of fear,
which is unfortunate. A sense of dedication, work satisfaction and
fulfilment is what is expected of every educator in the world.

The repeat of the shocking matriculation results, namely 1 036 high schools
with a 80% to a 100% failure rate, was not completely unexpected. Last year
I pleaded that we should have racial presentation of results. I want to
repeat this request. To work in national averages is ideal, but can be
completely misleading.
We also need a healthy learning environment. Clean schools should not be a
monopoly of a section of the population. Last week I visited a school in
Mpumalanga with broken windows and a dirty and uninspiring environment. Of
course, this is common all over the country. Parents, teachers, churches
and education departments must change this. Giving the school a face-lift
will announce to educators and pupils that change has come. Toilets, water
and electricity should be provided speedily.

The use of religious communities should not be ignored. Education is a
sensitive moral initiative or undertaking. If churches do not participate
in education, their task of transforming society is made impossible.
Schools become sausage machines which produce products that society does
not want. Schools should be centres of excellence which are co-creators
with God.

Many visitors coming to our country are surprised that many churches have
closed their church schools, and they wonder how we can ever build a
country with no church schools. The PAC will support this Vote. [Time
expired.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the next speaker,
the hon Kgwele, is making his maiden speech. Please give him the courtesy
of the House. [Applause.]

Mr L M KGWELE: Chairperson, Deputy President and hon members, in his reply
to the debate on his state of the nation address to Parliament, the
President expressed the direction which education should take and sent out
the challenge that teachers must teach, learners must learn and managers
must manage. As the ANC, we believe that that is the fundamental reasonable
expectation on which all other educational success will depend.

Since the ANC-led Government came to power in 1994, it began to tackle the
mammoth task of education transformation. It ensured that schools were open
to all and started moving towards equal spending on all students. More
money was spent on previously disadvantaged schools. The principles of
equity and access were, and continue to be, dominant in our new policy
formation.

The Education budgets, over the past few years, indicate the consistent
commitment of the ANC to eradicate the legacy of apartheid education, and
the legacy of inherited dysfunctional, poorly resourced and inefficiently
managed schools. The 2000-2001 Budget is not an exception in that the
growth of R1,9 million to a total of R51 billion reaffirms the commitment
of the ANC Government to the provision of quality public education.

Although the prophets of doom on the left of the House would wish us to
believe otherwise, we are indeed convinced, in the words of the President,
that we are on course. Yes, indeed we have begun to move away from the past
with conviction. Recent review committees appointed by the Minister of
Education also affirm that the people have indeed entrusted governance to a
party that is not only responsible but also responsive to the challenges
facing our nation. As the ANC, we believe that regular evaluation,
monitoring and assessment of implementation processes are imperative in an
ever-changing education environment.

After the President sensitised the august House in his state of the nation
address, on 4 February 2000, about the continued existence of racism in our
society, I am tempted at this point to examine whether racism does exist in
our schools today in the context of our democratic Constitution and
schooling policies. We have observed an unacceptable phenomenon that,
although the ANC Government has put in place nonracial and progressive
policies, racial separation and discrimination still affect schools.

The ANC has always stood for the creation of a nonracial, nonsexist and
democratic society in which all South Africans enjoy conditions of peace
and dignity. We have started to build a united nation, joining hands
without regard to race, colour or creed. Each of our communities is free to
express its linguistic and cultural identity and to assume its equal place
within our new nation.

Our country has ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights of 23 March 1976 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination. As a member of Unesco, South Africa is also bound
not to tolerate practices that clash with the declarations that we are
committed to. The Human Rights Commission deals with a number of complaints
ranging from discrimination, disciplinary measures, racial violence and
racial prejudice. The commission has found that efforts aimed at
eradicating racial discrimination have not achieved the desired results, in
part because learners approach schools with the prejudices instilled in
their home environments, and the schools have no mechanisms to challenge
and stimulate the unlearning of deep-rooted prejudices or to transform the
learners.

As the ANC, we regard racism in schools not only as a violation of the
rights to equality, human dignity and basic education, but as an affront to
the values enshrined in our Constitution. We invite fellow citizens to join
the struggle for the elimination and combating of discrimination to ensure
the coherent integrity of society and the realisation of the national
vision enshrined in our Constitution. The determination to raise school
effectiveness and educator professionalism through the Tirisano programme's
new supervisory services that would have the responsibility of conducting
home school evaluation, providing reports and offering advice on school
quality improvement will be vital in making our schools work for our
nation.

We the ANC welcome the investigation of alternatives to corporal punishment
commissioned by the Minister to capacitate educators, school managers and
school governing bodies to deal effectively with issues of discipline. We
further commend the MEC for Education in Gauteng for initiatives taken to
deal with the Yizo-Yizo level of ill-discipline emerging in our schools.

I think that for the ACDP to request this democratic Government to even
consider home schooling is not an informed act, given that parents do not
have time to be with learners all the time. Therefore this would definitely
sacrifice quality education. The call for the reinstatement of corporal
punishment is obviously not an informed one in that the Minister has
commissioned an investigation to look at different forms of alternatives to
corporal punishment.

In conclusion, we in the ANC wish to thank parents who served in the first
democratically elected school governing bodies, seeing now that their term
has come to an end. They have made a profound contribution and laid a
foundation. We also recognise the new school governing bodies elections
that are being conducted in some of our provinces, and the Northern
Province is one of those provinces that are leading in this regard. With
90% parent turnout, schools are able to hold elections democratically. We
wish to call on all parents to take advantage of this democratic
opportunity by participating in the school governing body elections and
helping to shape the future of public education. [Applause.]

Dr L LUYT: Chairperson, hon Minister and members, I must say that the
Minister looks sporting today. I hope he has been practising his
marksmanship because I imagine that he will be boom-booming everybody in
his final words. [Laughter.]

I am not going to repeat all the statistics he has heard, as he most
probably knows them all anyway. I going to repeat one quote I said before:
``Education makes a people easy to lead, but difficult to drive; easy to
govern, but impossible to enslave.'' These were the words of Henry Baron
Brougham.

Ronald Reagan vowed that he would get the United State literate by having
the schools raise their standards. ``Americans must learn physics and
chemistry, mathematics and English,'' he said. How true. South Africa has
more than its fair share of gifted pupils. Abraham Lincoln said, and I
quote: ``Four score and seven years ago, our fathers brought forth on this
continent a new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the
proposition that all men are created free and equal.'' Indeed, 1994 saw
exactly the same occurrence. It is gratifying that the hon Minister Kader
Asmal has committed himself to the betterment of our education. His strong
stance on nonperformance must be lauded. His undertaking to bring back
qualified science and maths teachers can also only be applauded.

Our nation will stand or fall on how well it is educated. Education teaches
us to discern between right and wrong, education makes us responsible. The
hon the Minister has a mammoth task ahead of him, but he has fearlessly
tackled other problems in the past. He will be mindful of the fact that
matriculants of 2004 would all have had the same opportunities and he will
know that his part as Minister of Education is to shape a better future.

As a nation, we are committed to equality, and therefore, we have to
support the hon Minister wholeheartedly in his quest to create a civilised
youth - an educated youth. Therefore, we must stop the bickering and,
shoulder to shoulder, work for our children. That should be our
contribution to posterity. Milton in On his Blindness said, ``They also
serve who only stand and wait.'' We can also serve in our little way. The
challenges are severe and extend well beyond racial and language barriers.
Therefore, young minds must be nurtured and shaped, through education.

The notion that our children will lose something if another is afforded the
same opportunities is fallacious, to say the least. Not every school leaver
is necessarily fit to receive a university education. Quite the majority,
certainly, is fit to attend technikons. I would therefore suggest that
practical students who excel in their areas of endeavour, receive degrees
instead of diplomas. That would lure more would-be students to technikons
and they would know that their labours will be rewarded in the right way.

Education will make our country self-sufficient in knowledge, and give us
the opportunity to earn the respect of the world; in fact, demand the
respect of the world. An educated nation is a responsible nation. An
educated nation is an industrious nation. An educated nation is a free
nation, a globally free nation. An educated nation sustains its country.
Education is not a gift to be bestowed on a few. It is a gift to all those
who want to receive it. The FA supports this Vote.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, Deputy President, Ministers, the MF wants
to congratulate, especially, the Minister of Education, Prof Kader Asmal,
on his tremendous hard work in restoring and transforming the education
system in various ways, especially for those that were deprived of the
privileges in the past. At the same time, may I take this opportunity in
congratulating the hon member Kgwele on his maiden speech. Well done!

Effective educational reforms must be accompanied by meaningful political
changes. Therefore, at this point in time in South Africa, education ought
to be the first financial priority of the Government. Mere organisational
changes or simply obtaining more funding for education at primary,
secondary and tertiary level, will not, in themselves, resolve the crisis
we are burdened with.

To sustain the education system we require the commitment of all
stakeholders and we require a measure of sacrifice from all individuals who
are involved in education. Of course, our unrealistic expectations must not
be imposed on the renewal of our education system. The SA Schools Act of
1996 provides that education is financed on an equitable and nonracial
basis.

However, in KwaZulu-Natal, especially in the low socioeconomic areas like
Phoenix, subsidies allocated to schools were drastically low, based on the
contention that ex-House of Delegates schools in previously predominantly
Indian areas are equivalent to Model C schools. This treatment has created
a shabby impression that poor people do not exist in areas like Phoenix and
in the Indian community. Backlogs in education must be mediated with
excellent and realistic managerial strategies. Investment in education is
an investment in the nation's future.

In establishing a new democratic education system, care must be taken not
to dismantle those parts of our education system that are functioning
effectively. South Africa cannot afford to lose quality education that has
already been attained through continued social and economic development.
Regional variations within a national population, which is not carefully
captured in data, can adversely affect the allocation of funds. That may
result in unequal access to educational opportunities. Quality education
which meets the needs of the general society and the individual must be
viewed as human resource development, which provides the potential for
superior work competence and stimulates economic productivity, though this
may not be realised exclusively in practice.
In South Africa we have a growing surplus of poorly educated workers who
lack an adequate literacy base for formal training in skills that are
required in the labour market. At present illiteracy is being tackled at
grass-roots level by the Government. However, one must bear in mind that
literacy is not a quick-fix method that automatically leads to increased
productivity and improvement in people's quality of life. In South Africa
illiteracy reflects the gap between the rich and the poor, the haves and
the have-nots, which originated from the apartheid education. The point is
that people are illiterate because they are poor and disadvantaged.

The attainment of literacy does not necessary lead to economic improvement
of the individual or the nation, but where literacy is taught effectively
it has the profound long-term benefit of individual empowerment. Vocational
training in schools is absolutely necessary, as it provides scope for
occupational choice and flexible responses to structural and technical
changes during the individual working life. However, on-the-job training,
whether privately or publicly funded, appears to be cheaper and more
effective than institution-based vocational training, as equipment and
salaries in these specialised institutions prove to be expensive. The
fragmented and unequal nature of education and training has had negative
effects on the development of the society and the economy.

The Government is accountable for individuals with special needs in
education and training. Learners with special educational needs have
suffered a legacy of unjustifiable inequalities of various kinds in the
past. The Government's challenge is to create a policy framework that
develops these individuals both socially and economically. [Time expired.]

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: Chairperson, Deputy President, hon Minister of
Education, the ANC Government is quite aware of all the problems and
backlogs faced by our people. The Department of Education is on board,
having a programme of action to redress the inequality in education
provision and to transform the system of education that we inherited from
apartheid. The ANC, since the days of the Freedom Charter, with the new
Constitution and now by means of its Acts, has not changed. It is still
maintaining its position of bringing changes for a better life for all. The
doors of learning are open to everyone, to ensure the survival of the
people and not of the fittest.
The budget process and the public finance management framework has also
been reformed to enable improved service delivery. The central focus of
budgetary reforms is the need for an integrated planning framework that
links plans, priorities, budgets and implementation targets. For the first
time in the history of education in South Africa the Department of
Education has a comprehensive database of every school building in order to
service and provide available equipment and resources to each and every
school in the country.

The President in one of his speeches has identified the following provinces
as the poorest of the poor, most of which have rural schools: the Eastern
Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, the Northern Province and Mpumalanga. The Portfolio
Committee on Education recently paid a visit to KwaZulu-Natal and the
Eastern Cape.

Zombili lezi fundazwe, iKomiti lezeMfundo elahamba laya kozivakashela,
zinezikole eziningi ezisemaphandleni. Izakhiwo zezikole ziyizakhiwo zodaka.
Akunamanzi kulezi zikole eziningi. Izindlu zangasese azikho futhi ugesi
kanye nomtapo wezincwadi akukho. Izingane zihamba amabanga amade ukuya
esikoleni. Izinga lokufunda nelokuphatha liphansi ngoba lezi ndawo
zisemaphandleni. Nanoma kunjalo, ezinye izikole ziyakwazi ukwenza ukuthi
kufundwe, kuthi izinga lokuphatha libe sesimweni esifanele kanti
nelokuphumelela kwabafundi libe kumaphesenti aphezulu. (Translation of Zulu
paragraph follows.)

[The two provinces that were visited by the education committee have many
schools in the rural areas. The schools are built of mud. Most of them have
no water. They have no toilets and neither do they have electricity and
libraries. Students walk long distances to go to these schools. The levels
of learning and administration are low because they are situated in the
rural areas. However, some schools are able to make learning take place and
to improve the level of administration as well as the percentage of
students passing.]

I am mentioning all these problems to show that the ANC is aware of all its
functions.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, please pay
attention. Hon Aucamp, you will have your time at the podium, sir. Please
continue, hon member.

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA: I am going to briefly mention the following provinces
in respect of how many schools have been built and how many still have to
be built. In Gauteng, 272 new classrooms have been built and 3 000 are
still to be built. In the Western Cape, 9 schools have been built and 32
still need to be built. In the Free State, 138 classrooms have been built
and 16 new schools have to be built. In KwaZulu-Natal 1Â 007 classrooms need
to be built, 62 new schools have been built and 133 classrooms have been
built and added to existing schools. In the Eastern Cape 62 classrooms need
to be built and 7 have been built. In the Northern Cape 4 new schools have
been built. In Mpumalanga 16 new schools have been built and in North West
7 new schools have been built. I would like to appeal to the youth and
students of this country not to vandalise the schools.

The rate and state of illiteracy in our country rests squarely on the
shoulders of the previous regime of the NP. For, as long as we have this
endemic situation, it will always be traced back to the New NP, whether
they like it or not. The responsibility for illiteracy is on their
shoulders.

The adult basic education programme is the mechanism through which the ANC-
led Government is working towards eradicating this legacy of apartheid.
Obviously, liberation and democracy, which were overdue for so long, have
accumulated interest. All of us have a responsibility to harness this
initiative. The programme outlined in the five-year plan Tirisano, is the
tool in our hands to deal with the problem and to break the back of
illiteracy amongst our adults and the youth of this country.

A target of 154 000 learners in the state Abet centres was exceeded in
1998. Provision for Abet finances is catered for under Programme 3 in the
Budget, which deals with general education and training. Those who could
not finish school are given an opportunity to reassert themselves and to
undertake this noble, basic right enshrined in our Constitution.

Some sterling work has been achieved through the dedication of public-
private partnerships. We have seen teachers going an extra mile to help our
grown-ups and those whose schooling was interrupted by, amongst others,
enslavement on farms and inaccessibility of schools as a result of the
school being out of reach of the people. I still believe and hope that all
of us will help. Experience is the mother of wisdom.

I would like to commend other bodies like Telkom who, by the end of 1998,
had helped more than 2 400 employees to successfully complete their adult
basic education programme. For the first time, these graduates were able to
read, write and understand basic mathematics. We also commend other private
and public companies for their contribution by assisting their employees in
the development of their characters. We hope others will still follow. I
also stand here to welcome the Abet Bill that is envisaged, because it is
never too late to learn.

I will be failing in my duty if I do not congratulate the Minister of
Finance on the hard work he has done. He got the recipe from the people,
taking into account their demands. He then baked the big cake, the national
Budget. He had to slice and share it according to the needs and hunger of
the departments. I also congratulate the Minister of Education for
accepting his slice of cake from the Minister of Finance and sharing it
with the people in the provinces.

Besiqala ukukubona lokho. KuHulumeni wangaphambilini besithola izimvuthu
nje zalesi sinkwa. [Ihlombe.] [It was the first time that we saw it. During
the previous regime we only received the crumbs of this bread. [Applause.]]


Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, my sympathy goes to the Minister. He has
inherited a portfolio that is really in a mess, and nobody can argue that
he is not putting all his energy, and that is quite a lot, into his new
mission. He has also shown his versatility today. Now he is dressed like
Benni McCarthy, yet this morning he was Father Kader. [Laughter.]

A more realistic approach towards the introduction of Curriculum 2005 is
one of the positive signs from the Minister. The same applies to the
termination of the redeployment policy and the re-employment of retrenched
teachers with skill and experience. The AEB supports every effort to uplift
the standard of education in South Africa. In this regard I want to make an
appeal for a larger state contribution to special schools for the disabled.
A well-known school of this kind in Pretoria covers only 30% of its budget
through state funding, and 70% comes from the parents and teachers
themselves.

The Minister underlined in his speech this morning ``the challenge to build
an educational system for a democratic society''. He briefly referred to
the diversity of our society, but he left it there. I want to focus on one
crucial aspect of education in a diverse society, and that is the right of
language, cultural and religious communities to educational institutions
which reflect the ethos of such communities and - very important - are
funded by the state. Yes, like the nagging widow before the judge in the
parable in the Bible, I will not stop until justice has been done in this
regard.

Several studies prove that as much as the right to private property is
number one on the list of individual rights, education according to the
choice of parents is number one on the more collective priority list. Our
children do not belong to the state, that is an outdated Marxist view. Our
children belong to God and the parents are the number one trustees.

Onderwys het nie sy oorsprong by die staat nie, maar by die ouerhuis. Die
staat het 'n gedelegeerde bevoegdheid. Elke kind het die basiese reg op
onderwys in ooreenstemming met die religieus-kulturele raamwerk van sy
ouerhuis, binne die perke van die Handves van Menseregte. Dit word
wÃªreldwyd erken. Die VN se deklarasie, die EU se resolusies en selfs die
African Charter, wat deur hierdie Parlement bekragtig is, erken hierdie
basiese reg, sonder die diskriminerende byvoegsel van ons artikel 29(3): ``
... at their own expense''.

Elke enkele ouer in Suid-Afrika is geregtig op sy regverdige aandeel uit
belastinggeld vir die opvoeding van sy kinders. Waarom word hierdie reg hom
ontneem die oomblik as hy vra dat sy kind in ooreenstemming met sy
lewenswaardes onderrig moet word? Wat het in Suid-Afrika gebeur?
Geleidelik, stelselmatig en ongemerk soos die pes wat in die donker wandel,
is die inspraak van ouers op die opvoeding van hulle kinders geÃ«rodeer. Die
1993-grondwet het bestuursliggame nog beskou as mede-indiensnemers van
onderwysers. Die Gautengse onderwyswetgewing van 1995 het reeds hulle
posisie verswak deur aan die LUR die mag te gee om 'n bestuursliggaam tot
stand te bring of te ontbind.

Die finale teks van die 1996-Grondwet het die beskermende bepalings van
artikel 247(1) van die 1993-grondwet oor bestuursliggame totaal weggelaat
en ook die belangrike moedertaalbepaling onderhewig gemaak aan ``where
possible''. Die Suid-Afrikaanse Skolewet van 1996 het beslag gelÃª op die
eiendom van die ouergemeenskap. Die Gautengse regulasies van 1997 het van
die beheerliggame ondergeskikte strukture gemaak. Die Wysigingswet op
Onderwyswette van verlede jaar is ook bekend in diÃ© verband.

Die leerplanne wat van staatsweÃ« op alle kinders in staatskole afgedwing
word, kom eintlik neer op niks minder nie as totalitÃªre, kulturele en
religieuse imperialisme. Dieselfde agb Minister het drie weke gelede in
hierdie Huis gesÃª uitgediende ideologieÃ« soos die Christelik nasionale moet
uit die onderwys wyk, want dit is uit pas met die New Age. Onderwys geskied
nie in 'n atmosfeer vry van ideologiese voorkeure nie. Inteendeel, dit word
gedra deur 'n nuwe - en vir ons onaanvaarbare - ideologie van die
Ãbermensch op die troon.

Ons kinders is ons kosbaarste aardse besitting, die duurste pand aan ons
toevertrou. Die jongste van my vyf kinders het verlede jaar haar
skoolopleiding voltooi aan 'n staatskool. Ek het persoonlik 22 jaar lank
gedien in bestuursliggame van staatskole en die geleidelike erosie van
ouerinspraak aan eie lyf ervaar. My eerste kleinkind moet volgende jaar
skool toe. Ek het nie die vrymoedigheid om oor te lewer aan die toenemende
kulturele en religieuse imperialisme van die staatskoolbestel nie. Wat is
my alternatief? Ja, artikel 29(3) van die Grondwet maak pragtig voorsiening
vir private skole, en daarmee saam die onbillike en onregverdige
verbeurdverklaring van daardie kind se aanspraak op sy deeltjie van mnr
Manuel se Begroting.

Gehalteonderwys, onderwys vry van diskriminasie wat voldoen aan alle
internasionale standaarde, maar ook onderwys in die religious-kulturele
etos van die ouerhuis, is die heel eerste prioriteit op die lys van
internasionaal erkende minderheidsregte waarvoor die AEB en ander
geesgenote ons beywer. Ons sal nie rus voor hierdie reg ons nie gegun word
nie. Ons sal hierdie saak toenemend internasionaliseer. As 68Â 000 Belge in
Duitsland hul eie onderwysdepartement, eie inspekteurs en eie leerplanne
het, en ten volle deur die staat gesubsidieer word, waarom het die
Afrikaner en ander kultuurgemeenskappe in Suid-Afrika dit nie ook nie?

Ons steun die toewysing aan onderwys uit die Begroting. Ons steun die
Regering en die Minister in die massiewe opheffingstaak van die onderwys,
maar ons stem nie saam met die aanwending van belastinggeld vir die New Age-
ideologie nie. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Education does not have its origin in the state, but in the parental home.
The state has a delegated authority. Each child has the basic right to
education in accordance with the religious-cultural framework of his
parental home, within the limits of the Bill of Rights. This is
acknowledged world-wide. The UN's declaration, the EU's resolutions and
even the African Charter, which has been ratified by this Parliament,
acknowledge this basic right, without the discriminatory addition of our
section 29(3): ... ``at their own expense''.

Every such parent in South Africa is entitled to their fair share of tax
money for the education of their children. Why are they being deprived of
this right the moment they ask that their child be educated in accordance
with their values? What has happened in South Africa? Gradually,
systematically and undetected, like the plague roaming the darkness, the
say of parents in the education of their children has been eroded. The 1993
Constitution still considered management bodies as being fellow employers
of teachers. In Gauteng legislation relating to education of 1995 already
weakened their position by furnishing the MEC with the power to bring a
management body to a halt or to dissolve it.

The final text of the 1996 Constitution completely omitted the protective
provisions of section 247(1) of the 1993 constitution concerning management
bodies, and the important provision relating to mother-tongue education was
made subject to ``where possible''. The South African Schools Act of 1996
confiscated the property of the parent community. The Gauteng regulations
of 1997 changed the controlling bodies into subordinate structures. The
Education Laws Amendment Act of last year is also well-known in this
respect.

The curriculums that are forced on all children in state schools by the
state in fact amount to no less than totalitarian, cultural and religious
imperialism. The same hon Minister said in this House three weeks ago that
obsolete ideologies such as the Christian national ideology should leave
education, as it is out of tune with the New Age. Education does not take
place in an atmosphere free of ideological preferences. On the contrary, it
is supported by a new - and to us unacceptable - ideology of the Ãbermensch
on the throne.

Our children are our most precious earthly possession, the most costly
pledge that we have been entrusted with. The youngest of my five children
last year completed her school training at a state school. I personally
served on the management bodies of state schools for 22 years and
experienced the gradual erosion of the parental say at first hand. My first
grandchild must go to school next year. I do not feel free to give in to
the increasing cultural and religious imperialism of the state school
dispensation. What are my alternatives? Yes, section 29(3) of the
Constitution beautifully provides for private schools, and with that the
unfair and unjust forfeiture of that child's claim to his part of Mr
Manuel's Budget.

Quality education, education free of discrimination, which complies with
international standards, but also education in the religious-cultural ethos
of the parental home, is the very first priority on the list of
internationally acknowledged minority rights, which the AEB and other like-
minded people pursue. We will not rest until we are granted this right. We
will progressively internationalise this matter. If 68 000 Belgians in
Germany could have their own department of education, their own inspectors
and their own curriculums, and be fully subsidised by the state, why do the
Afrikaners and other cultural groups in South Africa not have it as well?

We support the allocation to education in the Budget. We support the
Government and the Minister in the massive task of uplifting education, but
we do not agree with the use of taxpayers' money for New Age ideologies.
[Time expired.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Chair, our education is a mess, particularly in the black
areas. The vast majority of schools serving blacks in the townships and
villages, including institutions of higher learning, have enormous problems
and it has a lot to do with our history of oppression, discrimination,
poverty and other such things, but it also has something to do with us as a
people. The Budget is mainly about plans and money. Before addressing these
plans and the money, may I steal a moment to talk about us and our
relationship to the Budget.

Discipline on the part of both teachers and learners has gone to the dogs
and, of course, where there is no respect and order, there can be no
credible teaching and learning. The greatest blame for this sad state of
affairs must be laid at the feet of our teachers. Young people take their
cue from and model their behaviour on what adults do or enforce. In black
schools such as Mbilwi, Leshata, Reashoma and others where the teachers are
disciplined, the learners are not only disciplined but they also produce
good results in their examinations.

It seems that a lot of black teachers have adopted an attitude to do the
minimum and many may have lost confidence in their own ability to teach.
How else does one explain the fact that most black teachers send their own
children away to be taught by white teachers elsewhere? Do we not believe
that we can teach our own children? We give up and send them away to be
taught by others somewhere else? That is unfortunate, because throughout
the history of settler colonialism and racist oppression, blacks were
portrayed as stupid, inferior and incompetent. Now we, ourselves, are
reinforcing these same negative notions in our own children by telling them
that black schools and black teachers are not good enough for them, that
their own parents, uncles, aunts and neighbours who are qualified teachers
are not good enough, and that a better education can only be imparted by
white teachers. This is psychologically damaging to our children.

The tragedy is that it is all false. Some of us were taught by both black
and white teachers at high school. Of course, there are different levels of
competence among individual teachers, but not among the races. A teacher is
a teacher is a teacher. There is therefore no good reason why black
children should be carted out of the townships at four o'clock in the
morning to attend schools elsewhere.

The problems of education are further compounded by the fact that not only
the teachers, but also the entire black petit bourgeois class, which played
a crucial leadership role in the black community during the struggle, has
trekked from the ghettos. Those who still stay there tend to send their
children away.

That means that the leadership skills and expertise that used to reside in
the community is now rare. In this specific area of education, those skills
would have been valuable in the school governing bodies, and the general
thrust in improving schools and the education that they provide. This has
occurred because the advent of democracy in our country has opened a lot of
opportunities for the black petit bourgeois, that is most of us who are
sitting in this House whose opportunities have been widened by the advent
of democracy.

Unionism is a progressive thing. It is an essential element of both
democracy and balanced economic activity, ensuring that different and
important interest groups in society contend as fairly as possible.
However, in education unionism is beginning to have a bad name. There is a
notion that teacher unionism protects laziness, incompetence,
irresponsibility and poor education.

There is a close relationship between crime and the dysfunctional education
system. Teachers do not only provide knowledge and skills; they also give
moral guidance and leadership to the youth under them. Schools that lack
order, discipline and learning are a breeding ground for antisocial
elements who grow up to fill the prisons. Unless society and teachers,
working together, can restore the dignity, respect and image of teachers
whose presence ``induces girls to cross their legs and boys to swallow
cigarettes'' to quote Minister Asmal, schools will not be institutions
where responsible citizens are nurtured.

We may have all the money in the world to invest in education, but if the
factors we have just discussed are absent, we will reap nothing. In fact,
those schools that have little financial resources but have solved the
problems of ill discipline, lack of performance and disrespect, have tended
to produce good results. It follows that the combination of ample resources
and human factors we have just alluded to are required to afford us quality
education. We hope that the R272 million allocated to professional
development in the current budget will go some way towards addressing these
problems.

There are several worrying shortcomings in this budget. Firstly, the fact
that only 1,2% of the education budget will go to infrastructural
development, suggests that the backlog that was deliberately imposed by
apartheid on black schools in the townships and villages cannot be tackled.
It is now six years after the attainment of democracy, but an issue of
gross inequality among the races such as the quality of classrooms we
provide to our children is still with us. It also appears that through
normal budgetary processes this matter can never be adequately addressed.
It might therefore be prudent to consider redress in the provision of
educational infrastructure as a special project and in this way create a
special fund for it. A campaign could then be launched to raise the
necessary funds for these goals.

Secondly, it is said that the rich still get a disproportionately larger
slice of the budget than the poor. In fact, some observers believe that
inequality in educational resources between the poor and the rich has grown
since the advent of democracy. It is a matter to which the Ministry of
Education might have to pay attention.

Thirdly, early childhood development and adult basic literacy remain the
poorer cousins of all other components of our education in this country.
They get close to nothing in the present budget. Again, this is a problem
of the poor. It is they who could not get an education in their youth, and
it is their children who cannot afford preprimary school fees for their
toddlers. It is our duty as a society to invest in those two aspects of
education so that we can create a better and productive population.

Fourthly, the decline in the allocation of funds to tertiary institutions
means that black institutions in particular, which have been inching from
one crisis to another, might just accelerate towards doom. It seems a
strategy is required to save or convert these institutions into something
more viable. As the education budget increases in nominal terms but
declines in real terms year after year, the problems in education seem to
be deepening. We wish the Minister and his department wisdom and strength,
for education is very close to our hearts, and without a good education, we
have no future. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, please pay
attention to this education debate. No doubt it is educational for all of
you. Some members are not bothered to listen to the education debate,
having participated in it for the past 45 minutes. Please pay attention.

Dr J BENJAMIN: Chairperson, Deputy President, hon Minister, hon members,
friends and comrades in the gallery, first of all, I want to tell Mr Ellis
that contrary to what he thinks, the ANC Government has not failed in any
education policy. Let me congratulate the national Department of Education,
the Council on Higher Education, the stakeholders and the institutions for
the tenacity with which they have implemented the transformation agenda in
higher education.

Apartheid created higher institutions of learning which reproduced white
privilege and black subordination. This system was fragmented and divided
along racial and ethnic lines. These institutions reflected severe social
inequalities in terms of race and gender in student access and success and
in the composition of academic staff, with major inequities between
historically white institutions and historically black institutions.

By the 1970s, resistance to apartheid education emerged at various black
campuses, and philosophers became a threat to the state. Student leaders
were banned, placed under house arrest and detained en masse. Many of those
student leaders sit in this House today as members of the ANC. By the
1980s, black institutions had begun to address the questions of
transforming apartheid institutions. Progressive organisations addressed
questions of the transformation of apartheid education and began to develop
the mandate on which the White Paper No 3 and the Higher Education Act of
1997 is based. However, between 1975 and 1990, many scholars and students
died on campuses in the struggle against apartheid education. I salute
Hector Peterson, Steve Biko and many others who pioneered and died in the
struggle against apartheid education.

The department's implementation plans have been published in order to build
a rational and seamless higher education system that grasps the
intellectual and professional challenges facing South Africans in the 21st
century. Such a transformation agenda has considerable financial and human
resource implications, and the pace of implementation and achievement of
policy goals will be shaped by available resources.

This Budget has prioritised education. The higher education budget
comprises about 94% of the transfer payments of R7 billion in 2000, R7,5
billion in 2001 and R7,8 billion in 2002 in the education budget, and R450
million is allocated to the National Student Financial Aid Scheme,
representing an increase of 13%. A redress allocation of R30 million is
included in the total allocation to universities and will be used to fund
academic development programmes.

The Council on Higher Education has been established to advise the Minister
on all aspects of higher education transformation, including the
appropriate shape and size of the higher education system. In this regard,
the task team is expected to report in June this year. According to the
first report of the Council on Higher Education, a new higher education
landscape is emerging in which the previous differences between
institutional types are becoming blurred. Differences between institutions
categorised as historically advantaged and disadvantaged, historically
black and white, university and technikon, contact and distance, and
Afrikaans and English medium are becoming eroded. These changes are both
consequences of policy initiatives and political changes that have exposed
South Africa to global trends and competition.

In spite of changes to the shape and size of higher education, some
inequities remain. The proportion of female enrolment increased from 43% in
1993 to 52% in 1999. However, traditionally women students have been
clustered in the humanities programmes and underrepresented in maths,
engineering, business and science programmes. Further enquiry is therefore
needed to ascertain whether gender equity is spread across all programmes.

Major changes are evident in the enrolment of African students, which
decreased at historically black universities and Unisa, and increased at
historically black technikons, Technikon South Africa, historically white
Afrikaans universities and historically white English universities. This
pattern indicates that the system is becoming representative of South
Africa's population. A possible sign of inequity, however, is that large
proportions of African students are clustered in distance education
programmes of historically white institutions, mostly in the humanities.

Ironically, the main beneficiary of expanded enrolment between 1995 and
1999 has been the historically white Afrikaans-medium universities, and, to
a lesser extent, the historically white English-medium universities. Here
one notes that the increase of black students at historically white
Afrikaans-medium universities is 1 117%, moving from a very low base. I
want to ask the hon Mulder whether he thinks that we could reverse this
trend now by making Afrikaans universities once more exclusive only to
Afrikaans speakers. [Interjections.]

On the other hand, the historically black universities, both individually
and collectively, have experienced a sharp and severe decline in student
enrolment. This has serious implications for their level of public funding,
given the link between student numbers and state subsidies, and the
efficient use of infrastructure and resources, which impacts on their
organisational viability.

Research for the period 1996 to 1997 shows also that less than 10% of all
research publications were produced by the 10 historically black
universities, while more than 63% of publication outputs were produced by
only five of the historically white universities, ie Cape Town, Pretoria,
Witwatersrand, Natal and Stellenbosch. That means that the changes that are
happening are happening at the level of access, but at the deeper level of
research, of who is producing the research, of where the black students are
and so on, a lot of work still needs to be done.

Also, academic staff composition is still strongly determined along racial
lines within the historical categories of institutions. Lack of change in
the race and gender profile of the higher education system's academic staff
bodies contrasts starkly with rapid changes in the composition of students
over the past few years. This is most evident in the historically white
institutions.
Higher education institutions are currently a long way from meeting the
provisions of the Employment Equity Act. Overall, in the three years since
the adoption of the White Paper, considerable progress has been made with
regard to the transformation agenda. There are some extremely positive
trends, although much remains to be accomplished if higher education is to
produce the knowledge and person power required to participate in a
globally competitive society. [Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Mr Chairperson, His Excellency the Deputy President,
hon members, the IFP education policy has already been ably explained by my
colleague the hon Mr Mpontshane. I shall not repeat that.

In his Budget Speech, the hon the Minister of Finance stated the following:


  This Budget makes a strong contribution to enhancing the growth and
  development potential of our economy.

The Education department has a big role to play in this regard and should,
therefore, be supported in its initiatives. It is only right that
Government spending on education should concentrate on those less favoured
by circumstances or historical advantage.

Deep inequalities are still found in our education. We cannot, for example,
compare the financial standing of the University of Zululand with that of
UCT or Pretoria Tukkies. It is only through a sound education budget that
the Education department's  strategic priorities for the next five years
can be accomplished, in particular, the creation of a vibrant further
education and training system, which will equip students to meet the social
and economic needs of the 21st century.

The hon Minister of Education's ambition of building an ideal higher
education system that grasps the intellectual and professional challenges
facing South Africans in the 21st century can only be realised by means of
a healthy Education budget. This includes the fight against HIV/Aids. The
hon Minister of Education's initiatives in this regard are applauded. The
core activities, viz research and policy review, planning and policy
development, support and monitoring, will succeed only if sufficient funds
are available.

The integration of colleges that offer higher education into the higher
education system, is an equally important matter and should be supported
financially. More financial resources should be spent on inputs such as
text books and professional development of staff as well as the culture of
learning. It is important for us to develop the culture of learning, as
this will help us fight the culture of nonpayment at our universities.

Ayikho into etholakala mahhala emhlabeni. [Nothing is free in this world.]

The budget should, hopefully, promote the full-scale educational planning
process, which will be in place in 2003. Such a plan is, of course,
critical, to quote the Minister of Education, in ``reshaping the
institutional landscape and programme direction of higher education''.

The budget should fast-track the financing of important professions such as
medicine and engineering. The Council on Higher Education and the Council
on Higher Education Quality Committee, which is the education and training
quality assurer for higher education, needs to be given further financial
support, so that it can discharge its mandate.

The ambitious and forward-looking National Student Financial Aid Scheme is
a further plus in the funding of higher education and will successfully
address the so-called financial exclusions at our technikons and
universities. It should, therefore, be given a further financial boost. The
department needs financial resources to address the dwindling number of
students in our universities. Such a state of affairs has bad consequences
for the development of our country and our economy.

Umgomo we-IFP ngukuthi imfundo ephakeme ixhaswe ngokwanele ngezimali.
Abafundi kufanele banikwe imifundaze eyanele eyobasiza ekutholeni
imisebenzi. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] [The policy of the IFP is that higher
education should be fully sponsored. Students should be given adequate
bursaries so that at the end of the day they will be able to find jobs.
[Time expired.]]

Mr R S NTULI: Mr Chairperson, the hon the Deputy President, hon Ministers
and members, I would just like to preface my speech by responding to the
constant criticism of the DP policy of ``Adopt a School''. [Interjections.]
We understand why there is so much political hysteria. It is because the
agenda is to ring-fence the DP not to penetrate black areas. We are going
to do that, because, in as much as the ANC has the right to campaign in
Houghton, we also have the right to campaign in black areas.
[Interjections.]

Having said that, the DP notes with alarm that the budget for education has
only been increased by 1% in real terms, and this despite the pathetic
backlogs and poor infrastructure in the majority of our schools. The
national vision for education should put much emphasis on access for all to
quality public education. The budget should reflect the main functions of
the Department of Education, which are policy development, evaluation and
monitoring, as well as assist in creating an enabling environment in the
provinces.

For these functions to be effectively carried out, the following needs to
be put in place. We need well-trained, sufficient, disciplined and
motivated educators. The bare requirements to attain this are job security
and fair remuneration law. We believe that the endless stress of downsizing
and redeployment of teachers or the perennial feuds between the department
and the unions do not help to enhance job security. Downsizing should be
manageable. We must also ensure that we have adequate physical
infrastructure as well as adequate access to learning material.

We also need to develop curricula which are coherent and relevant to the
needs of the learners, broader society and the labour market. We would like
to be optimistic, and therefore hope that we have such a curriculum in the
form of Curriculum 2005. Without adequate training and support mechanisms,
however, it might prove to be a disaster.

A few observations on the current implementation of Curriculum 2005 at
foundation level may be relevant, too. These include the fact that the
timeframes for implementation were too tight. This did not allow the
teachers to make the necessary paradigm shift from the ways of delivering
in the classroom with which they were familiar to an outcomes-based
approach. The effects of this, inter alia, were that the educators did not
have time to consider the effect of OBE in classroom practice, the extent
of reorientation required by educators was grossly underestimated and
training was inadequate. The cascade method which was adopted in order to
speed up implementation did not make adequate provision for the training of
teachers, and hence the development of support material was rushed. There
are many other things I could mention.

We need to proceed cautiously and judiciously, dear Minister, in our
curricular transformation.

An HON MEMBER: Dear Minister?

Mr R S NTULI: He is also my Minister. The future of our children is at
stake. It is in this context that the DP welcomes the Minister's
appointment of a curricular review committee.

I would now like to say a few words on early childhood education. The DP
believes that the funding of early childhood education is an integral and
important part of the core responsibility of the state. Yet we note a
progressive cut of more than 50% in this regard. Clearly, we need some
explanations in this regard, because we believe that provision of early
childhood education creates the necessary background for children to
advance better at school.
In conclusion, it is imperative that we learn from past experiences if we
do not want our education system to slip again into such backlogs and
serious obstacles. Specifically, we should not politicise the education
system again. [Interjections.] The previous government virtually paralysed
education for blacks by making it a significant facet of its political
ideology. It is common knowledge that this resulted in many talented and
dedicated teachers leaving the profession in large numbers in the mid
1950s, the 1970s and later. [Interjections.]

What is more pathetic is that the inhuman policies of Bantu education
converted these centres of learning into political and psychological war
zones, and the unintended consequence of the liberation struggle inevitably
spilling into our schools was the breakdown of order and discipline and
disregard for the authority of teachers. [Interjections.] The new
Government also aggravated the position in many ways by using political
correctness as an ultimate deciding factor in appointing some of these ...
[Time expired.] [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I have to announce that, by
agreement amongst the Whips, notices of motion were not taken at the start
of proceedings today. Instead, they will be called for immediately after
the debate on the Education Vote has been concluded. All members are urged
to be back in the Chamber at 14:00, when business will be resumed.

Business suspended at 12:56 and resumed at 14:00.

                              Afternoon Sitting

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Minister of Education,
hon members, comrades and friends, firstly I want to start by addressing
the hon Mike Ellis, who is not here and who earlier indicated that the ANC
and the IFP seemed to be having an unholy alliance in the National
Assembly. He was actually saying that they are collaborating. We can pardon
Mr Ellis ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Here I am!

Mr S D MONTSITSI: We can pardon Mr Ellis for his short memory, because if
we still remember quite well, the Government of National Unity was formed
in 1994. The IFP has never moved out of the Government of National Unity,
and this also is the stipulation of the Constitution of our country.
However, Mr Ellis seems to ignore the fact that the DP have a relationship
with the New NP in the Western Cape. I am not quite sure why he is not open
with that type of relationship because, indeed, it seems like a syndicate.
[Interjections.]

Now, coming to Mr Gaum ... [Interjections.] Okay, the hon Mr Gaum! He is
very interested in making sure that we go back to the models. He is saying
that parents must have choice in education, but the choice that he is
referring to is that of the Model As, the Model Bs, the Model Cs and the
Model Ds.  Hon members will remember that these models are the same ones
that we dismantled in the past.

Right now we only have two systems of education. We have the private system
and the public system. The hon Mr Gaum wants to take us back. He obviously
does not mind about the township schools. This causes one to wonder about
what is actually happening within the New NP. What we have is a situation
in which there seems to be emerging some opposing forces within the New NP,
because some of the members of the New NP, when they stand at this podium,
support the two systems of education, namely the private education system
and the public education system.

It seems as if though there are those within the New NP who take one step
forward and those who take three steps backwards. Those who take one step
forward unfortunately do not continue. They wait for those who have taken
three steps backwards. As a result the two never meet. [Laughter.]

I would like to inform Mr Green that we have discussed the issue of home
schooling. When we discussed the South African Schools Act in 1996, he
actually wanted the Government to fund the system and the teachers. He also
wanted corporal punishment to take place in this system. He even, together
with others in the Christian community, applied to the court in order to
give them the right to mete out punishment to children in the home-
schooling system. The court turned him down, but he continues, despite
that, to clamour for the home-schooling system and to have it funded by the
Government. That is quite unreasonable.

I will not waste time with our hon Mr Ntuli.

The HON MEMBER: You are not supposed to be responding.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: There are nations on the shores of Africa which over
centuries arrogated themselves a paternal as well as a maternal role over
our continent. During that period, Africa was regarded as a pot of gold.
Years of plunder and pillage were the results. Our fields of gold were
reduced to ruins, squalor and poverty. If a medical doctor were to diagnose
this scenario, it would indeed be confirmed that due to lack of clean
water, a balanced diet, warm clothes and shelter to ward off adverse
weather conditions, the giant collapsed. Those of us who live in this era
on the feet of Africa are fortunate. We can see and feel the feet
twitching, moving and stretching. The giant is indeed awakening.

The process to bring about change and transformation in education commenced
five years ago. The transition from apartheid to people's education is
going to take us a long time to achieve, given the extent to which Bantu
education and colonialism destroyed our infrastructure and our resources.
We wish to commend the Minister for launching a systematic and
comprehensive overall programme which hinges on mass mobilisation to turn
education around. This call for action is made to all of us, MPs, teachers,
students, parents, the community, all education staff and all other South
Africans who have the interests of our children at heart. Indeed, Tirisano
is the strategic education plan for the implementation of the programmes
which will gradually and systematically salvage our education system from
sliding further into the abyss of darkness.

There are nine priorities which the Minister has identified. However, for
the purpose of implementation, these priorities have been organised into
five core programme areas, and these  are: Firstly, the scourge of HIV/Aids
that is prevalent in schools; secondly, the schools' effectiveness and the
teachers'  professionalism; thirdly, the unacceptably high levels of
illiteracy amongst the youth and adults; fourthly, further education and
training, including higher education; and fifthly, organisational
effectiveness of the national and provincial dapartments of education.

These programmes will be implemented over the next five years. This mass
movement towards the normalisation of schools, tertiary institutions and
the Department of Education is not contradictory or far removed from the
Colts campaign. On the contrary, Colts and Tirisano go together. Whilst
Tirisano adopts a holistic approach to the education crisis, the Culture of
Learning, Teaching and Service campaign, Colts, is more focused on the
behavioural pattern and discipline of all educational stakeholders.
Therefore, the two supplement each other.

In a school, institution or community where there is a culture of learning
and teaching, it would be much easier to establish programmes of Tirisano.
Our President says of an environment with a culture of learning and
teaching - Comrade Kgwele has actually indicated this point - that the
learners should learn, the teachers should teach, the managers should
manage and the school governing bodies should govern.

A classic example in respect of the culture of learning and teaching is the
one reported on by the Portfolio Committee on Education on their tour of
KwaZulu-Natal. The report states in part that -


  ... there were some poverty-stricken rural schools which had good
  discipline, where teachers were actively teaching and students actively
  learning. There were no broken windows and vandalised furniture. Although
  the schools did not have enough text books, school governing bodies are
  encouraged to fundraise for learners' teaching material. Many of these
  poor rural schools maintained a matric pass rate in excess of 60% through
  the positive attitude of the principals and teachers, and generally have
  neat and clean premises. There were also rural schools where principals
  had many complaints while doing very little themselves to improve the
  situation. Such schools were in a very sorry state.

Tirisano, therefore, is the game plan to rebuild the morale of teachers,
parents, students and the surrounding communities. It is a philosophy that
says, together we can do it, united we can do it. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before I call on the next speaker, I would like
to welcome the Fifa delegation, led by Mr Allan Rothenburg. You are very
welcome to this Parliament, and to the country. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, thanks for the opportunity to sum
up the debate. I want to thank all hon members, who have made spirited
contributions to this debate. Taken as a whole, I think we have done duty
as I invited them to.

We have started to grasp the notion that the education of the people of our
country is not and should not be a partisan affair. In particular,
education is not a field of public life where cheap shots by small-minded
politicians are appropriate. I will reply to everyone of the submissions
made and to the questions asked, either bilaterally or by meeting the
political parties represented by the intervention, as I have done already
with two or three.

The chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Education, Prof Mayatula, has
set an excellent tone with his thoughtful, erudite and broad-ranging
analysis of the budget and its implications. I congratulate him on taking
his committee members on field visits so that they can see for themselves
what is going on in the hinterland of our system. Benefits of first-time
engagement with the grass roots are evident in his own contribution and
that of several of his colleagues.

As hon members know, three years ago there were blood, sweat and tears in
this debate. Three years ago there were constitutional contestations, with
cases concerning education gone to the Constitutional Court. Now it is
quite obvious that there has been consolidation. There is an emerging
consensus, an emerging agreement, as to how we should handle education.

It is therefore a pity - and I have to say this because the hon member
comes from an education background - that the hon Mike Ellis has displayed
such pettiness in his remarks on the work that has been undertaken by the
Mandela Government in the field of education transformation, for which my
predecessor, Prof Bengu, had political responsibility.

I remember the days when the NP of old tried to drive a wedge between Prof
Bengu and Dr Blade Nzimande, then chairperson of the Portfolio Committee of
Education by personalising the issue. They failed then. I regret to say
this, but the hon Mr Ellis fails today. What both the New NP and the DP
have never understood, is the fact that the Ministers of both the first and
second democratic Governments, since 1994, have not been carrying out
personal agendas, but the policies of the democratic Government. I have
contributed to those policies and I stand by them today.

The hon Mr Ellis tried to smear the 1994/1999 transformation programme as
communist, socialist engineering.

Mr M J ELLIS: Telling it like it is!

The MINISTER: No, be careful.

As hon members know, there is a ``tokoloshe'' in our custom. [Laughter.]
[Applause.] To keep the ``tokoloshe'' out, we have to have recourse to
``betela'', is that not so? [Interjections.] A ``betela'' is something to
keep the ``tokoloshe'' out. What can we get to keep the ``tokoloshe'' of
Mike Ellis out? [Interjections.] [Laughter.] [Applause.] What kind of
rebarbitive remedy do we have to adopt to keep the hon Mr Ellis, with his
very large communist under the bed, out of that bed and make them visible.

I think what we really have to talk about, is that this is our own
democratic and constitutional policy and legal framework. I want to say to
the hon Mr Ellis that he resolutely refuses to grow up as a political
thinker and is content with lazy reliance on the old ``Rooi Gevaar'' smear
tactics of the old NP. It is a rather pitiful thing to do that.
[Interjections.] The country has the right to expect more from the senior
spokesperson of the official opposition, frankly.

In the same light the hon Mr Ntuli says ``we will assert our masculinity,
we will go where we want in any school in South Africa''. He replied in the
Sowetan. Identical letters were written to three other newspapers, but they
were not written under his name. He replied in the Sowetan and I replied
back to him to say: ``Look, we are going to draft rules for access to
schools because of the latent violence in all our schools. The rules of
access will lay down public representatives' right to go there, inspectors'
right to go there, everybody's right to go there under controlled
conditions.''

There is no right to adopt a school. I said that if the ANC, the IFP or
Azapo tried to adopt a school, I would object to it. The adoption of a
school presupposes a kind of reliance, to provide a kind of fatherly
supervision of things. [Interjections.] No, seriously. At the same time he
says: ``Keep partisan politics out of education.'' We do not wish to make
our schools centres of rebellion, centres of no-go areas, centres of fags.
I think it is a cultural thing.

The hon Mr Ntuli's party had their federal congress last week. They had a
theme song which went as follows. Presumably the hon Mr Ntuli comes from
this culture which says: ``You are the voice, show and understand it, make
a noise and make it clear, awoo, awoo, awoo.'' [Applause.] [Laughter.] ``We
are not going to sit in silence, we are not going to live in fear, awoo,
awoo, awoo.'' [Applause.] [Laughter.]

This comes from the rural vastness of somewhere near Empangeni, which is
very much part of the ``volkland'' tradition that the hon Mr Ntuli stands
for. [Interjections.] We are talking about the culture of the schools we
want to develop, and I do not think that we should, in fact, trivialise it
by saying that it is going to be a party-political matter.

On professional discipline, Mr Ellis was on somewhat firmer ground in
highlighting the need for greater professional discipline in schools. In
saying so, he was echoing the sentiments of everyone with the interest in
the system at heart, including the South African Council of Educators. But,
given Mr Ellis' narrow vision, all he could suggest to deal with the matter
was that I should control the trade unions. At the same time, the AZAPO
representative says that we should not have these constant battles between
the unions and the Minister. Both of them are travesties. This represents a
desperately thin, hackneyed response, a social malaise of immense depth and
complexity which I dealt with quite fully in my opening speech.

If the DP expects to broaden its narrow electoral base by making a habit of
union-bashing, they have another think coming. And let us be quite clear
about this, Mr Ellis is wrong. There is no moratorium on visits by
inspectors to schools. That neither was imposed by SADTU nor any other
trade unions. This is part of an urban legend.

Let me make it quite clear. Inspectors go to schools without the authority
of any trade union. They go there to carry out their legal obligation to
the education community. Can I assert this, because I should not be
deceitful before our Parliament. It is not only unparliamentary, but it is
also impolitic to do so. There is no moratorium on school visits ...
[Interjections.]
Mr M J ELLIS: You worry me, Kader.

The MINISTER: Do I worry you? That is something you have to deal with
yourself. I cannot be responsible for that. [Laughter.]

Our approach is different. The organised teaching profession are our
allies, our social partners in the work of renewal in our schools. Rightly
so. Of course, we hold these organisations' members to the highest ethical
and professional standards. There should be no doubt about this. That is
why I am introducing the South African Educators Bill in Parliament before
June to fasten and strengthen the ethical and moral behaviour of teachers.

Our approaches are wide-ranging. We have set up systems to monitor
attendance trends. We are preparing the way for the whole school review.
This is a systematic way of doing it, without scapegoating anyone, as I
said; and we are preparing regulations in collaboration with provincial
authorities to ensure that there is no ambiguity whatsoever about the right
of officials of the Education department to visit schools on official
business. There is no question of no-go areas.

In the same way, I shall be publishing, within the next few days, the
regulations imposing duties on principals during strike actions, because it
is essential that there should be order in schools during strike action. I
make the appeals, of course, as the unions know, but we want stability. For
the next two or three years, we want stability in our schools. Labour
relations must be engaged in and settled outside the school, without the
schools being affected.

In the same way, I will deal with this whole question of how we treat
excellence in schools. Mr Gaum mentioned and relied on a statement by Mr
Bush jnr. You see, Mr Bush snr, once the President, was described as having
voodoo economics. What we had today was largely voodoo educational
policies. [Laughter.] You see, Mr Gaum wants us to celebrate excellence by
saying that there must be special bonuses given to special excellence in
schools. Well, a comrade here, from the ANC side, replied to that in
passing by saying that to celebrate excellence, we must in fact have
competition on equal terms. Of course, there is no competition on equal
terms. I do not want to score the narrow political point that our
inheritance is an awesome one, with enormous problems that attend to us
today.

And let me say quite clearly to this House that to have competition, it
must be fair competition; to have vouchers where children will go to school
on the basis of vouchers of their choice, then we must have fair
competition. One third of our schools do not have electricity. One third of
our schools do not have running water. Nearly 50% of our schools have no
sanitation. We are talking about competition, but the physical wherewithal
for competition is not there. One third of our teachers are underqualified
or unqualified, but this is the legacy that we have. So to have competition
then, one cannot have one runner with both feet tied together, and I mean
at the Olympic Games, not in soccer. [Laughter.] We cannot have runners
with two feet tied together.

Seriously, we have to deal with the pathologies which we face. We have to
do so on the basis of the recipes that hon Louis Luyt has raised. These are
the kinds of recipes that we can deal with systematically in our country.
But there is no partisan advantage in this. The school system which we
inherited did not result in the ANC majority falling from 63% to 50% or so,
as the Leader of the Opposition wants it to happen in the next election.
Our majority went up and our people who voted for us were the very ones who
confront daily, all the time, the problems of poor schooling.
[Interjections.]

Can I therefore say to hon Mr Gaum that the incentives which we will give,
are not the incentives of money, or preference, but the incentives we will
give is a commitment that we would like to find new resources for school
building and for in-service training. It is quite clear that we have to do
so. It is quite clear that Government this year has shown this in the
budget, which I will come to now.

However, before I do so, I must in fact refer to corporal punishment. It is
very saddening that the ACDP, of all the parties here, persists in its full-
on campaign to restore corporal punishment in our schools. There is no
possibility that this Government and this Ministry will bring back the cane
and the whip. It would be a kind of sadomasochism to bring back the cane,
the whip and the ruler in our schools. Our task is to uphold human rights,
not to encourage or legitimate their violation. So it is impossible to
believe that an archaic and authoritarian form of discipline should persist
in an era of democracy and the protection of human rights.

My department knows that for six months now I have been waiting very
impatiently for them to produce a document that will give professional
support to principals and teachers in handling disciplinary problems. The
Council of Education Ministers has acknowledged that such a document would
be extremely helpful. That is the way we should be talking. So we do not
need a document merely because corporal punishment has been abolished. We
need this document because discipline deals with responsibility, with
rights, with relationships, with commitment, with determination to succeed,
with consideration and with respect and, in fact, may provide the real
basis of love in our schools.

I want to come to the national literacy campaign. Hon Mr Ellis was shooting
in the wrong direction when he blamed alleged failures in our Abet
programme on the national qualification framework. This is as illogical as
blaming our failure to solve the problem of backlogs in school
infrastructure on the existence of a matriculation examination. In other
words, we have a problem in extending provision. Mr Ellis chooses to attack
the new system of quality assurance. The job of the SA Qualification
Authority in this area is to ensure that Abet programmes fulfil basic
requirements of quality and that the standards on which qualifications are
built allow for further progression. SAQA has fulfilled its obligations in
this respect.

Now, of course I am concerned about the inadequacy of public funding for
Abet, including the national literacy campaign, and I refer to my call-to-
action document of last July. I made it clear at the time that public funds
were insufficient for this purpose. That is why I lay such a great emphasis
on partnerships and that is why the Business Trust, through the business
fraternity, has come up trumps in this. In the same way, as far as the
literacy campaign is concerned and the governing bodies, I must say to hon
Mr Gaum that we have turned to international donor assistance, and the
money will be forthcoming because they trust our Government. They believe
in our Government and they know that we are doing the right things.
Therefore, money is not everything. We may use it as an excuse to batter
the Government or to attack the Government, but in fact public employers
and others are under an obligation to provide functional literacy at places
of work. We are therefore doing this in a comprehensive way.

We do not need a junior Minister. We now have a national director for the
agency, a person of enormous intellectual acumen and with a good
relationship with the whole of South Africa. He will set up the campaign
and, in fact, we show seriousness by doing this. We will do so in the right
way.

As far as the budgetary matters are concerned, several hon members have
referred to the budget cut for Education in real terms. They are not
referring to Vote 8, which is what we are discussing today. If we analyse
the figures allocated to the national department for 2000-2001, it appears
that there is a nominal increase of 6,5%. Depending on what figures one
assumes for inflation in 2000-2001, it appears that the real value of
education spending, particularly for the higher education budget, will be
retained in this coming financial year.

I made it quite clear in my opening speech that, apart from conditional
grants, the national Budget does not cover provincial allocations for
education. These are decisions of provincial government legislatures over
which neither I nor this House has any jurisdiction. In fact, the
provincial legislatures have yet to begin their own budget debates. We must
arm our MECs. But then, regarding the relationship with their own
exchequers in the provinces, are they are able to obtain the sums of money
to carry out the programmes they have?

As members know, provincial budget allocations are part of a block grant
from the national revenue fund. The education component of equitable shares
is a nominal amount largely based on demographic data. The education
component is not a ring-fenced allocation for education but merely a means
of ensuring that funds are available to provincial governments for their
approximate needs.

I cannot take issue with Mr Gaum. I will engage with him about the dramatic
conclusions from his reading of the provisional provincial education budget
allocations. He is of the view that provincial departments will be shedding
teaching jobs. Allow me to state the position as that hon member has done.
The Government, not just the Minister of Education, is committed to achieve
a better balance of personnel to nonpersonnel spending. The target for 2004
... [Interjections.] [Applause.] Thank you very much. I shall add half a
minute to my time.

We must reduce personnel costs to 85% and 15% for nonpersonnel costs. Thus,
we are not talking about reducing the number of teachers. Lay-offs of
temporary teachers in excess will only occur where it is impossible to
redeploy them. Of course, the equity redeployment process, as I have
announced, will end in June this year. That redeployment was necessary to
bring about equity as far as allocation of resources was concerned. It will
end this year.

That is why we must bring back to the teaching profession, the younger and
the more enthusiastic teachers. But, there will always be redeployment.
Forty thousand teachers retire or die every year. There is constant
movement and flux as far as teaching is concerned. Of course, I do not use
the word redeployment. When I was a school teacher, I was appointed to a
job and, regardless of my consent, I had to take the job.

Now we must work out a system where in fact we do not use fancy names like
redeployment. But let us say that in fact we have an obligation, as public
servants, to take up jobs consistent with family obligations, as I have
mentioned - jobs to which we have been appointed. So the picture is highly
dynamic. The rationalisation and redeployment process is now completed. I
will therefore be able to announce further improvement in the terms and
conditions of employment of teachers, particularly the negotiations that
are taking place of payment by performance for teachers.

I end therefore by saying that the question of registration of private
higher institutions and others will remain to be discussed bilaterally
because it is enormously important as far as registration fees are
concerned, which is also a point raised for universities. We shall do so.

Once again, I thank all those who contributed to this fascinating debate -
those who came to praise and those who came to blame. May the winds of the
debate continue to blow through the corridors of the education system. It
needs and deserves the combined wisdom and energy of all hon members and
their constituents. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Paris Club of creditor nations meets today on the question
           of the Mozambican debt;


       (b)  Mozambique has been devastated by the worst floods in living
           memory, and that this devastation is a major setback to economic
           recovery;


       (c)  several countries, recognising this, have recently announced
           that they will cancel all or part of Mozambique's debt;


       (d)  South Africa cancelled Mozambique's debt to it some years ago;
           and
       (e)  the servicing of Mozambique's debt, estimated at US$8,3Â billion
           in 1998, was already an intolerable burden before the floods;
           and


  (2) calls on the Paris Club to take a bold step to relieve Mozambique of
       its debt and thereby contribute to creating conditions for recovery
       in that country.

[Applause.]

Mnr T D LEE: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem dat -


       (a)  die Nuwe NP in die Oos-Kaap verbind is tot groter samewerking
           met die ANC, wat konstruktiewe betrokkenheid met die regerende
           party insluit;


       (b)  die Nuwe NP beweer daar is nie werklike ideologiese verskille
           tussen die Nuwe NP en die ANC nie;
       (c)  sowel die Nuwe NP as die ANC die Nuwe NP-kongres gebruik het om
           die DP aan te val; en


       (d)  die Nuwe NP die moontlikheid van gesprekke met die DP oor
           opposisiesamewerking as 'n mors van tyd verwerp het;


  (2) besef dat 'n knievallende, onderdanige opposisie 'n resep vir
       mislukking in Suid-Afrika is; en


  (3) aan die DP die eer gee vir sy bereidheid om, indien nodig, alleen
       weerstand te bied teen die magshonger van die ANC en die gevolglike
       traak-my-nie-agtige benadering teenoor die armes en werkloses van
       Suid-Afrika.

[Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion
follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the New NP in the Eastern Cape is committed to greater co-
           operation with the ANC, which includes constructive involvement
           with the governing party;

       (b)  the New NP claims that there are no truly ideological
           differences between the New NP and the ANC;

       (c)  both the New NP and the ANC used the New NP's congress to attack
           the DP; and


       (d)  the New NP has dismissed possible talks with the DP on
           opposition co-operation as a waste of time;


  (2) realises that a kowtowing, submissive opposition is a recipe for
       failure in South Africa; and

  (3) gives the DP credit for its readiness, if necessary, to stand alone
       against the power-hungry ANC and the resultant could-not-care-less
       attitude in respect of the poor and the unemployed.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Mr M A MZIZI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that crime is ever prevalent in Hillbrow, which
       has recently become the crime capital of South Africa;


  (2) commends Home Affairs and SAPS officials on their efforts to weed out
       crime in that area and to fight it visibly;


  (3) pleads with communities to co-operate with such efforts and to give
       the project their full support;


  (4) iyaqaphela ukuthi ngalokhu asihlosanga ukuhlukumeza abafikayo kuleli
       zwe lethu, kodwa esikuhlosile ngukulwisa inkohlakalo eyenza
       kubonakale iHillbrow sengathi yindawo nje impela
       engasenakungcebeleka; nokuthi
  (5) ikhuthaza aboMnyango waseKhaya kanye nowamaphoyisa kababa uSteve
       lapha ngaphesheya.

[Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)


  [[(4)    notes that by this we do not mean to discriminate against aliens
         in this country, but that our aim is to fight the corruption which
         has turned Hillbrow into a place where there is no joy; and


  (5) wishes to encourage the Department of Home Affairs and the police of
         Mr Steve Tshwete.]

Ms M A MOLEBATSI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that yesterday's crime blitz in Hillbrow resulted in the arrest
       of hundreds of suspected criminals, the seizure of illegal firearms,
       the confiscation of drugs and the recovery of counterfeit money;
  (2) recognises that the Government and the SA Police Service are serious
       in their efforts to curb crime;


  (3) acknowledges that the blitz in Hillbrow and other parts of the
       country can be described as victories in the fight against crime;


  (4) commends the Minister of Safety and Security and the SAPS for their
       efforts to make our streets safer; and


  (5) calls on all law-abiding South Africans to assist the police in
       sending a message that crime is no longer welcome in our country.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) acknowledges the constructive role played by opposition parties in
       order to strengthen multiparty democracy on the continent of Africa;


  (2) recognises the need for opposition parties to participate in
       multilateral forums such as SADC and the OAU; and


  (3) welcomes opposition leaders of 13 African countries attending a
       conference of the Democrat Union of Africa, an associated member of
       the International Democrat Union, currently being held in Cape Town
       and hosted by the New NP.

[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with grave concern that thousands of commuters in the Northern
       Province are faced with serious transport problems;


  (2) notes with dismay and disappointment that most of the previously
       state-subsidised bus companies are virtually bankrupt and are now on
       the verge of closing shop;


  (3) notes that the few buses that are still operational on public roads
       are not roadworthy and pose a big danger to commuters; and


  (4) calls on Government to apply the same policy of recapitalisation of
       the taxi industry to the bus industry, as a matter of urgency.

Mr A M MAZIYA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) noting that the South African Government has taken the initiative to
       introduce tougher gun control measures;


  (2) recognising that the Government has adopted positive measures to deal
       effectively with unemployment and crime; and
  (3) acknowledging that crime has a negative impact on the daily lives of
       millions of our fellow South Africans, the youth in particular, and
       that it has a negative impact on economic growth;


  (4) commends the youth of Soweto for courageously taking the lead in the
       fight against crime; and


  (5) calls on people throughout our country to hand in any illegal
       firearms and to work with the police in making South Africa a safer
       place for all.

[Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Constitution requires that legislation envisaged in
       sections 9(4), 32(2) and 33(3) of the Constitution be enacted within
       three years of the date on which the Constitution took effect, 4
       February 1997;
  (2) notes that in order to give effect to those provisions of the
       Constitution, Parliament, just before the expiry of the three-year
       period passed the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair
       Discrimination Bill, the Promotion of Access to Information Bill and
       the Promotion of Administrative Justice Bill;


  (3) notes that the President has assented to these Bills in terms of
       section 79 of the Constitution and that the relevant Acts of
       Parliament have been published;


  (4) notes that each of these Acts contains a provision to the effect that
       it will take effect on a date to be fixed by the President; and


  (5) calls on President Thabo Mbeki to ensure that these Acts are put into
       operation as a matter of urgency and ...

[Time expired.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die VF sal voorstel:
  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van die onsteltenis van President Mbeki, soos vandag
       berig is, omdat 'n boer in die Ermelo-omgewing geweier het dat 'n
       swart persoon op sy plaas begrawe word;


  (2) verder kennis neem -


       (a)  van die omstandighede van die weiering, naamlik dat die
           oorledene nie op die plaas woonagtig was nie, maar op die dorp
           waar daar wel 'n begraafplaas is;


       (b)  dat die rede waarom die familie versoek het dat die begrafnis op
           die plaas moes wees, aangegee is as sou die voorvadergeeste dit
           so aangedui het;


       (c)  dat die boer deur 'n appÃ¨luitspraak, waarvan die koste R102Â 000
           beloop het, 'n hofbeslissing daarteen verkry het; en


       (d)  dat die familie ondanks dit alles nog probeer het om die
           begrafnis op die plaas te hou, welke aksie dit nodig gemaak het
           om die polisie en van die kommandolede te gebruik om die
           hofbeslissing te handhaaf; en


  (3) 'n beroep op President Mbeki doen om versigtig te wees om nie
       gemoedere op te sweep nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans Notice of motion follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
I shall move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the dismay of President Mbeki, as reported today, because a
       farmer in the Ermelo district refused to allow a black person to be
       buried on his farm;

  (2) further notes -


       (a)  the circumstances surrounding the refusal, namely that the
           deceased was not resident on the farm, but in the town, which
           has a cemetery;

       (b)  that the reason for the family's request that the funeral be on
           the farm was given as being a specification from ancestral
           spirits;

       (c)  that the farmer obtained a court ruling against this by way of
           an appeal verdict, which cost R102 000; and

       (d)  that, despite all this, the family still attempted to have the
           funeral on the farm, which made it necessary to utilise the
           police and some members of the commando to uphold the court
           ruling; and


  (3) appeals to President Mbeki to be careful not to incite emotions.]

Miss N B SIGABI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises that the national lottery is a monopoly which has affected
       the ability of many worthy causes to raise desperately needed funds;


  (2) calls on the Government to name the worthy causes that will qualify
       to receive 30% of the lottery's revenue; and


  (3) further calls on the Government to ensure that there is complete
       transparency in how the money raised by the lottery is spent,
       including how much is spent on -
       (a)  salaries and payments to members of the company which runs the
           lottery;


       (b)  administration costs;


       (c)  marketing; and


       (d)  any other specified costs.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:
  That the House -


  (1) recognises the sterling work done by the Parkview community police
       forum in reducing crime in that neighbourhood, particularly in view
       of the Government's repeated calls on communities to become partners
       in combating crime;


  (2) notes that people work best when offered incentives and programmes
       work best when there is accountability; and


  (3) calls on the Minister of Safety and Security to -


       (a)  reinstate the programme operated by the Parkview community
           police forum whereby residents pay reservists to be bobbies on
           the beat;


       (b)  promote such initiatives throughout the country; and


       (c)  demonstrate his commitment to community participation in
           combating crime in every way possible.
Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that 50 white families have been welcomed into the informal
       community in Borchards in the Southern Cape;


  (2) recognises that the admission of white children into the local former
       DET school is an historical event;


  (3) believes that such a community spirit is a shining example of ubuntu,
       the spirit on which the future of our country depends; and


  (4) commends the people of Borchards in the Southern Cape for their
       humanity to welcome others who are facing adversity, setting aside
       divisions of race and culture.

[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with horror and disgust that charges against six alleged
       rapists, among them a man accused of raping an 11-year old girl and
       an alleged murderer, were withdrawn last week in the Northern Cape
       because of the failure of the justice system to provide them
       timeously with legal aid-funded legal representation;


  (2) notes that the reason for the withdrawal of legal representation in
       most of these cases was apparently the sudden reduction by the
       Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development of legal aid
       fees;


  (3) further notes that this action by the courts has outraged communities
       and reflects no credit on our criminal justice system; and


  (4) calls on the National Director of Public Prosecutions to look into
       these cases and on the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
       Development to start an urgent departmental probe into the
       consequences, countrywide, of the sudden reduction in legal aid fees.

Miss O N MNDENDE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent incident in which Mrs Zoleka Dlodlo Maqungo of
       Umhlombo Wenene, formerly Radio Xhosa, was gunned down in the early
       morning, in front of her children, by her husband, who later shot
       himself, leaving the defenceless orphans traumatised for life;


  (2) expresses its concern at the escalating rate of murders of wives by
       their husbands; and


  (3) calls on Government immediately to address this shocking situation
       with a co-ordinated strategy which gives special attention to the
       inability of certain men to cope with their own frustrations and
       sense of failure.

                        DISASTER RELIEF IN MOZAMBIQUE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the positive contributions of the SANDF, the international
       community, business, the media and many other people of the world to
       the disaster relief operations in flood-ravaged Mozambique;


  (2) hopes that the international community and relief agencies will
       continue in their efforts to ensure the long-term, sustainable socio-
       economic rebuilding of Mozambique;


  (3) pays homage to all those who continue to play a role in helping the
       flood victims to secure some measure of stability and social
       rehabilitation;


  (4) honours all the personnel of the SANDF who came to the aid of the
       victims who were left homeless, destitute and in dire straits; and


  (5) identifies and invites all those individuals, especially Air Force
       pilots and crews who played an extremely courageous and noble role in
       saving thousands of babies, women and children to visit Parliament
       and receive our commendation.

Agreed to.

                   VISIT BY FIFA TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the FIFA Technical Inspection Delegation, led by Mr Allan
       Rothenburg, is in South Africa to assess the country's preparedness
       to host the prestigious Soccer World Cup in 2006;
  (2) recognises that a successful bid would signify an important
       advancement of the noble objectives of the African Renaissance;


  (3) acknowledges the high standards of South African and African soccer,
       as well as the large number of Africans who are competing at
       international levels and that our soccer arenas are among some of the
       best in the world; and


  (4) appeals to Mr Rothenburg and his team to strongly recommend to FIFA
       that South Africa be considered to host the World Cup 2006 on behalf
       of and for Africa.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 29 - Sport and Recreation:

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President,
colleagues, it is indeed an honour for me to address this august House in
this my maiden budget speech at the end, almost, of my first year in
office. I would like to reflect on what has been a very busy year in the
Ministry and in the Department of Sport and Recreation. I would also like
to give hon members some insight into the path ahead that I am
contemplating for my area of responsibility.

The year 2000, as hon members are aware, is a watershed year for Sport and
Recreation in South Africa, given the fact that the SA Sports Commission
and the new, smaller organisational component for Sport and Recreation will
assume their full-scale operations on 1 April. This represents a new dawn
for Sport and Recreation that will, I am very confident, take the
institution to new heights in our country. I shall return to this matter a
little later on.

Allow me, first of all, to contextualise my approach to Sport and
Recreation for my term of office. Hon members are aware of the approach of
the Government of integrating its initiatives in striving to improve the
quality of life for all South Africans. It is envisaged that by combining
or integrating the efforts of various Government departments, we shall be
able to make a greater impact on the lives of all.

Sport and recreation form part of the social and international relations,
as well as of the governance and administration sectors. It is my intention
to take sport and recreation to the centre stage of these domains. It is my
view that sport and recreation have been trivialised, or have been
considered to be a luxury, for too long. As a global phenomenon, sport has
a significant impact on many spheres of social life, including the economy.
Indeed, regarding the latter, I am proud to announce that the latest
research shows that the contribution of sport and recreation to the GDP has
increased from 1,9% in 1997 to 2% in 1999. It is estimated that it is worth
R15Â million. If capital expenditure is included, the contribution rises to
R16 million or 2,1% of the GDP.

Sport and recreation provide employment for some 34Â 000 full-time and 6Â 000
part-time workers, as well as about 8Â 000 volunteers. We therefore sideline
sport and recreation at our own peril. Sport has always been something of a
stepchild, when it comes to the allocation of Government resources. We,
however, understand why that has been, and still is, the case, for there
are very many other areas that require Government's urgent and immediate
attention. Government, however, has been, and always will be, committed to
ensuring access to sport and recreation for all South Africans and to
create opportunities and eliminate backlogs in this regard in the
disadvantaged sectors of our society. Impediments to such access are some
of the legacies of apartheid and I shall strive tirelessly to eliminate
them.

I am nevertheless dissatisfied with the budgetary allocation for Sport and
Recreation. I am looking at the Minister of Safety and Security, and he is
smiling at me because he knows what I am talking about. Our baseline
allocation for the 2000-2001 financial year of R54 million constitutes
0,025% of the national Budget, and translates, from a national perspective,
into a per capita annual expenditure of approximately R1,20. This can never
be satisfactory. I shall continue to fight for a bigger piece of the cake
and, believe me, we shall get it.

I believe that the merits of our case will in turn be based on the impact
or the outputs of our endeavours on broader Government objectives that we
strive to contribute to. We tend to pay lip service to the potential of
sport and recreation to contribute to nation-building and the like. We
shall, however, have to invest more substantially in the institution, if we
are to realise such benefits.

We shall, however, not adopt a crybaby approach because of our budgetary
allocation. Rather, we shall strive to unlock the additional resources
required to meet the needs of sport and recreation ourselves. The fact that
we are one of the five good causes that will benefit from the national
lottery will go some way towards achieving that end. Moreover, the SA
Sports Commission was also created with the aim of securing additional
resources for sport and recreation to try to eliminate the shortfall. The
White Paper on Sport and Recreation that was produced in 1998 is as
relevant today as it was when it was launched.

While we are in the process of considering the next cycle, we are confident
that this policy document will run the full course of the five-year life
for which it was intended. My confidence is based on the consistently close
relation between the priorities of Government today and those identified in
our White Paper.

The social sector constitutes our core cluster in Government. We are
committed to utilising the medium of sport and recreation to contribute to
the establishment of a humane, caring, deracialised and nonsexist society.
We shall therefore participate vigorously in the joint effort to, firstly,
alleviate poverty; secondly, provide a safety net by targeting the most
vulnerable in our society; and, thirdly, eliminate all forms of
discrimination against women.

I have requested our Women in Sports programme to redirect their energies
to ensuring that more women participate in sport and recreation, and that
the level of their performance is raised at the same time. We are in the
process of amending legislation that prohibits women from participating in
certain sporting codes, so as to ensure that we are in sync with the
Constitution of our country. [Applause.] I am referring, of course, to
women's involvement in boxing. Our Constitution is described as a model all
over the world. If we fail to respect its provisions, however, we will
render the supreme law of the country meaningless.

While speaking about the Constitution, I would like to warn sports
administrators - and we have a lot of them - athletes and participants
sitting in the gallery, that no constitution of any international sports
organisation, including that of the International Olympic Committee, is
above the supreme law of this country. [Applause.] I will definitely come
back to this, because at the moment there are burning issues, that concern
Athletics South Africa, hockey and the Gymnastics Federation of South
Africa.

Fourthly, we will take immediate steps to look at the impact and slow down
the rate of the spread of HIV/Aids within our country. Sport provides a
captive audience for spreading messages about the dangers of HIV/Aids and
for educating people to ensure that the spread of the pandemic is
contained. Moreover, the status of role models in sport among the youth of
our country provides us with a strong vehicle for getting that message
across. We have been actively involved in the interdepartmental HIV/Aids
forum and we will continue to do so.

We have drafted and revised our position statements on HIV/Aids and sport,
and we have spread the message throughout Africa in this regard, through
the recent All Africa Games that were held in Johannesburg, where we drove
a very successful campaign amongst participating athletes. We regularly
advise athletes who compete internally and abroad about the dangers of the
disease and about appropriate preventative measures to avoid contamination.


Fifthly, with regard to integrated rural development and urban renewal
strategies, our involvement in the creation of physical infrastructure and
the provision of programmes both in the rural areas and inner cities is
manifold. Our facility-creation project, addressed by means of RDP funds,
was biased towards the rural areas. Sadly, however, this project has come
to an end because funds have dried up. We are, however, proud of having
built nine multipurpose indoor sports facilities and more than 300
multipurpose outdoor sports facilities across the country with the funds
that were put at our disposal. This is one domain, however, in which we
shall strive to find additional resources, as our project has only made a
slight dent in the huge backlog that exists for sports and recreation
facilities, especially in disadvantaged areas.

Our problem with regard to facilities in South Africa is not about how many
facilities we have or the quality thereof, but rather about the
distribution of these facilities. Provision is skewed to the urban
advantaged and predominantly white areas. We are in the process of
developing a national facility plan aimed at ensuring that the right
facilities are built in the right places at the right time. It is also
intended to ensure that the general community makes the numerous facilities
that lie dormant for large parts of the day available for use. I am
thinking here of school facilities, private clubs, facilities at military
bases and the like.

We have dedicated programmes for establishing sustainable sport and
recreation facilities in the rural areas, and a new project we have is
aimed at rekindling indigenous sport. That programme is bound to promote
increased participation and contribute to the restoration of the dignity of
our people by reviving elements of culture that have been denigrated and,
in many instances, crushed. We are targeting the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-
Natal and the Northern Province for pilot projects in this regard. To this
effect, we have employed a person at director level to co-ordinate this.
Indigenous sport is also very close to our President's heart.

We are also looking at human resource development. We are committed to the
development of the human resource base within my department and Ministry in
order to ensure high levels of service delivery to all our clients. We will
strive to invest in the development of those responsible for delivery at
grass-roots level through the provision of training and refresher courses
that will not only equip people to serve communities better, but will also
equip them in such a way that their acquired skills are transferable to
other domains, thereby increasing their employability rating.

We are also in the process of establishing a standards generating body, or
SGB, that will relate to the SA Qualifications Authority's National
Qualifications Framework. This will provide national recognition for
certification in the various fields of sport, including sports medicine,
fitness, coaching, officiating, management and administration, outdoor
recreation and adventure, and so forth.

We are also participating actively in the tourism and hospitality sector
education and training authority in order to ensure that we derive the
maximum benefit from opportunities that will be generated from this
initiative. Of course, human resource development in sport and recreation
does not relate to deliverers only. On the contrary, the beneficiaries
benefit from their inputs and the athletes and participants develop
themselves. We constantly strive towards the development of talent amongst
our youth so that they can also have access to the huge economic benefits
that can be derived from direct and indirect participation in sport. Our
projects, in this regard, include, amongst others, the talent
identification programmes of Sisa.

Our life skills programmes for athletes who excel in their sport  strive to
prepare them for the economic, social and other rigours that go along with
the exposure to top-class international competition, and the high
performance programme prepares our athletes physically, emotionally,
nutritionally and otherwise for high level participation and numerous other
development programmes. Once again, in all these programmes, our focus is
biased towards vulnerable groups.

We would like to contribute also towards combating corruption. We believe
that participation in sport, in whatever capacity, can contribute towards
combating corruption. The demands that we place upon our national
federations in terms of having to account for the public funds that we
entrust to them provide ample evidence in this regard. While in many
instances we are not even speaking about the misappropriation of funds, we
regard deviations from contractual agreements in a serious light. I have
not and will not, in future, hesitate to take action against individuals
and federations that do not live up to public expectations in terms of the
tasks that have been entrusted to them. We shall be doing more regular
performance audits on our clients in future. Our clients, in this instance,
are national federations. To date, I have already intervened in the
unsatisfactory state of affairs in boxing, soccer and Sanrec during my
short spell as Minister of Sport and Recreation, and we will do so in any
sport where corruption or maladministration may rear its ugly head in
future. I am not apologising for this to anybody.

We also want to strengthen social partnerships and community participation
within sport. We are also looking at regional integration through the
institutions of SADC as a platform for launching the African renaissance.
Members will agree with me, I am sure, that the hosting of the 7th All
Africa Games in September last year was a highlight of our sporting
calendar and provided a launch pad, from a sporting perspective, for the
African renaissance. The fact that it was the biggest All Africa Games,
with 52 countries and a total of more than 6 000 athletes competing in some
21 different sports, provides ample proof of our reacceptance into the
African family of nations. The quality of the event, from an organisational
perspective, as well as the performances of our athletes, proved
unequivocally that the African renaissance can indeed be realised.

Our membership of the Supreme Council for Sport in Africa, Zone Six, the
technical arm for sport of SADC, reflects our commitment to the region.
Indeed, we have been requested by the SADC countries to assist them with
hospitality facilities at the Sydney Olympic Games this year. I am
considering this request. Moreover, our presidency of the Supreme Council
for Sport in Africa has provided us with the unique vantage point from
which to drive the African renaissance, from a sports perspective, on the
continent.

We have also been combating racism and addressed the question of
representivity in sport. Last year my department held a conference to
address the question of racism in sport. I was saddened by the realisation
that where sport was once at the forefront of transformation and
integration in our society, we have fallen behind in this regard. At the
conference we developed a charter on no racism in sport that will be
observed by the entire sports fraternity of this country. I hope to include
the question of racism in sport in the national and international
conferences on racism that are being planned for South Africa later this
year.

On the question of the representivity of our sports teams, I have made my
position absolutely clear. Our national representative teams will be chosen
strictly on merit. I will, however, keep a close watch on developments in
this regard, and trust that the federations will ensure that the best teams
are indeed selected. The national federations are acutely aware that the
country is keeping them responsible for ensuring that our teams are
competitive internationally. However, at the same time, they should
continually strive to ensure that they reflect the demographics of the
South African society. This representivity and transformation within sport
is non-negotiable. At the levels below the national representative teams,
we will actively create opportunities for players from disadvantaged
backgrounds to gain access to elite participation.

I am happy to announce that in the several meetings that I have held with
major sports federations, I have received unanimous support in this regard.
Indeed, national federations have signed performance agreements, or
performance contracts, with me in which they undertake to make teams as
representative as possible. I shall hold them to these contracts, and
measure the extent to which they realise their targets within one year.

One of the priorities in the area of international co-operation concerns
the marketing of South Africa globally. Given its pervasive nature, as well
as the prominence of our sports teams in the international arenas of the
world, sport provides us with one of the most unique opportunities for
marketing our country abroad. Our sportspeople have over the years been our
best ambassadors, and we shall strive to use that medium to expand the
country's profile.

Our bid to host the 2006 World Cup in soccer provides another opportunity
to turn the eyes of the world on South Africa, as members have seen. We are
happy to announce that the Government of President Mbeki is fully
supportive of the bid, and that we hope for a positive outcome to the
process. [Applause.] We wish the bid company well in its endeavours to
secure this prestigious competition for South Africa, and we wish to place
on record our sincere appreciation for their efforts thus far.

Our success in hosting major sporting events, such as the 1995 Rugby World
Cup, the 1996 Africa Cup of Nations and the Seventh All Africa Games,
confirms, unequivocally, our capacity to host sporting events of this
magnitude. Here I also wish to thank the members, the colleagues, Cabinet
members and all sports-loving people of this country, who today have shown
where their passion lies with this particular World Cup bid. [Applause.] I
think we will have quite a good team coming out of Parliament - a mixed
team of both ladies and gentlemen, with Shenge as the captain. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

An HON MEMBER: Laduma! [Goal!]

The MINISTER: Allow me to focus on a number of sport-related issues that
have arisen during my brief spell as Minister, and which I shall continue
to deal with during the coming year. The House will recall that we have had
to intervene in certain federations that were experiencing crises in one
form or another. These include the SA National Boxing Control Commission
and the SA Football Association as well as the professional league.

I am happy to announce that the boxing commission has appointed a committee
to investigate the alleged misconduct of the CEO of the SANBCC, and the
soccer authorities have provided me with a comprehensive report on their
activities, in respect of the various matters that I raised with them
during our several meetings. I am presently in contact with them to clarify
some of the issues raised in the report, and I am very confident that the
matter will be concluded very shortly.

In the same breath, I also should mention that the issue of the under-23s,
Amaglug-glug, is also an issue that we are busy discussing, and I am hoping
that by the time the team goes to Guinea, it will be a full strength team.
[Applause.] I must stress, however, that we will strive to clean up sport,
where there is corruption and where administrators have built their
individual fiefdoms.
If a particular sport does not move or budge, we will use all our
persuasive powers to make them move. As a very handsome Minister, I will
just smile at them and they will move. With regard to the SANBCC, boxing,
we will host a one-day indaba this coming Friday. That should set that
structure on a course that will see the sport returned to its previous, pre-
eminent status. At that meeting, we will discuss the draft boxing control
Bill, that I shall be introducing to Parliament later this year. The new
Bill will replace the existing Act that was first introduced in 1954 -
older even than some of the people here in Parliament.

Various internal problems that have affected unity within certain
federations, and that I have managed to deal with, have emerged. These
include life-saving and karate. I have also been in intense discussions
with the National Olympic Committee of South Africa, Nocsa, with regard to
our representation at the Olympic Games in Sydney later this year. I am
very happy to announce that we have made substantial progress in this
regard as well, and that a full team, Team South Africa, will be announced
very soon.

At the risk of being repetitive, let me confirm that we stand a very good
chance of winning the soccer bid for 2006.[Applause.] The report that we
got from Robben Island just now is a glowing report of what has happened
during the past five days in South Africa, and that seems to be very good
for us. I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate, as I
did, the CEO of the bid company, Mr Danny Jordaan, on the excellent work
that he has done in putting South Africa's case to the world. [Applause.]
We, therefore, look forward to a positive outcome on 6 July.

On the question of physical education and sport, I am happy to announce
that he minister of Education, Kader Asmal, and I have made considerable
progress with regard to the issue of physical education and sport in our
schools. We are committed ensuring that these activities are restored to
their rightful places in the programme of all schools in South Africa. I am
convinced that, for pupils from disadvantaged communities, physical
education and school sport provide the one certain opportunity in their
lives to gain access to sport and recreation.

We are planning a joint summit on physical education and school sport in
June this year that will chart the course ahead. We shall be meeting with
the representatives of teachers unions to get their buy-ion and commitment
to the process. I call upon teachers to do their utmost to ensure that this
initiative succeeds. It is in the interests of our youth and our country.
It is no accident, I believe, that schools with an established culture of
learning are also those schools with an established sporting culture. We
have agreed to place competitive school sport and school leagues under the
Department of Sport and Recreation, provincially and nationally. The
curricular side of sport will be under provincial and national education.

As far as sport broadcasting is concerned, we often refer very glibly to
the potential of sport to build the nation. If sport can in fact fulfil
such a role - I believe that it can - then it is imperative that everybody
should have access to at least those matches in which our national teams
participate. Unfortunately, the recent trend has been for the pay TV
channels in South Africa to acquire exclusive rights for broadcasting
matches involving the national teams in certain sports. The majority of the
people in our country are therefore excluded from seeing our teams play as
they do not own decoders or satellite dishes. This is totally unacceptable.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms N R BHENGU: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers and hon members,
the time for Africa to host the Soccer World Cup could not have been
earlier than when the whole African continent was free from colonialism.
[Applause.]
The time for Africa can no longer be delayed. The lives of our youth who
may perhaps have participated in sport and recreation, like their
counterparts the world over, were cut short by apartheid-sponsored
political violence. We are specifically referring here to the Solomon
Mahlangus, Hector Petersens, Portia Ndwandwes and scores of our youth who
might have participated in the favourite pastime. Yet others who are
already making an imprint in their sports discipline, such as the respected
Kaizer Chief captain, Pro Khongoane, had their lives made by apartheid
state violence. Others, under threat of violence, harassment and detention,
were forced to leave their homes and live as refugees in foreign lands. Yet
others, such as Jomo Sono, Kaizer Motaung and Sugar Ray Xulu, to mention
just a few, who might have been giants on the world stage, never had that
opportunity.

It is to these that the world has an obligation. They must not fade from
our memories. We dare not fail them. They should honour them by giving the
World Cup to South Africa. [Applause.] The Fifa delegation has seen what
South Africa can offer.

Babheme bakholwa kubhuquzisana ezikamagebhula neSundowns eKings Park
ngeSonto, ebigcwele ichichima ingangoZulu eya emakheni. [They were
satisfied with the match between Orlando Pirates and Sundowns at Kings Park
Stadium, which was full on Sunday.]

If there were doubts about our people's passion for soccer, those have been
laid to rest. Our people love the game. The whole nation supports the Year
2006 Cup Bid. Our objective is to transform sport, which was structured
along racial lines both at administrative and player levels. We have
specific objectives of making facilities accessible to all, including the
rural communities and the disabled people.

We also have the objective of making all sports codes accessible to all
people, including women and the disabled of South Africa. We need to
facilitate development programmes that will result in a wide pool from
which we can select players to represent us in all sports codes. We also
need to facilitate representivity in our national teams to reflect the true
demographics of our country.

The ANC was voted into power mainly by the disadvantaged masses of our
country as the only party that can provide them with a better life. The
budget we are debating today is a commitment by the Government to the
masses of South Africa for a better life. Sport is designed to make people
feel happy and interact as equal counterparts, yet it so happened in South
Africa that sport was structured along the racial divide. Sport should be
seen as a vehicle for unity.

The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation has undertaken two
provincial study tours this year, one to the Free State and the other to
the Eastern Cape. In the Eastern Cape we were exposed to the uneven level
of facilities. The facilities of the coloured community are of a better
quality and standard. Mdantsane has facilities of an inferior quality and
standard. Facilities in the rural areas of Tsolo, Ngqeleni and Idutywa are
also different from those of Mdantsane township. At Qwaqwa in the Free
State, there are 230 schools, but only three have school facilities. This
indicates that there was an uneven level of delivery by the previous
government. This budget seeks to address these imbalances.

The Government is correct in adopting the ANC policy of making facilities
accessible to all South Africans, regardless of their race, colour or
creed. The Government is committed to providing facilities with a specific
focus on the previously disadvantaged communities, as a way of bringing
them to the level of other groupings. However, we want to mention the fact
that the budget for sport has never been enough. We would urge the
Government to seriously look at this and consider increasing the budget to
meet the needs on the ground.

Ndithi mandibulele koomama nootata baseDebe Nek eMpuma Koloni. Inkundla
yezemidlalo eyakhelwa abantu bala lali icoceke ngeyona ndlela. Icocwa
ngoomama nootata ngezandla zabo bengajonge ukuba ibe ngurhulumente kuphela
omakazise imali. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Aba mama naba tata bazi ngokupheleleyo
ngephulo likaMasakhane. Kunga nezinye iindawo zingayibona le nto
bayenzileyo abantu baseDebe Nek nazo ezo ndawo ziyenze kuba loo Rhulumente
ngurhulumente owonyulwe luluntu. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)
[Let me thank the men and women of Debe Nek in the Eastern Cape. The
sportsground that has been built for the people in the area is
exceptionally clean. Men and women clean it with their own hands, without
expecting Government alone to donate funds. [Applause.] These men and women
have thorough knowledge of the Masakhane campaign. I hope that people from
other areas take note of what the Debe Nek people have done and do the
same, because this is a Government that has been elected by the people.]

In the Free State the Government has invested R3 million in Phuthaditjhaba
Stadium. That stadium has been vandalised, indicating lack of community
ownership of facilities that have been provided by the Government.
Maintenance of facilities should not be seen as the responsibility of
Government alone. Communities also have a role to play.

In conclusion, I would like to speak on indigenous sport. We find ourselves
today in a situation where we are not able to quickly respond with clear
explanations when confronted with the question of indigenous sport. This
did not happen by mistake. It is a result of a system which was created for
the purpose of taking away from African people their cultures, their
African values and their African pride and replacing these with Western
cultures. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The next speaker is making his
maiden speech. Please give him all the courtesy he deserves.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr N J CLELLAND: Mr Chair, 24 June 1995 was the day when I first
comprehended the amazing transformation South Africa had undergone. We were
one nation, a winning nation with one vision and identity. It was not the
day of our first democratic election. It was the day we won the Rugby World
Cup and South Africa was on top of the world. As I walked along the Durban
beachfront, the electric vibe of joy, friendship and a common and proud
South Africaness permeated the air. This is the power of sport: to unite
people across the great divide of history as South Africans.

Today our country faces another opportunity to host a world cup, this time
for the world's most representative and democratic sport - soccer. I want
to tell this House and the country that the DP proudly and enthusiastically
endorses our bid and will do whatever it takes to ensure its success.
[Interjections.] While this sort of event can go a long way towards
developing South African sport, there is still much to be done. Sadly, the
apartheid legacy has deprived children from many communities of
participating in sport, at either a competitive or social level, and this
needs to be addressed.

Schools must have adequate sporting facilities and the young people of all
communities, black and white, Indian and coloured, rural and urban, must be
afforded the opportunities to take part. Sports development must be
prioritised. Furthermore, our most successful sportsmen and women must be
recognised and promoted as a credit to our country. This has not been the
situation with regard to the South African men's hockey team and the
decision not to send them to the Olympic Games.

I am keenly sensitive to the political pressures sporting federations now
labour under. But I seldom comment, and do not feel that politicians should
be involved in telling sportsmen or selectors what to do. But I have to
comment on the refusal by Sam Ramsamy and the NOSC to send the hockey team
to the Olympics, despite the fact that it has won the Africa Cup and is
rated in the top seven in the world. In many other sports we are sending
much weaker competitors to the Olympic Games. Mr Ramsamy said in his
announcements that the problem was that, although the squad had seven
members from previously disadvantaged groups, this was not enough and was
not sufficiently demographically representative.

What he was saying is that race is what ought to count, not merit. Saying
that the hockey team cannot go because too many people in it have the wrong
sort of skins is racism. There is no other word for it. It is also saying
that the only way that one could sent a team abroad is if one is willing to
abandon the principle of merit selection and deliberately pick a weaker
team, which would then guarantee that one loses because the rest of the
world would definitely pick their team on merit. It will also guarantee
that our talented sportsmen and women of the wrong colour start drifting
abroad. Already, we can see this beginning to happen.

We want to host all manner of international events, from the Olympics to
the soccer and cricket world cups. These bring in a lot of money for South
Africa, but people like Mr Ramsamy will really have to be careful because
this sort of apartheid-era racism is a straightforward denial of the
Olympic Charter and the whole spirit of the Olympics, which says that one
has to be completely colour-blind and that individual achievement is all
that matters. No country that ever wants to host the Olympics games can
afford to behave in this way.

The sporting world has never really got over the 1936 Nazi Olympics in
Berlin. Even then, Hitler's clearly racist policies led to pressure for the
boycott of those games. The sporting world never got over the shame of the
Olympics in the way that Jesse Owens, the world's finest athlete was
shunned by the Nazis because he was black or was the wrong colour. If we
too start discriminating against our sportsmen because they are the wrong
colour, like Verwoerd and Vorster used to do, we will be in real trouble. I
could not care what colour our national sports teams are. I want them to be
the best.

So, let us focus on sports development to ensure future success for South
African sportsmen and women. Let us ensure the success of our national
teams now by making sure that they are picked on merit. Their successes
only serve to fuel the development of and interest in sport throughout the
country. That is the vision of a common, liberal and colour-blind South
Africaness all of us should have. I am looking ahead to the new liberal
nation which we know has to come - a nation that puts both white and black
racism behind it and which is proud of all its talented people, wants the
best and wants to win. [Applause.]

Mr E T FERREIRA: Mr Chairperson, there is no adhesive in our country that
can bond South Africans together as one nation as sports can do. Where
politicians and churches have failed, sport has succeeded.

As a sport-mad nation, whether in large stadiums, pubs or their own homes,
South Africans of different cultures, languages and persuasions feel as one
when they watch our national sportsmen and women compete against other
countries. Sport, as one of our premier national assets should be nursed
and promoted in a much more serious and aggressive manner than what has
been the case up to now.

Sport has obvious advantages to our country, and one of them is delivering
tremendous tourism potential to South Africa. Can one imagine the tourism
to this country in the next 10 years, should we get the 2006 World Cup
Soccer Tournament? There is no reason why we should not get it. Our
facilities, infrastructure, stadiums, hotel accommodation and whatever one
wants compare very well to that of any of the European bidding countries.

The 1995 Rugby World Cup held in South Africa is generally regarded as the
best Rugby World Cup ever. I would like to believe that there is no reason
to believe that we cannot do the same for soccer in 2006. Government should
not be shy to invest much more money in sport, as the returns on their
investment will be tremendous.

We in the IFP will be supporting the national Sport and Recreation budget,
although we are in no way convinced that the budget is sufficient. There
are cities in the world with bigger sport budgets than what our national
sport budget is. Munich is a classic example. We do, of course, understand
that Government has a moral dilemma. Morally it could be very difficult to
defend a budget of hundreds of millions of rands for sport, taking into
account the demands on departments such as Education, Housing, Health and
Welfare. We should not, however, allow a premier asset like sport to be
neglected.

Given the shortage of funds and financial support for our sportsmen and
sportswomen, it is quite incredible what a great sporting nation we are. We
must really congratulate our sports federations and all our sportsmen and
sportswomen on this feat. We are world class in the vast majority of
sporting codes that we have in this country. I must admit, though, that the
results from the past weekend do not quite reflect this.

As far as representivity in sport is concerned, there could be no dispute
that we still have a very long way to go. Equally, we have come a long way
since the days of window-dressing. People such as Breyten Paulse, Paul
Adams, Hezekiel Sepeng and many others have proved that the majority of
South Africans need no special favours to perform at the highest level.
What they need are good facilities, proper training and equal
opportunities. Our under 21 rugby world cup winning team from last year is
a classic example of this.

The IFP policy on sport and recreation has always been that good facilities
are the key to getting our nation to play. Good facilities, however, need
to start at school level. Many young South Africans turn to drugs, crime
and baby-making because of the limited availability of sporting and
recreational activities. This does not justify their behaviour, but it does
at least partially explain it.

Much more should be done by the Department of Education as far as school
sport facilities are concerned. Our portfolio committee is currently in the
process of visiting different provinces - as we have heard from the
chairperson, Mrs Bhengu - and we are looking mainly at facilities. On a
visit to the Free State recently, we saw some things that were very
refreshing and some things that were very depressing.

It was very clear that the provincial government and national Government
were doing plenty to supply and upgrade sports facilities in rural areas.
At the same time though, local government then failed to maintain these
facilities. In Botshabelo we saw a stadium good enough for international
events, whereas in Qwaqwa we saw a very similar facility in such a state of
ruin that the local people cannot make use of it. What is extremely
disturbing about this particular facility is that it has a R2,3 million
synthetic soccer pitch that is going to waste. It seems to be a general
problem in our country that provincial governments play the game, but local
governments do not arrive at the party. I would like to plead with our
charismatic Minister of Sport and Recreation who I often think would make a
good evangelist, to use his influence in getting local governments to do
their share.

Much has been said lately about the broadcasting of major sporting events
on the public broadcaster. It is indeed sad that the majority of South
Africans very often cannot see their national sporting heroes take part in
major events. The issue is very complex and certainly not as easy as many
of us would like it to be. The IFP will, however, fully support the process
that has been put in motion to ensure that, in the not too distant future,
all South Africans can see major sporting events on their television sets.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! All members, please be seated,
including Mr Aucamp. Please be seated. [Laughter.]

Mr C M MORKEL: Mr Chairperson, Mr Minister, Deputy Minister, Ministers,
members of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, I want to start off by saying: Viva, Fifa!
[Laughter.]
An HON MEMBER: Viva ANC!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Electioneering should not
start in the House. [Laughter.] Please continue, sir.
Mr C M MORKEL: As a complete novice to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
Recreation, I started out by asking myself the following questions: Has the
Minister of Finance allocated enough of his Budget to Sport and Recreation?
Has the Minister of Sport and Recreation prioritised the allocation of
funding the sports codes and recreational sectors on the basis of an
accurate needs analysis? Is the public funding ... [Interjections.]
Â 
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, please realise
that this is the House in which debates are conducted, and decisions taken.
There should be no laptop computers or any other such tops in this House.
If you are busy, sir, please take it to your office ... I am waiting for
you. [Laughter.] Thank you! Please continue, sir.

Mr C M MORKEL: I also asked myself: Is the public funding that has been,
and will be, allocated to Sport and Recreation administered in such a way
that it would minimise any corruption or financial mismanagement, or
maximise performance and excellence in the physical development of the
people of our nation and facilitate the great sense of unity and national
pride that we felt with the Rugby World Cup in 1995 and the Africa Cup of
Nations in 1996?

At this stage, it would suffice to say that sport and recreation should be
given a greater priority as an area of Government's integrated development
programme. The Minister should note that it is unacceptable that only
0,025% of our national Budget is spent on Sport and Recreation. It is
unacceptable that this translates into R1,20 per capita spent. However, the
hon Minister should note that too much funds are allocated already, but
unspent by his department. We need to monitor this so that it does not
happen again in future.

I realise that this is not necessarily the Minister's fault. Yet, we need
to recognise and acknowledge that sport and recreation teach us -
especially in the absence of complete family units - the rules and skills
of the game of community life, of national life and of our life in Africa.
Respecting the rules of the game is the best form of developing a
democratic culture and an appreciation of the rule of law that is
apparently absent in the moral fibre of our nation.

We are a developing nation that is in the process of developing a
democratic culture and an appreciation of the rule of law. Unfortunately, a
democratic culture and the rule of law also seem to be lacking in the
administration of many of our sporting codes, even, in certain cases, in
the Department of Sport and Recreation itself. In the recent budget
briefing by the Department of Sport and Recreation, and upon reflection on
the Auditor-General's Report on the financial statement of the department,
the following emerged in terms of needs analysis.

We need to take into account the degree of private sector funding to Sport
and Recreation, so that we can identify what needs still remain. Financial
needs cannot therefore be analysed accurately, and I therefore do not
believe that enough public funds could ever be allocated accurately to
needs that have been identified and determined accurately. We need to have
a clearer definition of what national interest is. Sporting codes of
national interest need to be defined more clearly and we, as a portfolio
committee, will be participating in that debate with the Minister.

History has taught us that where the process of excellence and development
is flawed, the outcome is bound to be flawed. It is by participating in
sport and recreation that we develop notions of excellence based on
performance and merit - notions that we can apply in every avenue that we
walk in life.

The New NP is committed to the development of the necessary skills to be a
winning nation, and to performing at our peak in the pursuit of excellence.
It is an acceptable principle that our sporting codes should represent and
include administrators, coaches and players who reflect the diversity of
our rainbow nation.

Yet, we are faced with the challenge of confusing excellence and merit with
a legitimate need to develop representative national teams. It is a
challenge. We therefore need to develop generic and quantifiable
performance criteria that would establish the targets for selection on the
basis of merit. Too often selection committees ... [Time expired.]

Mr R D PIETERSE: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon members, colleagues
and the DP, when we promised a better life for all a rightful expectation
on the question of service delivery was created. We are talking about the
delivery of houses, water, electricity, roads, safety and security, jobs,
etc. But what about sport and recreation?

When we were accepted back into the fold of the world, we were literally
caught with our pants down in terms of sport. We have to accept that sport
has become an industry and that all our people must be exposed to this
industry in terms of participating as athletes and as administrators.
Sport, if properly governed and guided, must and will become another option
for employment.

We pride ourselves on being a gender-sensitive nation, and I agree that it
is true. However, there are certain areas of concern. Women athletes
participating in the various sporting codes very seldom, if ever, get the
recognition which they deserve. An example of this is our national women's
soccer team. Who can still remember them? Nobody talks about them. Is this
the state of affairs only because they are women? Women athletes are often
referred to as the Cinderellas of the sport industry. As the Minister said
earlier, currently boxing for women is outlawed in terms of the Boxing and
Wrestling Control Act of 1954 and this needs to be brought in line with the
Constitution.

Ek glo absoluut dat vrouens beter atlete is of kan wees as mans. Die vroue
soek net 'n geleentheid om dit te bewys. [I absolutely believe that women
are, or can be, better athletes than men. They are merely seeking an
opportunity to prove it.]

We need to level the playing field in terms of women and sport. I think
this budget starts to address that. We need to ensure that the present
facilities are upgraded in order to allow women and disabled people to use
the very same facilities as any able-bodied man.

Ek wil 'n beroep doen op die media, sowel elektronies as geskrewe, om seker
te maak dat almal wat aan sport deelneem gelykwaardige dekking ontvang. Die
Minister verwys na die Afrika-Spele van verlede jaar, maar ek onthou dat
ons 'n gestremde atleet van die Wes-Kaap gehad het wat die wÃªreldrekord in
borsslag geslaan het. Die Maandag het die nuus 30 sekondes daaraan bestee.
Dinsdagoggend het ek verwag dat 'n Kaapse koerant dit ten minste sou dek,
maar nee. Tot my groot verbasing was die gesig van AndrÃ© Agassi op die
voorblad, want hy het die Amerikaanse Ope tennistoernooi gewen. Nou vra ek
myself weer die vraag af: was dit omdat die persoon gestremd is dat niemand
van hom gepraat het nie? Nie een van die koerante het iets daaroor berig
nie, selfs nie die Kaapse koerante nie. Waar is hulle lojaliteit teenoor
ons vroulike en gestremde atlete? Ek glo en weet ons het gestremde
wÃªreldkampioene in sport in diÃ© land, maar niemand praat direk of indirek
van hulle nie. Ek wil eintlik sÃª dat hulle dubbele kampioene is as 'n mens
in ag neem dat hulle eers persoonlike, strukturele en ander uitdagings moet
oorkom voordat hulle hul sport kan beoefen en goed kan vaar in kompetisies.


Tydens my onlangse besoek aan die vloedgeteisterde en -beskadigde dorpe in
die Klein Karoo, waar my kiesafdeling ook is, is ek blootgestel aan skade
aan die strukture wat my baie na aan trane gehad het. Dit was die ergste
wat ek nog gesien het. Die grootste pyn het ek egter later ondervind toe ek
so deur die dorpsgebied van Bergsig en in Ladismith loop en sulke opgeskote
kinders daar sien speel. Ek het eers gedink die vloed het daar deur ook
gekom, maar toe ek met hulle praat, ontdek ek dat die kinders nog maar al
die jare daar speel. Daardie plek was erger as wat die vloedskade kon
aanrig, want niemand het voorsiening gemaak vir sport en ontspanning vir
hulle nie.

'n Week of twee gelede het die agb Maxwell Moss 'n sokkerwedstryd bygewoon
waar twee Kaapse sokkerspanne op Nuweland gespeel het. Omdat daar geen
fasiliteite en geriewe vir gestremde mense is nie, moes hy alleen op die
veld langs die kantlyn sit in sy rolstoel. Sy familie en vriende wat hom na
die wedstryd vergesel het, moes nÃ¡ baie oor en weer stryery op die
paviljoen gaan sit, want hulle wou hulle nie toelaat daar langs hom nie.
Hulle kon net met die rustyd afkom om vir hom koeldrank of kos te gee, maar
toe moes hulle weer teruggaan paviljoen toe. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[I want to make an appeal to the media, electronic as well as written, to
ensure that everyone participating in sport receives equal coverage. The
Minister referred to last year's All Africa Games, but I remember that we
had a disabled athlete from the Western Cape who broke the world record in
the breast stroke. On that Monday the news devoted 30 seconds to this fact.
On the Tuesday morning I was expecting a Cape newspaper at least to cover
it, but no. To my great amazement the face of AndrÃ© Agassi was on the front
page, because he had won the American Open tennis tournament. Once more I
now ask myself the question: Was it because the person was disabled that
nobody mentioned him? Not one of the newspapers mentioned a thing about it,
not even the Cape newspapers. Where is their loyalty towards our female and
disabled athletes? I believe and I know that we have disabled world
champions in sport in this country, but nobody is talking about them,
either directly or indirectly. I would actually say that they are double
champions if one considers that they first have to overcome personal,
structural and other challenges before they can pursue their sport and do
well in competitions.

During my recent visit to the flood-ravaged and damaged towns in the Little
Karoo, where my constituency also lies, I was exposed to damage to
structures which had me very close to tears. It was the worst I have ever
seen. However, I later experienced the worst pain while just walking
through the township of Bergsig and through Ladismith and watching
adolescents at play. At first I thought that the flood had also reached
there, but when I spoke to them I discovered that the children had always
been playing there. That place was worse off than what the flood damage
could have wrought, because nobody had made provision for their sport and
recreation.

A week or two ago the hon Maxwell Moss attended a soccer match when two
Cape clubs played at Newlands. Because there are no facilities for disabled
people, he had to sit alone in his wheelchair on the field next to the
touchline. After lengthy arguments to and fro, his family and friends who
had accompanied him had to go and sit in the grandstand, because they were
not allowed to stay with him. They were only allowed to come down during
half-time to give him a cold drink or food, but then they had to return to
the grandstand.]

I think there are thousands of Maxwell Mosses outside in our community.
Thousands of Maxwell Mosses, as well as women, are facing the same
challenges. We cannot and will not allow this situation to continue. The
better life for all must reach all the people who have given a mandate to
this Government. The better life, in particular, must address the
challenges facing women and the disabled in sport and recreation.

I want to place on record that while there are challenges in sport and
recreation, everything else is not doom and gloom. Again, this budget has
started to address issues.

Die vroue en die gestremdes van Suid-Afrika, die plattelanders van hierdie
land, die mense van Vanwyksdorp, Ladismith, Zoar, Calitzdorp, Bongolethu,
Uniondale en die ander plekke in die Karoo sÃª hierdie Begroting begin nou
om hulle probleme aan te pak sover dit sport en ontspanning aangaan.

Ek wil my volle steun uitspreek teenoor die Ministers van Sport en
Ontspanning en van Finansies en hulle departemente. 'n Beter lewe vir almal
sover dit sport en ontspanning aangaan, met die klem op vroue en
gestremdes, sal en moet verwesenlik word.

Ek wil ook my volle steun aan Danny Jordaan en sy span gee vir die
uitstekende werk wat hulle doen met betrekking tot die bod om die
WÃªreldbeker-sokkertoernooi in 2006 in Suid-Afrika aan te bied. Afrika is
gereed, Suid-Afrika is gereed en ons gereed.

Ons het saamgestem toe president Mbeki gesÃª het ons is op koers. DiÃ©
begroting bevestig dit, maar ons moet ook seker maak dat die lewering van
sport- en ontspanningsgeriewe bespoedig word. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Women and the disabled of South Africa, the rural people of this country,
the people of Vanwyksdorp, Ladismith, Zoar, Calitzdorp, Bongolethu,
Uniondale and the other places in the Karoo are saying that this Budget has
now started to address their problems as far as sport and recreation are
concerned.

I would like to express my full support for the Ministers of Sport and
Recreation and of Finance and their departments. A better life for all as
far as sport and recreation are concerned, with the emphasis on women and
the disabled, can and must be achieved.

I also want to pledge my full support to Danny Jordaan and his team for the
excellent job they are doing with regard to the bid to host the Soccer
World Cup tournament of 2006 in South Africa. Africa is ready, South Africa
is ready and we are ready.

We agreed when President Mbeki said that we were on course. This Budget
confirms that, but we must also ensure that the delivery of sport and
recreational facilities is speeded up. [Applause.]]

Mr C T FROLICK: Mr Chairman and hon members, the Vote for Sport and
Recreation seems minuscule, given the tremendous challenges facing the
department. For the department to achieve its aim to improve the quality of
life of all South Africans through the promotion of sport and recreation,
it will need the assistance of all South Africans.

The provision in the budget for the SA Sports Commission to become fully
operational is welcomed, given the tremendous role it should play in the
advancement of sport in all sectors of society. Equally, the increase in
the grant to the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport is commendable, although
we believe that funds must also be channelled, not only for policing the
athletes through dope testing, but also for proper prior communication with
athletes and coherent educational programmes at schools to prevent the
occurrence of drug scandals amongst our athletes.

The increase in trial payments to macro bodies, federations and recreation
providers should enhance their operations. However, the UDM believes that
proper financial control mechanisms must be implemented and enforced to
ensure that recipients are accountable for funds transferred to them.
Audited financial statements must be submitted at national and especially
at provincial level before new transfers are made.

The budget makes no provision for facilities as that is supposed to be the
responsibility of local government authorities. Study tours to provinces
have shown that although millions of rands were previously spent on
building new facilities, local government authorities are often reluctant,
and in certain instances bluntly unwilling, to maintain such facilities.
The result is that these facilities are vandalised, and ultimately become
white elephants.

The UDM believes that a partnership must be forged between all tiers of
government, federations, and communities to ensure co-ordination in the
planning, building, maintenance and utilisation of facilities. In so doing,
communities will own the process. The Debe Nek Sports complex in the
Eastern Cape is a good example of community ownership and the result is
mass participation in all sports codes throughout the week. Sadly, this is
lacking elsewhere.
In conclusion, we as South Africans have been afforded the opportunity to
unleash our unbridled passion for sport while hosting the Fifa technical
committee for the past five days. The 2006 Bid Committee, under the
leadership of Danny Jordaan - who is also, incidentally, from the Eastern
Cape - has proved that our facilities, officials and administrators can
hold their own with the very best in the world. By uniting as South
Africans we have indeed demonstrated our preparedness, passion and ability
to host the 2006 Soccer World Cup. [Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Chairperson, South Africa is in the race to develop
itself to compete at the highest levels. The nation has dedicated itself to
developing initiatives. Our economic policies are boosting confidence in
the South African way forward. The IMF recently intimated as much. South
Africans have a great hunger to succeed and this has been shown in the
sporting arena. South Africa has the capacity to support itself to host any
event in this country.

The All Africa Games have come and gone, and although there were problems,
ours were small compared to those of Atlanta in the last Olympics. To the
Fifa delegation we say: We are ready. We have the necessary infrastructure
in place to host the 2006 Soccer World Cup in South Africa. With South
Africa having been admitted to the sports world, the formation of unified
multiracial sports structures and management, as well as the introduction
of development programmes, must be implemented down to the lowest levels.
This must be one of the critical tasks of the SA Sports Commission, which
must ensure that national, provincial and local teams reflect the
demographics of South Africa.

Sport deserves a more equitable and workable budget from Government. The
Department of Sport and Recreation must play a strong role in the way money
is used and allocated to federations, and measures must be implemented
against those who do not adhere to the criteria set out in the funding
policy. Provincial departments of sport and recreation play a critical role
in assisting communities in becoming active participants in sports, not
only through funding and developing sport, but through taking pride in and
ownership of their sports facilities. In the Free State town of Qwaqwa two
sports facilities are in a bad condition. In 1994 President Mandela
addressed the community at one of the stadiums. [Time expired.]

Mr G E BALOI: Chairperson, sport is an international phenomenon and is very
important for every developing nation. It is important in our country,
South Africa. Every nation is proud of its sport. In South Africa we have
different kinds of sports, namely football, rugby, cricket, volleyball -
you name them. Sport in the years of oppression was not inclusive at all
and discriminated against people racially. South Africa plays an important
role in developing sport internally and internationally.

The Department of Sport and Recreation in South Africa, led by the hon the
Minister Ngconde Balfour, is structured into two programmes for the 2000-01
budget in order to perform its functions. Each programme has its budget.
These programmes are administration, and sport and recreation. The aim of
the administration part is to conduct the overall management of the
department. The programme also has a staff complement of 38 posts. The aim
of the sport and recreation part is to render support to the SA Sports
Commission, the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport, the National Olympic
Committee of SA, the National Sport and Recreation Federation, and other
service providers. This programme has a complement of 12 posts.

South Africa wants to host the 2006 World Cup and we are ready to do so. We
have all the necessary requirements to qualify. The Fifa committee of six
has seen for itself and must go back to tell Fifa that there is no doubt
the 2006 World Cup is coming to South Africa. [Interjections.] God help
South Africa in its attempt to host the 2006 World Cup!

Mr N B FIHLA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon MPs and comrades, on Sunday
afternoon, 12 March, two great giants met at the Absa stadium. The soccer-
loving people of South Africa voted overwhelmingly on their feet for the
hosting of the 2006 soccer extravaganza. Today, the Sport and Recreation
portfolio committee, on behalf of Parliament, as representative of the
people of South Africa, is saying: Europe, you have had your many turns for
hosting the soccer championships. It is now the turn of Africa, and South
Africa is as ready as ever. [Applause.]

Coming back to the subject matter of today, sports have played a pivotal
role in building bridges between the nations of the world since time
immemorial. During the period of slavery and thereafter in the feudal
system, sport was merely for entertaining slave owners and landlords
respectively.

It was the Athenians and Spartans who came with a new philosophy for the
youth of the day. They came up with the ideal of building a healthy nation
and a principle of a sound mind in a healthy body. At this present era,
sport has become all embracing. Sportspersons have become ambassadors of
their countries, goodwill instruments for big businesses, role models of
the youth of today. It creates lasting careers for our children. The policy
of sports for all and ultimately of closing the huge gap caused by the
great divide of the past regime, can only be brought about by effective
concentration of our resources in our disadvantaged schools.

Since the introduction of the hateful Bantu Education system in 1954, in
South Africa, school sports in our African schools has deteriorated to
zero. Sport today has become the property of big business. Sportspersons
today can become millionaires at a very young age. There are so many subtle
ways in which children coming from the disadvantaged community can be
discriminated against and are therefore not able to reach the top.

Lack of facilities in the disadvantaged areas is prevalent. We do not find
specialist teachers in sports as trainers in our schools. As a result, very
few teachers are having any serious commitment to sports. Also there is no
compulsory period for sports activities in their daily timetable. In the
plan for the building of new schools, various facilities must be in place,
eg tennis courts, rugby fields, soccer fields, swimming pools, gymnasiums
and table tennis facilities.

Sports facilities like swimming pools and gymnasiums ought to be in place
in all primary schools, as top swimmers and gymnasts are produced at the
very young age of between 11 to 14 years. That is a great handicap we have
in the disadvantaged schools. Nevertheless, we do appreciate the
introduction of sports academies in the various provinces. This will be a
quicker way of identifying talent at an early age.

School sports, managed properly, will create mass production of talent from
amongst the disadvantaged schools. We do not know whether Ussasa is in a
position to tackle this huge challenge at schools. At present there are
hardly 10 sporting codes that our disadvantaged schools are exposed to a
country where there are more than 20 sporting codes. This is the challenge
facing today's sporting developers and that can only be tapped from the
schools.

It is high time that sport and recreation are part of the school curriculum
as they used to be in our days. We also congratulate the Department of
Sport and Recreation on creating a special trust fund that is to aid those
children from the disadvantaged communities who happened to be selected to
national teams but do not have enough funds to travel to other countries.

Dr L LUYT: Mr Chairman, hon Minister and members, the FA has already
expressed its support for South Africa's bid for the 2006 World Cup in
writing. But I do so again today, unequivocally. I have said it before and
I say it again: We have everything, yes everything, it takes to host any
event in this country, most of all, very enthusiastic people.

In 1994 I fought tooth and nail to keep the Rugby World Cup in South
Africa. We were told of violence, a bloodbath and a lack of sophistication
to host that event. Not only did we prove them wrong, but after four World
Cups, South Africa still reigns supreme, both in administration and
support. We shall demonstrate it again in 2006.

One thing I find very disturbing, though, is that there is a perception
that a creeping regulatory tendency has started to rear its ugly head in
our sport. If South Africa ever wants to become a major factor in world
sport, it must allow the self-regulatory system to take its course.

The hon Minister Balfour is the epitome of enthusiasm. He must not stifle
that. In fact, he should be supported and kept enthusiastic. One cannot,
however, be regulator, manager, coach and selector of sporting teams at the
same time. After all, we have a Bill of Rights which must be respected. I
believe the hon the Minister, with his enthusiasm, should coax and cajole
people in the right direction, not use a big stick.

We are a mere six years down the line, but we already expect miracles. In
another eight years the six-year-old disadvantaged sportsperson of 1994
will be as skilled and gifted as his white counterpart, if not better.

We live in a professional era and sportsmen and women have to be paid for
their services. Television payments are the single most important
contributor towards funding the professional athletes. It is not simply a
matter of outlawing pay TV and dismissing international contracts as if
they did not exist. On the contrary, international law dictates our
adherence to these agreements. Unless we have an alternative in place, I
suggest we think again.

An area into which the Minister could inquire - and no commission of
inquiry, please! - is the situation in which one company now has the de
facto control over eight of the 14 unions in Sarfu. I had sight of two of
these contracts, which not only fly in the face of the International Rugby
Board regulations, but put rugby's future and its control in great
jeopardy. Rugby people must control rugby, and this is the same with any
other sporting code.

The Minister certainly has shown that he loves his sport. Therefore he
should allow normal sport to evolve normally. He has the personality to
achieve this. For this direction he will receive the support of all
sportsmen and sportswomen. The FA also gives him its support.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil vandag begin met 'n aanhaling en
dit lui soos volg:
  Joe Slovo het 'n paar jaar gelede gesÃª daar gaan twee revolusies in Suid-
  Afrika wees. Die tweede gaan onder die voorwendsel van transformasie
  geskied. Hy was so reg, want rassisme in 'n graad wat ek myself nie kon
  indink nie, is besig om die Verenigde Krieketraad van Suid-Afrika oor te
  neem.

Aan die woord is nie die een of ander sogenaamde regse wat ``homesick''
raak oor die goeie ou dae van apartheid nie, maar Mnr Ray White, voormalige
voorsitter van Krieket Suid-Afrika. Miskien is sy van dalk verkeerd! Hy
gaan verder:


  Toe die nasionale span die mini-wÃªreldbekertoernooi in Bangladesj en die
  goue medalje by die Statebondspele gewen het, was daar geen woord van
  gelukwensing van die Regering nie. Al wat ek gehoor het toe die goue
  medaljes aan die spelers uitgedeel word, is hoe dit dan moontlik is dat
  die span so leliewit is.

Kom ons gaan verder. Die Suid-Afrikaanse manshokkiespan word deur die
Ramsamy-mafia verhinder om aan die Olimpiese Spele deel te neem, terwyl
hulle die Afrika-kampioene is en in alle opsigte kwalifiseer. Hulle het net
een toets gedop, naamlik die pigmentasietoets.
Nog 'n voorbeeld is dr Louis Luyt hier in ons midde; 'n man wie se
organisasie van die WÃªreldbeker-rugbytoernooi in 1995 dalk die enkele
grootste pluspunt kan wees ten gunste van die huidige sokkerbod vir 2006.
Daar is nie gerus voordat hy uit Suid-Afrikaanse rugby uitgeskuif is nie,
met as sogenaamde rede sy verset teen die daarstelling van 'n kommissie
waarvan daar in elk geval niks gekom het nie.

Wat sÃª al diÃ© dinge vir ons? Eenvoudig dat die ANC in sy totalitÃªre strewe
nie die basiese fundamentele onderskeid tussen die burgerlike en die
staatlike terrein eerbiedig nie. Elke enkele terrein van die lewe moet
verstaatlik word. Rugby en krieket word onderwerp aan 'n magdom kwotas ten
gunste van spelers van kleur. Meriete word oorboord gegooi.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek het nog nooit van 'n kleurkwota ten gunste van blankes in sokker gehoor
nie. Is dit nie die doodnormaalste ding op aarde dat sekere
bevolkingsgroepe 'n historiese geneigdheid tot sekere sportsoorte het nie?
Wanneer gaan ons regulasies kry dat elke boereorkes in die land minstens 'n
konsertinaspeler van kleur moet bevat?

Die sleutel tot die maksimale oopmaak van sportgeleenthede lÃª nie by
kunsmatige ingrype deur die staat nie, maar as 't ware daarby dat die
beginsels van die vryemark eerbiedig moet word. Kwotas druis daarteen in en
het 'n bose kringloop tot gevolg: swakker spanne lei tot swakker
kompetisie, wat tot swakker toeskouergetalle lei, wat tot minder geld vir
ontwikkeling lei.

Ja, ons is ten gunste van ontwikkeling, nuwe geleenthede en geriewe waar
dit ontoereikend is. Die wyse waarop die ANC egter met 'n Big Brother-
gesindheid met hierdie basies kulturele uiting van die menslike gees en
liggaam omgaan spel maar net die ou dwaling uit wat sÃª: ``Die staat is gans
die land''.

Is dit werklik die staat se taak om so in die burgerlike samelewing in te
gryp? Daar moet in 'n verantwoordelike regering onderskeid getref word
tussen die staat- en die burgerlike sfeer. Die owerheid mag nie op die nie-
staatlike terrein dikteer nie, anders word dit 'n magstaat en nie 'n
liberaal-demokratiese regstaat nie.

Ek wil met 'n verdere punt afsluit. Hier rig ek my tot ons sportsterre, ons
administrateurs en ons media. Daar is nie 'n enkele terrein waar Afrikaans
so geminag word as juis rondom die sportveld nie. Afrikaanse rugby- of
krieketkommentaar op televisie word beperk tot enkele anekdotes.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Onderhoude met Afrikaanse sportmanne en -vroue geskied in
Engels ... [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, I want to start today with a quote and it
reads as follows:


  Joe Slovo het 'n paar jaar gelede gesÃª daar gaan twee revolusies in Suid-
  Afrika wees. Die tweede gaan onder die voorwendsel van transformasie
  geskied. Hy was so reg, want rassisme in 'n graad wat ek myself nie kon
  indink nie, is besig om die Verenigde Krieketraad van Suid-Afrika oor te
  neem.

The person speaking is not some or other so-called right-winger who is
homesick for the good old days of apartheid, but Mr Ray White, the former
chairperson of Cricket South Africa. Perhaps he has the wrong surname! He
goes on to say:


  Toe die nasionale span die mini-wÃªreldbekertoernooi in Bangladesj en die
  gou medalje by die Statebondspele gewen het, was daar geen woord van
  gelukwensing van die Regering nie. Al wat ek gehoor het toe die goue
  medaljes aan die spelers uitgedeel word, is hoe dit dan moontlik is dat
  die span so leliewit is.

Let us go further. The South African men's hockey team is being prevented
from participating in the Olympic Games by the Ramsamy mafia, although they
are the African champions and qualify in every respect. They only failed
one test, namely the pigmentation test.

Another example is Dr Louis Luyt who is sitting here in our midst; a man
whose organisation of the Rugby World Cup tournament in 1995 may be the
single biggest plus in favour of the present soccer bid for 2006.
Everything possible was done to get him out of South African rugby, the
reason advanced being his opposition to the establishment of a commission
of which nothing came in any event.

What does all this tell us? Simply that the ANC, in its pursuit of
totalitarianism, does not respect the basic fundamental difference between
the civil and the governmental spheres. Every single sphere of life must be
governmentalised. Rugby and cricket are being subjected to a multitude of
quotas in favour of players of colour. Merit is being thrown overboard.
[Interjections.]

I have never heard of a colour quota in favour of whites in soccer. Is it
not the most normal thing on earth that certain population groups have an
historic inclination to play certain sports? When are we going to have
regulations stipulating that every boereorkes in the country must at least
have a concertina player of colour?

The solution to opening up sporting opportunities to the maximum does not
lie in artificial interference by the state, but, in actual fact, in
honouring the principles of the free market. Quotas run counter to this and
a vicious circle is created: weaker teams lead to weaker competition, which
leads to lower numbers of spectators, which leads to less money for
development.

Yes, we are in favour of development, new opportunities and facilities
where these are inadequate. However, the way in which the ANC is, with a
Big Brother attitude, dealing with this basic cultural expression of the
human spirit and body, merely spells out the old misconception: ``Die staat
is gans die land''. [The state is the entire country.]

Is it really the task of the state to interfere in civil society in this
way? In a responsible government a distinction must be drawn between the
governmental and the civil spheres. The state may not dictate in the
nongovernmental sphere, otherwise it becomes an authoritarian state and not
a liberal democratic nation under law.

I want to conclude with a further point. Here I am addressing myself to our
sports stars, our administrators and our media. There is not a single
sphere in which Afrikaans is held in such contempt as on the sports field.
Afrikaans rugby or cricket commentaries on television are limited to a few
anecdotes. [Interjections.] Interviews with Afrikaans sportsmen and women
take place in English ... [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member Joe Nash, allow the
member to have his say at the podium. Everybody needs to play sport and
everybody needs to speak about it. Please allow him the opportunity. Please
continue.
Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson,I like the applause.

Ons boerseuns het nou skielik Stormers, Cats en Bulls geword. Ons
rugbykaptein stel hom teen diÃ© tyd seker al aan sy eie skoonma voor as
``Van der Westhousen''.

Sport kan 'n magtige katalisator wees tot beter verhoudings, ook in 'n
multikulturele samelewing. Ons moet net pasop dat die teenoorgestelde nie
vandag gebeur nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Our Afrikaner boys have now suddenly become Stormers, Cats and Bulls. By
this time our rugby captain is probably introducing himself to his own
mother-in-law as ``Van der Westhousen''.

Sport can be a powerful catalyst for better relations, in a multicultural
society too. We must just be careful that the opposite does not happen
today. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]]

Mnu I Z NCINANE: Mhlalingaphambili, abaphathiswa namalungu ale Ndlu yoWiso-
mthetho, le nto kuthiwa kukuphatha iyaphazamisa, ngoba kudala abamhlophe
bangenelela kwimicimbi enxulumene nezemidlalo, kuba le ndoda isuka apha
icinga ukuba yinto entsha le. Into ekuyiyo kukuba babengenelela phantsi
kwekhwapha.

Olu hlahlo lwabiwo-mali lwalo nyaka lwahlukile kwamanye kuba indili yemali
isetyenziswe kunqontsonqa kanye wezomdlalo. Akukho bumenye-menye nabuqhekre-
qhekre obuchithwe eziofisini nakwezinye iindawo zokonwaba. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows).

[Mr I C NCINANA: Mr Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members of the National
Assembly, this thing called power corrupts. Whites interfered in sport-
related matters for quite some time, but the man who has just left the
podium things it is something new. What happened is that they interfered in
an underhand manner.

This year's budget is different from other budgets in that the bulk of the
funds is used for the essence of sport. No funds have been spent on
luxurious offices and glitzy ceremonies.]

[Mr I Z NCINANE: Mr Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members of the National
Assembly, this thing called power corrupts. Whites interfered in sport-
related matters for quite some time, but the man who has just left the
podium thinks it is something new. What happened is that they interfered in
an underhand manner.

This year's budget is different from other budgets in that the bulk of the
funds is used for the essence of sport. No funds have been spent on
luxurious offices and glitzy ceremonies.]

The debate today makes history as it is the first of its kind in the new
millennium, with a new Minister in this department. Prior to the dawn of
the African century this House converged specifically to promulgate the law
that began to redress the imbalances of the past, ie the South African
Sports Commission Act. Since then our country has come on a par with the
international community in terms of sports, especially the top countries
that are leading the world rating, that is America, Canada, New Zealand,
Australia etc.

As we enter the 21st century and the new millennium, we must take the
centre stage in term of the realisation of the African century. As the
writer Amilcar Cabral says, and I quote:


  When the 20th century has been completed, we come to the conclusion that
  there is little doubt that we will fail in describing it as the century
  of revolution.

Therefore, as hon members of this House, it is incumbent on us to drive
forward the struggle for a national democratic revolution in which we say:
`` A better life for all.'' This is linked to the Freedom Charter's
statement that ``The people shall share'' - even facilities.

The SA Sports Commission will be able to generate funds on its own and
actually assist the Department of Finance in terms of revenue generation,
thereby giving a financial boost to disadvantaged smaller sporting codes,
such as judo, karate, aquatic fishing, netball, fencing and stick fighting.
[Laughter.] On the other hand, we as the ANC Government will legislate
checks and balances and measures for prominent codes that are generating
millions of rands from business partners and stop them getting away with
murder.

I therefore call on companies and businesspeople to support the Sports
Commission the same way they supported over the past few years the Sports
Trust led by Bruce Fordyce in Johanessburg. Through the SA Sports
Commission our department will be able to take care of twinning
arrangements, which are part of international relations. This will help in
mass mobilisation of our sports and help fulfil the theme of our current
White Paper: ``Let the nation play.''

The time has come for us as Government to monitor and regulate all phases
of delivery in favour of our people, who need administrative skills to run
their own rural sports clubs, and to empower coaches and referees in order
to realise our efforts that started in the dark and bitter days of Sacos
and the NSC. Because we could unify various sporting codes across racial
lines, the Sports Commission will get fertile ground.

Prophets of doom and mischief-makers camouflaged their secret agendas in
sport in order to achieve their dirty political goals. As a result, ever
since the wolf in sheep's clothing, in the name of Dr Louis Luyt ...
[Interjections] ... was pushed out of rugby by the scruff of his neck,
through the window, rugby has normalised. Now it is beginning to take good
shape. I thank Dr Louis Luyt for going. [Interjections.] So we congratulate
the NSC ...
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, please withdraw
the words ``wolf in sheep's clothing''.

Mr I Z NCINANE: I withdraw them. [Laughter.]

We congratulate the NSC on bringing Dr Louis Luyt into open politics, which
is better than what he was involved in - secret politics, which he
practised in the name of rugby under the dirty blanket of full nepotism at
Ellis Park and in Newlands. [Interjections.]

I call on the hon the Minister to legislate and impose quota systems on all
national teams. I hear the Minister say that the national teams are
selected on merit. There is a lot of resistance to change and
transformation.

An HON MEMBER: Speak louder, we cannot hear you!

Mr I Z NCINANE: Master of ceremonies ... [Laughter] ... the system of merit
is biased ... [Interjections.]

The quota system should be forced on cricket with immediate effect as
cricket is now an embarrassment to this country, because the way they lost
to India recently clearly shows that they would rather lose with a hopeless
lily-white team than have black Makhaya Ntini, Mpitsang or Tsolekile in the
squad. The team has suffered many injuries but they will not call up black
cricketers. [Interjections.] Their bad attitude needs to be dumped, because
the legacy of Ray White must be stopped. He, together with the cricket
management, was suffering from political malnutrition. [Laughter.]

I must congratulate the hon the Minister for sometimes quietly jumping into
controversies in some of the sports codes and settling disputes that would
have done a lot of damage to sport in this country. But I also call on the
hon the Minister to jump with his heavy stomach and kick the Comrades
Marathon Association on their cheeks to stop them from privatising the
sport to the benefit of their white supremacy in Pietermaritzburg.
[Laughter.]

I must bring to the attention of this House that the Comrades Marathon
Association has been clinging to the old order of discrimination for the
past several years.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your time has
expired. However, remain at the podium. Sir, it is not parliamentary to
accuse any member of nepotism, unless you have absolute proof of that. So,
please withdraw the words with which you directly accused members of the
House of nepotism. Alleging it is something different.

Mr I Z NCINANE: I gladly withdraw. Chairperson ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Your time has also expired,
sir.

Mr I Z NCINANE: Oh! Thank you, very much. [Applause.] May God bless you!

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, on a point of order: The expression
``a wolf in a sheepskin'' in Xhosa is ``ingcuka eyambethe ufele lwegusha''.
Sisaci eso neqhalo lesiXhosa. Ndicela ukwazi ukuba ingaba ilungu eli
linelungelo lokuyisebenzisa? [This is a Xhosa idiom or proverb. I would
like to know whether this member has a right to use it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Minister, that is not a
point of order and the hon member was speaking in English, which has a
different connotation entirely. [Laughter.] Please be seated.

Adv P S SWART: Chair, Minister, I hope the sound system is still working
after that! This is a debate about a Vote and it is, therefore, only
fitting and proper that the emphasis should be on the financial aspects of
this specific department.

Hiermee impliseer ek nie vir 'n oomblik dat ons uit die oog moet verloor
die belangrike rol wat sport en ontspanning in hierdie land speel in die
heropbou van 'n nasie, die bevordering van nie-rassigheid en die spesifieke
klem op die welvaart van al die mense van ons pragtige land nie. Geen
suksesvolle program van nasiebou kan egter in isolasie gesien word nie. Die
finansiÃ«le implikasies en koste aan die belastingbetaler moet altyd in
oorweging geneem word.

Ons leef in 'n land waar een slagspreuk bo alle ander uitstaan as gevolg
van die agterstande van die verlede, naamlik diÃ© van lewering. Dit
veroorsaak dat die koek dikwels te klein is vir al die snye. Besondere klem
moet dus gelÃª word om die beperkte toedeling wat 'n spesifieke departement
ontvang optimaal te benut en te bestuur. Dit is ongelukkig juis hier waar
die probleem lÃª. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[With this I am not implying for one moment that we should lose sight of
the very important role which sport and recreation play in this country in
the reconstruction of a nation, the promotion of nonracialism and the
specific emphasis on the prosperity of all the people of our beautiful
country. No successful programme of nation-building can, however, be seen
in isolation. The financial implications and cost to the taxpayer should
always be taken into consideration.

We live in a country where one slogan stands out above the rest as a result
of the backlogs of the past, namely that of delivery. The consequence of
this is that the cake is often too small for all the slices. Specific
emphasis should therefore be placed on utilising and managing the limited
allocation which a specific department receives to the optimum. It is
unfortunately precisely here that the problem lies.]

Last week the Public Accounts Committee discussed the report on the
financial statements of Sport and Recreation by the Auditor-General for the
year ended 31 March 1999. I shall only highlight certain problems that were
noted and which clearly indicate a lack of proper financial control. The
Minister asked for a bigger slice of the cake. This report reflects on his
predecessor, but there are valuable lessons to be learnt.

With limited funds available, surely the most disturbing is that for the
past three financial years the department surrendered annual unspent funds,
which indicates inaccurate financial planning or the failure to achieve
objectives. For the 1998-99 financial year 13,4% of the appropriation was
surrendered by the department, which amounts to more than R13 million not
spent on the objectives it was intended for. This translates into
nondelivery to our people. Furthermore, apart from unauthorised expenditure
in excess of R36Â 000, in five instances amounts were paid out to sporting
bodies without their financial statements for the previous year being in
order.

Die gemelde sake dui op 'n spesifieke probleem met die interne ouditering
van die departement. Om dit te bevestig, moes die betrokke komitee verlede
week verneem dat hoewel die departement 'n interne ouditafdeling het,
funksioneer hierdie afdeling nie as gevolg van die vakante status van die
twee goedgekeurde poste.

Verskeie antwoorde is aangebied, maar uiteindelik is erken dat indien die
beskikbare gekwalifiseerde persone aangestel sou word, dit tot gevolg sou
hÃª dat die rassekwota van die departement nie bereik word nie. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The matters mentioned point to a specific problem with the internal
auditing of the department. To confirm this, the particular committee
learnt last week that although the department has an internal audit
section, this section is not functioning as a result of the fact that the
two approved posts are vacant. Various answers were given, but eventually
it was admitted that if the available qualified people were appointed it
would result in the racial quota of the department not being reached.]

Although we as the DP believe in transformation and rectifying the
injustices of the past, we can never support certain primary positions not
being filled owing to quotas, especially an important function such as the
internal audit section of a department. This should not be dysfunctional
for more than a year.

Die finansiÃ«le bestuur van die betrokke departement is nie na wense nie.
Die DP versoek die Minister om onmiddellik toe te sien dat die nodige poste
gevul word en kontroles in plek gestel word om behoorlike, deursigtige
finansiÃ«le bestuur te verseker. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The financial management of the particular department is not as it should
be. The DP is requesting the Minister immediately to see to it that the
necessary posts are filled and that controls are put in place to ensure
proper, transparent financial management. [Time expired.]]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Mr Chairperson, firstly, I would like to congratulate the
Minister on his appointment and say that it took the DP and the NP six
years to understand the ANC's policy on sport and recreation. But I am
quite happy that the young blood that has just joined the DP and the NP is,
in fact, able to come forward and support the ANC in its cause of making
sure that the nation will play.
My participation today in this debate marks the beginning of our call on
all members of Parliament, as they go to their constituencies, to mobilise
the masses based on the campaign that we have just started in Parliament
today, and to build on this momentum that we have created. The Chief Whip
and I have agreed that we will be meeting with the leaders of other parties
to arrange a programme whereby members of Parliament will participate in
sports on what we are going to call a parliamentary sports day.

Firstly, this Vote is about increasing the level of participation of South
Africans in sport and recreation and, secondly, about maximising the
probability of the success of our sportspersons in major sporting events. I
think I need to raise one point that was raised by Cassie Aucamp. The
problem is that he is alone in his party. If there were somebody with him
to attend sport and recreation portfolio committee meetings, he would be
able to understand that all these parties are not supporting just for the
sake of supporting, but because they understand the vision, aims and
objective of where we want to go. [Interjections.]

It is important that we address the question of sport development and the
role of federations. There are very few federations that are taking this
matter seriously. We still have a problem of transformation with some of
them, for example those for cricket, netball and hockey. [Interjections.]
In the case of a federation such as the soccer body, which is doing quite
well, it is not a question of not having black people or white people
playing soccer, but, clearly, it is because they are integrated. There is a
lot of integration by that federation within the white community.

The only one we are struggling with at present is rugby, and, as Comrade
Ncinane correctly said, one has to push some of these federations. It is
our duty as members of Parliament. We have to push some of these
federations, because at the end of the day we understand the objective of a
sporting nation. If they themselves are involved in making sure that
everybody participates in the federation, they, at the same time, are
building the nation. So we need to play that role as a portfolio committee
and that is why we have been calling on them.  For the past six years we
have been calling on federations to come to us and tell us what they are
doing, but, clearly, one could see that there is resistance and it is our
duty to make sure that we break down those walls.

I would like to commend the department, because of the portion of the Vote
that goes to the SA Sports Commission. There have been complaints that
Government is interfering in sports federation programmes and all that, but
now we are going to put in place the SA Sports Commission, which will be
accountable to Parliament. We will be able to call them, as neutral as they
are, to come and account for the programmes that they are actually
monitoring within the federations.

Sports democratisation will be in line with our Constitution and Bill of
Rights, and there is no way in which we will turn a blind eye to colour
disparities, as Clelland said we should.  Clearly, we have to fight these
things. The hon Clelland knows it himself, from our experience in the
Parliamentary rugby team, that when we go overseas the team does represent
the majority of the people and the relationship that we have developed. We
were supported even in Europe when we went there, because it was the first
time that they had seen this kind of achievement. So I think we are slowly
beginning to understand that we are going somewhere.
Clearly, the UDM supports the Vote because of the young chap who has just
joined them now, and I wish them well. But one of the things that I think
they need to do is that when we develop the programme of the portfolio
committee, all of us need to come together so that, at the end of the day,
we do not have questions such as the one raised by the UCDP that the ANC
used the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation tour in the Free State
for constituency work. I think we need to understand some of these things.

However, all in all, we are going somewhere. All of us can realise the
achievement that we have made in the past six years. The role that is
played by Government and, in particular, the President of this country in
supporting the bid by calling on all South Africans to support this bid
shows this nation-building that we are talking about.

The other point that I want to raise is very much about the youth. Our
youth are not being engaged in sport because of the problems of facilities.
The partnership that we are talking about is that when Government builds a
facility, it is the responsibility of local government to maintain that
facility. We are talking about a partnership between the community and
Government, so that when a facility is put in place, the community take the
responsibility of maintaining that facility.

I think this is one of the areas on which we need to engage our local
councillors. As we go back to our constituencies, we must make sure that we
talk to them and that they understand that sport has a role to play in
taking the youth out of the streets and out of crime.

The last question I want to raise is that recently we went to a
demonstration of female boxing. One of the challenges that we have to
openly accept is that the law that is currently operational is
unconstitutional, and we need to amend it. But we have to do that very
carefully so that we do not end up doing things that will hamper the whole
process of sports development, which is a very sensitive thing.

I would like to praise the former chairperson of the portfolio committee on
the role that she has played in building and maintaining the foundation
that we are working on today, and the former Minister of Sport, Mr Fix-it,
on the role that he has played. The foundation that we are building on
today is a foundation that was laid about six years ago. We are building on
that foundation gradually, and, at the end of the day, we are realising the
objective. Our sportspersons all over the country ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, allow me, first of all,
to thank the portfolio committee under the very able leadership of umama
uRuth Bhengu. I want to thank her, together with the members of that
committee. The kind of leadership they have given me, having been a member
of that committee myself for some time, has been tremendous. [Applause.]

Allow me also to thank the MECs who were here with us this afternoon. They
have just left, and are trying to get back to their respective bases.
Within the Minmec, the support they have given to a rookie Minister has
been very good.

I also want to thank the acting director-general in my department. I have a
new ``from-the-box'', as Nxe would put it, director-general, Prof Denver
Hendricks, who is sitting over there with a lovely tie. [Applause.] He is
the acting director-general, because the contract of the previous director-
general terminated last year. I wish him good luck. He has gone off to
greener pastures.

I would also like to thank the Ministry staff and the departmental staff
who are sitting next to Prof Hendricks, for the support that they have
given. [Applause.] I would also like to thank the members who have
contributed to the debate on my Vote today. For those members who have made
constructive contributions in particular, I am very thankful. I welcome all
the comments that they have made this afternoon.

I just wish to say a few things in response. I do not think I want to
comment on the issue of Ray White, because he is no longer the president of
the United Cricket Board of South Africa. He can holler, he can make a
noise and he can do whatever he likes. He is not the president of the
United Cricket Board of South Africa. I do not intend wasting my time
talking about a sheep in a wolf's skin. [Laughter.] I am not going to
apologise for that, because it is a Xhosa expression.  I do not apologise
for interfering with federations. They are my clients. I will interfere
with them and give them guidance when they need guidance, and if the DP
does not like that - too bad. [Laughter.]

Hon Mr Ferreira is quite right when he says I look and sound like an
evangelist. I am a lay preacher in the United Presbyterian Church of South
Africa. If he could hear me ndihlabela ingoma [starting a song], he would
sit down and want to listen, because I do sing beautifully. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.] Unyanisile. [You are telling the truth.]

Napcosa is doing a wonderful job regarding the disabled sportspeople. We
are giving all the assistance we can to Amakrokokroko, our disabled
sportspeople. They did well in the last Games, which was the Atlanta Games.
[Applause.] Now we will be going with them to Sydney. They bring back
medals all the time.

We are very serious about doping, that is, the use of illegal and banned
substances, in sports. To that effect we are a leading member of Wada, the
World Antidoping Agency. The African continent has two more members,
Nigeria and Egypt, on that body.

We undertake talent identification with the help of all our national
federations. They do it themselves. I must say that one of the federations
which is very good at talent identification is the SAGF, the SA Gymnastics
Federation. They started a programme which will end in 2004. Some of their
programmes have produced athletes who now are on the verge of selection for
the Sydney Games this year. I would want to commend them for that. I hope
we will be able to assist them with the problem that they are having in
dealing with Nocsa. We are taking the internal audit we had seriously, and
we are looking at it. We hope that it is going to take us further.

Lastly, if I have a few minutes, I would like to congratulate a few
sportspeople and federations which have done very well last year: Amanda
Coetzer and Wayne Ferreira, and of course we did remark on Amanda's
hairstyle. Comrade Priscilla Jana would know where it comes from. They won
the Hopman Cup in Australia at the beginning of this year.

Our lovely queen, Penny Heyns, has broken a number of swimming records in
our country, and we hope she will do that in the Olympic Games in Sydney
later this year. [Applause.] There is a lovely youngster called Terence
Parkin. Terence cannot speak or hear, but he is one of our best swimmers in
the country. He cannot even hear the gun when it goes off, but has to see a
light going off and then jump into the water. He is one of our best
athletes at the moment, and we will get a medal through Terence.
[Applause.]

The South African cricket team has won the series against India. We have
won the series but we have one-day internationals that we are battling with
at the moment. I do tend to agree that if we have some injuries, we should
get some players from back home to reinforce the team.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: What about the Stormers?

The MINISTER: Stormers, Stormers, Stormers. We really congratulate Bafana
Bafana on their bronze medal in the African Cup of Nations. They played
very well. [Applause.] We also have to congratulate the Springbok team,
also on the bronze from the World Cup in Wales. [Applause.] The men's
hockey team has just come back from Egypt, and they also have a slight
problem which we are looking into. Hezekiel Sepeng has been very consistent
in his performances.

We have a new sensation, Dikeledi Moropane. She is very young. She is one
of the sprinters that we have in this country, and we are hoping to take
her with us to Sydney. [Applause.] We congratulate Baby Jake - the old man
- and Hawk Makepula on the lovely fight they gave us a few weeks ago. They
fought very well and Hawk won. We have to say: ``Come back home,'' to the
rhamncwa [beast], Vuyani Bhungu. Do you know a ramncwa [beast], Mr
Chairperson? He tried his best and gave his all. He should come back home;
we still love him. [Applause.]

We also salute those tireless warriors who give so much of their time and
energy, sometimes without any reward - the coaches, the officials, the
technical assistants and the volunteers. With their dedication and Sport
and Recreation, we will really reach great heights. We also have to say,
clearly, that we still need the likes of coaches like Trott Moloto and
others to continue with the work that they are doing. [Applause.] I am not
talking about the provincial games, the Stormers, the Cats, and others. We
did not do well last weekend. Amaglug-glug did us very proud, but we hope
that the other teams, over the coming few months before the Olympic Games,
will really reach the highest levels of participation in our country.

I want to thank everyone for loving sport and loving all of us in sport.
[Applause.]

An HON MEMBER: Laduma! [Goal!]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Minister, your reference
to a sheep in a wolf's skin is an isiXhosa expression, and in many other
languages in the world too, there is an expression for that. You are not
referring to a particular individual in this House, that he or she is a
sheep in a wolf's skin, which has an odious connotation. Therefore, you are
ruled not out of order. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

An HON MEMBER: Laduma! [Goal!]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 11 - Foreign Affairs:

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Chairperson and hon members, it is a great
pleasure and privilege for me to stand before this esteemed House and
present my first budget as Minister of Foreign Affairs. I do so with great
humility, as someone stepping into the shoes of that great son of Africa,
the veteran of our liberation movement and the architect of our foreign
policy, the late hon Alfred Nzo. I pay tribute to his relentless efforts to
lay a foundation upon which I am challenged to build.

I stand before the House at the dawn of the African century, a time in our
history when we as the people of the continent are resolutely turning our
backs on the ugly past of colonialism, apartheid and oppression, on
ignorance, hunger, disease and poverty, on war and violence, on intolerance
of one another's differences, disregard of human rights, and absence of
democracy. We are turning our backs on underdevelopment and economic
dependency and poverty. This is our past, which we intend not to lament,
but to convincingly conquer in order to make real the dream of the African
renaissance.

We are under no illusion that its vestiges and legacies often affront us as
obstacles in our resolute cause for a better future. In doing this, we
shall build on the foundation laid by our forebears, those great
revolutionaries who conquered colonial and apartheid oppression. Our far-
sighted leaders of today have declared the year 2000 the year of peace in
Africa.

They have set themselves the daunting challenge of ending all wars on the
continent. They have unambiguously rejected military and unconstitutional
regimes. As economic development is central to the African renaissance,
they are implementing the Abuja treaty, whose regional economic blocs will
lead to the formation of the African economic community. They have mandated
our President, together with the current chairperson of the Organisation
for African Unity, President Bouteflika of Algeria, to champion the
continent's cause for debt cancellation. Through these and numerous other
similar efforts, our leaders and people are showing not only their
impatience with the legacy of the past, but their determination to overcome
it.

The agenda of the African century will inform the programmes of the
Ministry during my term of office. In pursuit of these, our policy and
programme will rest on four broad pillars: those of development, peace and
security, governance and transformation of related institutions. Economic
development is at the centre of our strategy. At the centre of our strategy
must be the integration of not only our economy, but also those of other
countries in the African continent, into the world system. Such an
integration must advance the interests of our continent. For this reason,
we play a leadership role to ensure that the new international trade
protocols of the WTO enhance the development agenda of the south.

Establishing co-operation with the various emerging economic blocs is one
of the central features of South African foreign policy. Hence the
conclusion of the trade, development and co-operation agreement with the
EU. We also played a leading role in 1999 in the negotiations with the EU
for a successor agreement to the LomÃ© Convention. We will continue to make
important contributions as a respected member of the African-Caribbean and
Pacific group. Afro-Arab co-operation and relations between the region and
the Gulf Co-operation Council will receive further attention. In this
regard, we are a founder member of the Indian Ocean Rim Association for
regional co-operation. The relations with the states of the Caribbean
community and common market Carricom will be improved. In pursuit of this,
a mission has been opened in Kingston, Jamaica.

Most countries in our region have successful economic reform programmes in
place. The process of regional integration has many opportunities for the
citizens of our respective countries. The ratification of the Southern
African Development Community Trade Protocol in January 2000 concerned our
common commitment to establishing a free trade area.

We are about to start negotiations for a trade agreement with Mercosur.
This will strengthen our links with South America. We have just returned
from Chile, where we were part of a historic event, the inauguration of the
socialist President, Ricardo Lagos, the first socialist President since the
coup d'etat against the Allende government.

We also intend to use various fora to articulate positions of Africa and
the developing world in dialogue with the industrialised world. These will,
among others, include the EU/Africa Summit of April 2000 in Cairo, the
South African/Nordic Summit in June, the G8 meeting in July, the China-Afro
Co-operation Forum to be held in Beijing in October, the 13th NAM
Ministerial Conference in Cartagena and the Summit of Heads of State and
Government in Havana, both in April.
Our embassies and high commissions abroad spend more than 60% of their time
on trade and investment-related matters, such as sustaining our market
share, exploring and opening new markets, facilitating joint ventures and
negotiating bilateral economic co-operation agreements. We have to
strengthen trade and investment relations with Africa, Asia, the Middle
East, Latin America and the Caribbean in order to diversify. An increasing
number of our top-20 trading partners now hail from these regions. In a few
days' time I will be visiting China in order to further strengthen and
expand our relations with that country, and also to prepare for the first
state visit by the Chinese President to South Africa in April.

With regard to social development, an exclusive focus on economic dimension
of development will be extremely limited and unwise. Culturally, we are in
a global village. Innovations in communication and information technology
make it possible to disseminate ideas, images and symbols at the blink of
an eye. Unfortunately, much of the developing world, particularly Africa,
does not have access to and cannot share this wealth of information and
knowledge. In an age of increasing global secularism there is, however,
also a need to provide space for cultural identity and to accommodate those
who feel threatened by this phenomenon.

The impact of HIV/Aids echoes through every facet of our societies,
crippling workforces and leading to unmanageable demands on our health care
systems. The African renaissance remains threatened, unless the people of
our continent - who should deliver this vision - are free from the scourge
of this terrible disease. South Africa is also committed to the promotion
of human rights internationally. In the light of this, South Africa has
accepted a request by the UN to host the World Conference on Racism in the
second half of the year 2001. We are uniquely positioned to contribute to
the international community's quest to combat racism in all its
manifestations. The United Nations General Assembly Special Session on
Women 2000 and on social development will enable us to place on the world
agenda the concerns we have about the continued marginalisation of women in
our societies.

In relation to peace and security, the regional conflicts wreaking havoc
across the continent cast a dark shadow over the prospects of the success
of the vision of the African renaissance. We shall continue to be an honest
and neutral broker in these conflicts. We believe that these wars cause
human misery and pain, and reverse whatever little gains we have made in
socioeconomic development.

The ratio of military to civilian casualties in these wars is thought to
have been 8:1 at the start of the century, but now it stands at 1:8, the
civilian casualties being the largest. It is wrong to think that all
conflicts should be solved through the barrel of the gun. Political
solutions should be explored at all times. For this reason, we are
committed to participating in peace missions wherever our contribution is
required and a legitimate international mandate exists. In the DRC there
can be no alternative to a peaceful resolution of that country's conflict.

We are happy to have played our small part in the development of the Lusaka
Peace Agreement which enjoys the support of all parties involved in that
conflict. This framework also enjoys the support of the OAU and the UN. In
this context we welcome the deployment of the UN Peacekeeping Force to
implement the ceasefire agreement and we support the former President of
Botswana, Sir Ketumile Masire, in his role as facilitator for the internal
process in that country. We are committed to stand by the people of the
Congo as they make this difficult journey,  and we will support and
encourage them wherever we can. For this reason, I will be visiting the
DRC, Kinshasa, at the end of this week.

During my visit to Burundi early this month, I was struck by the
desperation of those people for peace and for reconstruction of their
society. They count on our support to encourage the world not to forget
their plight and to urge those involved in the violent conflict to give
peace a chance. I therefore wish to assure former President Mandela, the
facilitator of the Burundi peace process, of our fullest support in this
endeavour.

The 26-year conflict in Angola is of great concern as it spreads and
affects other countries in our region. We support all the UN sanctions
against Unita and shall continue to work closely with the UN for the
success of these measures in order to secure a peaceful solution. We are
aware that some of our citizens have been involved in efforts aimed at
undermining the UN sanctions. We shall take firm action against those
involved. South Africa will continue to advocate for a political solution
to the conflict in Angola, as we remain convinced that there can be no
lasting military solution. We urge Unita once again to abandon war and
embrace peace. With regard to the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia,
progress has been made towards the implementation of the OAU peace plan. We
support the ongoing IGAD process in Sudan and hope that both parties,
namely the Sudanese government and the SPLA, will reach an early
settlement.

Human security is a foreign policy idea and a political imperative. It is a
responsibility placed on our agenda by the weight of public opinion. The
public is often shocked by live television broadcasts of the impact of
natural disasters. Our High Commissioner, Ms Jessie Duarte, acted with a
sense of urgency and alerted us in a manner which enabled the Government
through Foreign Affairs to act swiftly, resulting in thousands of lives
being saved. It is in this context that we applaud the heroic efforts of
our Defence Force who rescued about 13 000 desperate Mozambicans and formed
part of the international effort to distribute humanitarian aid.
[Applause.]

The support extended to Mozambique from fellow African countries with
meagre resources is a true sign of African solidarity. It is with a sense
of pride that we saw Africa take the lead in this time of crisis. We
welcome the humanitarian support that has since flowed from other
countries. We hope that the international community will assist in the
major task of the reconstruction and development of Mozambique.

Mozambique, of course, was not the only country affected by the disaster.
Zimbabwe, Botswana and South Africa, as well as Madagascar, were affected.
The challenge that faces us is to develop early warning capacity, and to
generate sufficient resources to prevent such human catastrophe and, where
we can, an ability to minimise the threat to the lives of our citizens. We
can only do this through co-operation in Africa and support from others.

At this moment 29 South African experts are assisting to put out a fire
that has been raging for almost a month. South Africa has keenly supported
the initiative in respect of the conference on security, stability,
development and co-operation in Africa. We serve on the steering committee
to further this process on the African continent. We believe that this
initiative represents a much-needed process and in Africa constitutes a
catalyst which will enhance and speed up the OAU politically, as well as
African economic integration processes. South Africa is looking forward to
hosting the OAU summit in the year 2002.

On governments, the past decades has seen a wave of democratisation sweep
the continent with three elected leaders coming to power. Unconstitutional
changes in government were unequivocally condemned by member states at the
OAU summit of 1999 in Algiers. African governments are generally embracing
the values of good governance and respect for human rights, and these are
becoming entrenched in their actions.

Our President has been asked to lead the process of settling the
unconstitutional cessation of the Anjuan regime and military takeover of
the government in the Comores. Good progress has been made to put pressure
on the Anjuan regime to maintain the integrity of the Comores as a unified
sovereign state. The OAU also endorsed efforts of the committee to return
the Comores to constitutional order and begin an end to the military
regime.

As a country, we stand prepared to support these initiatives, using the
wealth of experience and expertise that our people have in this regard, or
provide the requisite logistical assistance to ensure that the electoral
system reaches all the eligible voters. We provided such logistical support
in the form of helicopters for the Mozambican election.

South Africa is also actively participating in the proceedings of the
international criminal tribunal for Rwanda. The judge president, Navir
Pillay, is one of our judges, and I am also proud that she is a woman. This
tribunal is part of the process aimed at prosecuting persons responsible
for the genocide and other serious violations of international humanitarian
law committed in the territory of Rwanda in 1994.

In order for us to play our new role meaningfully and effectively within
our modest means, I will be tabling the African renaissance and
international co-operation Bill in the second quarter of this session of
Parliament. This law will enable us to co-ordinate, plan and direct our
efforts in this regard in a better way. Apart from participating in various
international fora, South Africa will this year be involved in initiatives
aimed at improving the security of Africa's citizens. These include
negotiations on the international convention against transnational
organised crime and the 10th UN crime congress that will take place in
April 2000 in Vienna.

I now come to institutional transformation. The creation of a better world
is imperative. But we have to have support of organisational and other
institutional mechanisms. Immense trust and confidence is placed in South
Africa, particularly by the developing world, resulting in our election to
leadership roles of various multilateral organisations, including NAM and
the Commonwealth. Yesterday, Monday, 13 March, was Commonwealth Day. As we
reflect on the unique role that it has played in helping to shape South
Africa's peaceful transition to democracy, we are also aware of the special
responsibility placed on South Africa whose President Thabo Mbeki is the
first-ever chair in office of the Commonwealth, and chairman of its high-
level group which will be examining the future role of the Commonwealth.

We continue to advocate the reform and renewal of multilateral
institutions, particularly the United Nations, the World Bank and the IMF.
The UN Security Council remains the paramount global instrument to
safeguard peace and security. Capacity must be built to enable it to
address new, nontraditional threats to security such as ethnic conflict,
mass refugee flows, illicit small arms trafficking, gross human rights
violations, and failures of governance and the rule of law, and to address
abject human deprivation.

I have mentioned all the challenges that face us, but do we have a
department that can live up to these challenges? Clearly the challenges
that confront us in the pursuit of these policy objectives require that the
Department of Foreign Affairs should itself undergo a thoroughgoing
transformation.

In this regard, measures are in place to develop a comprehensive
departmental strategy plan for transformation. This plan will span a three
to five-year period and it will be finalised before the end of this year.
The plan will cover such issues as programme and policy orientation,
fundamental organisational reform and the repositioning of missions. The
objective will be to ensure that we have efficient and effective capacity
to deliver on our mandate. These processes are already under way as we
recognise the urgency of enhancing our efficiency.
Clearly the present scope of the challenges ahead of us would require the
utilisation of a range of resources available to the state, including the
support of other departments and Ministries. We would also consult broadly
with the various organs of civil society to ensure their participation in a
manner that will not impinge on their independence and autonomy.

Effective communication of our policies and programmes, and indeed the
agenda of the African renaissance, will form an important part of our
strategy. In this regard, a co-ordinated approach that brings together the
various agencies in our international work, such as various Government
departments, ISA, Satour and other similar organisations, will be
important. The Cabinet decision to establish a programme called ``Imaging
and Branding South Africa',' which will be implemented with the assistance
of the Government Communication and Information System, GCIS, under the
guidance of an international committee that will be chaired by the Minister
of Foreign Affairs, is a welcome development.

As I conclude, I want to place on record my appreciation for the guidance
from the President and the support from the Deputy President. My
appreciation also goes to the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr Aziz
Pahad, for his support and counsel, and to the DG, the DDGs and the entire
staff in the Department of Foreign Affairs, who have worked so hard. I hope
that the new year will witness an even greater measure of co-ordination of
our efforts to realise common objectives. The newly formed Cabinet
committee and cluster committee system on international relations, peace
and security will lay a firm basis for this.

I would also like to thank all my colleagues, who have given me their
support and understanding, as Foreign Affairs impinges on the work of all
other departments. We remain on course and ready to face the challenges of
the African century. [Applause.]

Mr E I EBRAHIM: Mr Chairperson, and hon members, I would like to thank the
hon Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma for her very comprehensive and thought-
provoking comments on South Africa's role and priorities in foreign affairs
for the coming year. I would also like to extend a warm welcome to our new
Director-General of Foreign Affairs, Mr Sipho Pityana, whose visionary
leadership will help to guide the department into the new millennium.
The 21st century has been declared by our President as an African century.
In order to drive forward the notion of the African renaissance, and
operationalise the many strategic objectives which have been identified as
necessary to ensure Africa's renewal, we will have to commit substantial
resources to the pursuit of this goal. Similarly, to promote South Africa
as a competitive player and a valuable partner in the community of nations,
we will have to dedicate the requisite resources to marketing our strengths
overseas.

The concern shared by the members of the Foreign Affairs committee is that
the resources allocated to the Department of Foreign Affairs for the
current fiscal year are not sufficient to meet our foreign affairs
objectives. We are mindful of the demands made by the various Government
departments on the limited resources available to the state. The department
has, however, tried to manage, with increasing difficulty, a trend which
has seen its budget consistently reduced over the past three years, while
the foreign policy agenda has expanded, and more commitments have been made
in the international arena.

If we are to move beyond rhetoric and pronouncement, and actively engage in
multilateral fora, strengthen trading partnerships, attract direct foreign
investments, address conflicts on the continent and heighten human
security, we need a budget which reflects these priorities, and provides
the necessary capacity to fulfil these goals. What we are witnessing is
resource allocation which has hampered our efforts, as a result of the
Foreign Affairs budget being cut by R90 million. The budget now stands at
50% of what it was in 1993.

We lack capacity to seriously strategise on our involvement in places like
Asia and Latin America, which puts us at a significant disadvantage on
trade opportunities of a vast potential. There are no available funds to
open new strategic missions abroad in places that are growing points such
as Vietnam, the Philippines, and Shanghai, and we continue to close
missions in places like Bulgaria and Romania. A total of 221 foreign
service posts remain unfilled owing to financial constraints, and 14 head-
of-mission posts remain vacant even in Namibia, Tanzania, Mumbai and Cuba.

In Africa, where we are seeking to expand economic co-operation, we have
merely 25 missions, out of a total of 53 countries - a visible presence in
only half of the continent. The much-needed missions in Kigali, Lubumbashi
and Tripoli would enable us to more effectively pursue a number of our
economic and political objectives on the continent.

An additional constraint for the department in managing its current budget
is that before the beginning of the financial year, the budget has already
been reduced owing to the currency fluctuations of the past week. We would
like to recommend that the Department of Finance should make, at least,
part of the budget allocation to Foreign Affairs in foreign currency.

Within the confines of the current budget, South Africa will need to be
strategic in addressing the urgent issues of conflict resolution on the
continent which threatens the very potential for an African renaissance. We
cannot be peacemakers and reconcilers in every troubled spot throughout the
arc of crisis that runs from Angola in the south, all the way to the Upper
Nile Basin. But we do have a special responsibility to share our experience
and skill in reconciliation and mediation where such efforts are likely to
bear the most fruit.
Over the past years we have actively sought a peaceful resolution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo, and continue to pledge our
support to the Lusaka peace process. As parliamentarians, we must
repeatedly express our support for the work of Robert Fowler and the UN-
sanctioned regime which hopes to minimise the revenues of Jonas Savimbi. We
call on our Government to expose and prosecute any South African guilty of
sanction-busting. Creative thinking on all our parts will be required to
encourage and negotiate a political settlement and viable political process
in Angola.

In addition to concerted efforts in dealing with traditional security
issues on the continent, it is imperative that we increasingly look at
human security concerns. While traditional statecentric notions of security
are important, the security of individuals needs to garner renewed
attention. Peace cannot be seen as merely the absence of war or the
containment of conflict. Peace must entail efficient state services where
the basic needs of the people are met, sustainable economic development
takes place and good governance is made a priority. Without these
fundamental concerns being addressed, the underlying cause of state
collapse and conflict will not be challenged. Part of heightening human
security will necessitate genuine ethnic reconciliation and grass-roots
peace-building across Africa to bring hostile communities together and
facilitate meaningful dialogue processes.

In addressing human security issues we may want to examine the
controversial concept of humanitarian intervention in order to formalise
our approach to situations that involve gross violations of human rights,
starvation or genocide. Is the UN or the OAU prepared to intervene on
humanitarian grounds in the future when such tragedies unfold, or will it
adhere to the principle of sovereignty and territorial integrity? Are we
prepared to accept that there are exceptional circumstances in which this
principle can be violated? A serious debate needs to take place on such
issues.

One of the greatest human security concerns which confronts us today is the
scourge of HIV/Aids. The urgency of the crisis has made it necessary to
view HIV/Aids as a foreign policy issue if the African renaissance is to be
more than a dream. South Africa needs to forge partnerships with both the
North and South and civil society organisations to mobilise the necessary
resources, medication and awareness campaigns to reduce the devastating
spread of the pandemic.

South Africa should play a leadership role within the Nonaligned Movement
to push for faster and more extensive debt reduction so that resources in
the developing world can be freed up for programmes in education and health
care. If unity can be forged throughout the South as an extension of
Jubilee 2000, the North will find it harder to resist southern demands.

Similarly, we must push for UN reforms, and reform of the UN Security
Council in particular. Our influence in such world bodies does not reflect
the extent of our contribution. We currently contribute R46 million to the
UN and R40 million from South Africa went towards paying for peace
operations worldwide. Africa needs permanent representation on the UN
Security Council in order to place African issues and conflicts more firmly
on the international agenda. Such reform will not likely take place without
southern consensus behind a common reform platform.

Although our foreign policy is Africa driven, our internationalism demands
that we express solidarity with and support genuine national liberation
movements, and support those struggling for human rights throughout the
world. In this respect we welcome the process of granting full independence
to the people of East Timor and condemn the brutal violence perpetrated
against the entire civilian population.

We express concern about the intransingency of the Israeli government and
fully support the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for
their human dignity, for freedom and self-determination. We must also
express condemnation of the abduction and the flawed trial of the Kurdish
leader, Abdullah Ocalan, and we support the call for his release and for a
peaceful resolution to the Kurdish issue in Turkey.  We also note with
concern the continued Turkish military occupation of parts of Cyprus and
urge the United Nations to take the necessary steps to end this occupation.

In conclusion, South Africa does not lack the political will to
operationalise its varied foreign policy objectives. But the department
cannot operate on a shoestring budget. If we are to pursue the visionary
goal espoused by our President, we will need to ensure that we have the
real capacity to do so. I have no doubt that South Africa, under the
leadership of our President and under the able leadership of the Minister,
the Deputy Minister and the officials of the department, will continue to
play a significant role among the nations of Africa and the world.
[Applause.]

Mr C W EGLIN: Mr Chairperson, the hon Minister Zuma gave us an impressive
catalogue of the activities, past and future, of her department. It really
is very impressive. I look forward to tomorrow to hear not Minister Zuma
but the magician Zuma explaining how the department is going to achieve all
this on a very limited budget that her colleague has provided her with.

The only one point I want to touch on is that the hon the Minister
mentioned the issue of being an honest broker in dispute situations rather
than being a combatant. We, in the DP, support that attitude 100%. We
believe that very often there are complex factors surrounding disputes and
wars. But, in the main, the wars and the disputes within countries will
never be resolved unless it is on the basis of inclusive representative
democratic government. If one looks around Africa, that is the key problem
in many of the areas where the conflict is taking place.
I, like many other people in this country, were taken by surprise when the
President announced that Dr Zuma was going to be the Minister of Foreign
Affairs. We had always thought of her as stubbing out cigarettes rather
than stubbing out civil wars. But, we want to say that we commend her for
her enthusiasm and energy, and the way she has tackled the responsibilities
of her portfolio.

Reports from around Africa, in particular, indicate that she has made an
impact. Let me say to the Minister that it is too early for us to come to
final conclusions on the extent of her success. We wish her well. We, the
DP, will support her wherever it is possible. But let me say that we
reserve the right to criticise her whenever we deem it necessary.

This is also the occasion to welcome the new director-general, Mr Pityana.
I think we have had two directors-general in the course of the past year.
While the Minister's responsibility is in the field of policy and
diplomacy, the essential responsibility for the director-general is in the
field of management. I want to stress the importance of effective
management in the field of foreign affairs at this stage of South Africa's
international relationships.

We believe that proper management of a small department with a very limited
budget, operating in the international field, is of critical importance.
There are four reasons for this - expanded responsibilities; and yet
confronted with the reduced budget. We believe that the budget reduction of
R19 million will be much greater when taken in real money terms and is
short-sighted. We do not believe that it will be possible for the
Department of Foreign Affairs to play the full and appropriate part in
promoting South Africa's interest in the international field. I know they
are going to try their best, but we believe that there is not enough money
for us to cover the international field, and South Africa's increased
international status, and South Africa's increased international
opportunities. So we shall do what we can to persuade the hon the Minister
of Finance to increase the department's budget to a much more realistic
figure.

The second reason for good management is to meet the challenge and
opportunities presented by the developments of modern information
technology. The world of communication - and a big part of that is foreign
affairs - is changing dramatically before our eyes. We want to see that,
through good management, we keep abreast with the newest techniques in the
field of information technology.

The third reason for good management is the changing nature of
international relationships. What may have been good management five years
ago is probably going to be poor management this year and bad management in
a year's time, as national boundaries become less important and a regional
bloc, multinational agencies, international politics and global economics
become more important. We see the world as a kaleidoscope rather than as a
set pattern.

Finally, giving increased impetus to South Africa's effort in the fields of
international trade, finance and technology would not only require greater
effort, but, I believe and we believe, would also require much greater co-
operation and shared responsibility among the Department of Foreign
Affairs, the Department of Trade and Industry and the private sector. They
are three essential members of a team if we are going to expand our trade.
I would like to say to Mr Pityana that he has a tough mission ahead of him
and I wish him good luck.

I can only deal with one other matter in the short time available to me,
and that is our dealings with the Southern African region. The region, we
believe, is of critical importance to South Africa and the South African
people. What is more, the Southern African region is a part of the world
where, because of South Africa's location and because of its relative
strength and its human and material resources, South Africa can make a real
difference. It can make a very real difference, not only to the lives of
South Africans, but to the lives of millions of fellow Africans living here
within the southern region. We in the DP believe that we have to assist in
bringing peace, stability and development to this region.

And so the countries of this region have formed SADC, which is designed to
co-ordinate and facilitate agreements, protocols, and co-operation in
obtaining these objectives. We believe that SADC is a critically important
instrument in the whole question not just of the African renaissance, but
of the security, the peace and the development of our southern region. It
should be supported and it should be strengthened.

SADC, in its current form, is a relatively new institution, and in its
formative years it has not been able to meet all the challenges which have
confronted it. It has made good progress in a number of fields, such as the
technical fields of power generation and communication. It has brought
countries closer and closer together. The trade protocol, which in many
ways stands at the centre of our regional co-operation, while not yet
ratified, is well on the way to becoming a regional agreement.

However, it has had its shortcomings. It has not been able to deal with the
issue of conflict resolution. It might have been said that this is because
the conflicts in the countries, particularly Angola and the DRC, were
intractable. The fact is that SADC itself did not have the instrument
within it to cope with this conflict situation. I refer, in particular, to
the fact that over the past three years SADC's Organ for Politics, Defence
and Security, which should have been the body for creating a mutual and a
common attitude towards the conflict, in essence, did not exist because of
the disputes both over the question of the chairmanship and over the
question of where its authority lay. We believe that had they had that
organ, one might not have had SADC torn apart as to how one should handle
the conflict situation in the DRC. We are pleased that at the meeting in
Swaziland this matter appeared to have been resolved.

Secondly, there is no doubt that as SADC becomes a more important
instrument, consideration has to be given to the restructuring and the
revamping of the executive and the way in which various portfolios are
handed out. Finally, SADC, particularly, has to move towards having free
trading areas. We have economies which are becoming interlocked and more
and more interdependent. There must be clear and binding commitment amongst
the countries of SADC as to what kind of governance and what kind of
economy is going to prevail in that region. The countries and the
governments cannot and should not be clones of one another. Rather there
should be an unambiguous commitment to four features: first, to the
peaceful resolution of conflict and, second, to democracy and respect for
human rights and upholding the rule of law. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Miss M N MAGAZI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, comrades and
friends, the world we are living in is changing very fast. The change is
necessary, though the very nature of human beings, especially those who are
privileged, is not to want to give away the old and familiar, while those
who are not privileged want to bring something new and in most cases,
progressive. One author once described this contradiction as nothing but a
struggle between what is old and what is dying, but is refusing to die, and
what is new and struggling to be born.

The focus of my speech will be on the restructuring or reform of the United
Nations Security Council, the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund. The very nature of the United Nations Organisation was modelled along
the lines of the victorious forces after the Second World War. Also
important was that the world was divided into two - the socialist block
dominated by the former Soviet Union and the capitalist world dominated by
USA. Many developments have taken place since the world of 1945, as it was
envisaged by the United Nations Organisation.

There were 54 countries who signed the United Nations Charter in 1945, and
today the organisation consists of 185 member states. We are no longer
living in a bipolar world. The socialist bloc, which was once dominated by
the former Soviet Union, is no longer there. Technology and communication
have made our world much smaller than it was before. We all have a common
destiny as humanity. Our future as humanity is in our hands. No part of the
world has been left untouched by the changes that have taken place.

The UNO itself has not been left out in the process of change. Today one is
able to know what is happening thousands of kilometres away from one's
country, just by the push of a button. In all these changes that I have
stated above, the Security Council of the UN has not changed. Though there
is general agreement among the permanent members of the Security Council
that change is necessary and that they have to change, the question they
still entertain is to what extent they should change.

They are prepared to accommodate new members in the Security Council if
those members do not have veto powers. This is not acceptable to the
potential members and to those who campaign for this change to happen. New
members would not want to have a second class membership of the Security
Council.

Our position as a country is the position of the OAU which says that every
member, old or new, must be accorded the same status and privileges, and
that Africa must be accorded two seats. These seats must be rotational and
mandated seats. Those countries will have the backing, and they will be
expressing the aspirations, of the continent as a whole through the OAU.

We also concur with the view that regions like Latin America and Asia must
have representation in the Security Council. Owing to the reluctance of the
current permanent members of the council, the changes will take a long time
to come, but we are determined to have those changes. We know for a fact
that they will come.

Let me turn my attention to the financial institutions which play a
significant role in many lives - the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund. Those two institutions have not lived up to our expectations
and, to a large extent, they have caused havoc in the national economies of
many countries of the South. Let us first examine the main objectives of
these institutions that justify their existence. Among the objectives of
these institutions one will find the following: Firstly, to combat poverty
in all its manifestations; secondly, to protect the environment; and
thirdly, economic reconstruction and recovery. In many instances these
objectives have been neglected. The conditions that are attached to loans
granted to countries have literally killed the economies of these
countries. Among these conditions is the structural adjustment programme.
This programme has literally caused havoc with the countries of the south.

Countries have surrendered their sovereignty to these institutions. These
institutions have created in many cases parallel structures to those of the
governments. These programmes have denied millions of children their right
to basic education, thus keeping the bulk of the population of the
countries in ignorance. How are we supposed to achieve development if we do
not build human resources? Many people have been denied access to health
care, and clinics have been closed down. These loans have caused civil
strife. In one sentence, this has been the globalisation of poverty.

Despite massive evidence of the negative impact of this programme available
to these institutions, no policy shift is in sight. Perhaps they need to be
reminded that people are the greatest asset of any country. These financial
institutions must be persuaded that when they provide loans, they must do
so with a human heart. Their loans must ensure democracy, a human rights
culture and human progress. Anything short of that will not guarantee peace
in this world of ours. [Applause.]

Rev K M ZONDI: Chairperson, I must begin by thanking the President, His
Excellency Mr T M Mbeki, for the confidence he has shown in the women of
our country by appointing the hon Dr Zuma as Minister in this important
portfolio of Foreign Affairs. [Applause.] The strides with which the hon
the Minister set out to tackle one of the most difficult and complicated
problems of conflict on the African continent shortly after her
appointment, namely the problem of the Democratic Republic of Congo, proves
that the hon the Minister is well endowed with talent and ability to take
over the immense task that was ably executed before her by that quiet
diplomat who has since passed on from us, the late Mr Alfred Nzo, whose
soul should rest in peace.

The R1,3 billion allocated to the Department of Foreign Affairs for the
2000-2001 financial year is far from enough, if one takes into account the
daunting challenges that face us as a country, as we continue with the
important programme of being reintegrated into the international community
after decades of isolation which was brought about by our apartheid past.
Like any self-respecting country, we must continue to conduct our affairs
in a manner that will make us respectable and principled members of the
international community. We must, from time to time, take positions in
multilateral organisations that will help promote our image as that of a
good citizen of the world.

While it is important for us as a country to forge good relations with the
rest of the world community, it is, however, a matter of exceeding
importance that our foreign policy becomes Afrocentric in nature. It must
be biased towards Africa and her special circumstances. We must as a
country utilise the advantage of our connections with influential countries
to champion the cause of Africa. We cannot allow Africa to be shoved around
as an unimportant part of the world.

The Department of Foreign Affairs has a responsibility also to help make
this 21st century the African century. In fact, I was delighted when the
hon the Minister indicated that intention as a central part of the policy.
In order to help realise this, I would suggest that our foreign policy with
regards to Africa should be dominated by the following issues, among
others: Firstly, it should be based on the democratisation of African
governments, that is, all governments should be based on the will of the
governed. South Africa must play a pivotal role to help encourage this
positive development on the continent. Secondly, we should strive for the
end of all wars and conflicts leading to the return of stability and peace.
Thirdly, we should step up programmes that will help entrench a culture of
respect for human rights. Fourthly, we should stimulate economic
development in order to help reduce the unacceptably high levels of
gruelling poverty on the continent.

Our policy also needs to continue to focus on our immediate neighbourhood,
Southern Africa. While we have definite responsibilities towards our
continent, we should have even more responsibilities in Southern Africa. In
Southern Africa we have two situations which pose a very serious challenge
to us as a country. These are the conflicts in Angola and the DRC. While it
is commendable that we have supported resolutions taken by multilateral
organisations such as the UN, the OAU and SADC on the conflict in Angola,
such as taking stern measures against those who flout sanctions imposed on
organisations such as Unita, we should nevertheless not lose sight of what
should be our cardinal policy objective, that of ensuring that the decades-
long war comes to an end.

Perhaps we need to adopt a two-pronged approach, which should make it
possible that while we act in concert with the international community we
also are able to take initiatives which will ensure that we leave no stone
unturned in search for a solution. We need to take initiatives that are
designed to ensure that both President Dos Santos and Dr Savimbi find a way
to make peace possible in Angola, for the sake of millions of ordinary
Angolans who, on a daily basis, bear the brunt of the decades-long war.

One must also commend the stirling initiatives of the hon the Minister in
helping to bring together most parties to the conflict in the DRC. These
initiatives led to the signing of the cease-fire agreement by most of the
important role-players in that conflict. However, we do feel that more work
still has to be done by our Minister, and perhaps even by our President, to
persuade President Kabila to play a role that would be helpful to the
situation. The political parties in the DRC must be assisted to work
towards a programme that will eventually lead to the establishment of a
fully fledged democracy in the DRC.

Lastly, I would also like to add to the words commending our security
forces for doing a stirling and commendable job in helping out in the
situation of disaster in Mozambique. As a country it did us very proud.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Mr Chairman, I agree with the previous speaker that the
21st century should belong to Africa, but I will come back to that point.

It is only a privilege to serve on a committee that is chaired by the hon
Ebrahim Ebrahim. It is only a pleasure to interact with the able officials
of the Department of Foreign Affairs. It is only a pleasure to work with
Deputy Minister Aziz Pahad. And if there is truth in the saying ``absence
makes the heart grow fonder'' it will only become a pleasure to work with
the hon the Minister of Foreign Affairs as well. [Laughter.]

In the limited time at my disposal I would like to deal basically with only
one issue: The protection of minority rights as a mechanism for conflict
prevention on the continent of Africa. I will also raise a question
relating to the so-called ``China no motion'' issue that will arise later
this month in Geneva.

If the twenty-first century is to belong to Africa, as envisaged by
President Mbeki, if the concept of the African renaissance is to become a
reality, Africa will have to get its act in order. The senseless civil wars
which have been plaguing Africa for decades, destroying its natural
resources, emptying its state coffers, blocking foreign investment and
hampering economic development, will have to be stopped once and for all.
If this does not happen, the 21st century will not belong to Africa and an
African renaissance will remain a pipe dream.

How could these conflicts be brought to an end? Quite simply, really, by
implementing the contents of this document, the UN Declaration on the
Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious or Linguistic
Minorities. The root cause of virtually every prevailing conflict on the
continent is the violation of the rights of persons belonging to ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities by majority governments. This is the
case in the Sudan, in Nigeria, in the Great Lakes area - especially
Burundi, from where the Minister has just returned - in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, where the Minister is off to at the end of the week, in
the Caprivi, and, to a certain extent, in Angola.

Once people belonging to minorities have the right to enjoy their own
culture, to practise their own religion, to use their own language, to
participate effectively in decisions at national and regional level
concerning the minority to which they belong, as specifically required by
article 2 of the declaration, the conflicts will wither away until they
finally stop.

Die tyd het aangebreek dat die Suider-Afrikaanse Ontwikkelingsgemeenskap
die toepassing van hierdie VN-deklarasie oor die regte van persone wat aan
nasionale of etniese,  religieuse of taalminderhede behoort, as 'n saak van
dringende belang op hulle agenda plaas. Die tyd het ook aangebreek dat die
Organisasie vir Eenheid in Afrika dieselfde doen. Ek versoek die Minister
om die bespreking van hierdie deklarasie in genoemde forums, die SAOG en
die OEA, so gou moontlik te fasiliteer. Die toepassing van die bepalings
van die VN-deklarasie oor die regte van persone wat aan minderhede behoort,
is 'n baie doeltreffender en goedkoper manier om vrede te bewerkstellig as
wat enige militÃªre ingryping ooit kan droom om te wees. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The time has come for the Southern African Development Community to place
on their agenda, as a matter of urgency, the implementation of this UN
Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious or Linguistic Minorities. The time has also come for the
Organisation for African Unity to do the same. I request that the Minister
facilitate as quickly as possible the discussion of this declaration in the
said forums, SADC and the OAU as soon as possible. The implementation of
the provisions of the UN declaration on the rights of persons belonging to
minorities, is a far more effective and inexpensive way to achieve peace
than any military intervention could ever dream to be.]

In conclusion, can the hon the Minister tell the House whether South Africa
will support the motion condemning human rights violations in the People's
Republic of China that will possibly be considered by the UN Human Rights
Commission later this month in Geneva? The New NP believes that such a
motion should be tabled and that the People's Republic of China should be
condemned for human rights violations in Tibet, in Xinjiang province, and
for suppressing freedom of worship and jailing political dissidents.

Die Nuwe NP steun die begrotingspos, maar wys daarop dat as die begroting
elke jaar in reÃ«le terme krimp, bo en behalwe onvermydelike dalings as
gevolg van die wisselkoers, die departement naderhand al sy buitelandse
missies sal moet sluit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The New NP supports the Vote, but wishes to point out that if the budget
shrinks in real terms every year, over and above the inevitable downswings
as a result of the exchange rate, the department will eventually have to
close down all its foreign missions.]

The New NP - and this is my last point - endorses the idea of an African
parliament. This world, at least, guarantee opposition parties a say in
African affairs, something which is nonexistent at the moment.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy President, Madam Minister, ladies
and gentlemen, since 1994 our country's foreign relations have moved from a
defensive position to a creative interventionist one, and our primary focus
is the promotion of the African renaissance at domestic, regional and
international levels.

On the basis of an assessment of the expenditure trends in the department,
in relation to its strategic objectives, I believe that the Budget
allocation is far from adequate. For the regeneration of Africa, we are
committed to playing a critical role in several fields. As a background,
after World War 2, we in Africa fought for and got our political
emancipation. This emancipation coincided with the reconstruction of war-
devastated Europe under the Marshall Plan. Rather ironically, this was
deficit spending, but the culmination of which, within 50 years, became the
European Union. This union ensures that there will be no wars ever again in
Europe, but a very large part of Africa remains a theatre of war.

All former colonising powers of Africa are members of the European Union.
In other words, Europe has demonstrated that there should be no rigid
boundaries separating the interconnected dimensions of security, be they of
a political, economic or environmental nature. Even a common currency was
found to be essential for its unity. Today the European Union is so well
organised that farmers in the member states are paid not to grow food, not
to breed sheep and not to breed cattle, whilst we in Africa, once a
continent of colonies in broad terms, remain hungry.

The Marshall Plan was excellent for Europe, but what about Africa? Did not
the war occur in Africa? Were not the human and material resources of
Africa used to fight the war? In 1947 the Truman administration granted a
$17 billion aid programme for Europe, but I say not one dollar for Africa.

Today for us in Africa, the renaissance is a compelling call. For far too
long we have been subjected to the political and economic caprices of the
western world. And for our regeneration to become a reality, we need to
engage in several projects and programmes. We have to enhance our
integration by economic investment and institutional arrangements. There
has to be an intensification of more bilateral, subregional, regional and
continental co-operation. The sharing of developmental skills and
experiences and the transfer of technology must be important components for
our growth and accelerated development. Our technikons and universities
must play a lead in this, and I believe that the DFA must lead the co-
ordination.

Whether we receive support from the UNDP, UNCTAD, or the Commonwealth, we
need to build our own food production capacity. We need modalities and
mechanisms for this and, therefore, the question of developmental planning.
This must lead us to the role of the interventionist state versus the free-
market system or liberalisation as antecedent to globalisation. This should
be part of the agenda of the OAU as an urgent matter. The DFA again must
lead us and co-ordinate with others.

The technological needs of Africa are urgent and immense. Both the EU and
the United States cannot shirk their responsibilities. Both benefited from
colonialism and the slave trade. We do not want to accept hand-outs, but
the exercise of a moral responsibility towards Africa is imperative.

We need to persuade civil society in the West to pressure Western
governments to get involved in the reconstruction and the regeneration of
Africa. The EU and the United States must lead the process again, and I
believe that the DFA has to play a lead in this. There has to be co-
ordination in our communication systems and transport. Our states have to
intervene in the questions of education, land reform and health, with an
emphasis on Aids.

Centres for consultation and planning are essential. We can set an example.
The management and control of the environment is an absolute need. Water
conservation and soil conservation and additions to them are essential.
Toxic waste dumping and land mines in Africa are serious impediments and
obstacles to our regeneration.

I come to the question of wars and civil strife. The question to be asked
is: Whose wars are these? Who benefits from these wars? Internecine wars,
genocide and banditry characterise parts of the African continent. Who are
the beneficiaries of these? All these are possible because of the lack, in
my view, of one major component - the lack of democratic practice and the
lack of human-rights culture; because people can intervene to benefit from
the lack of a democratic practice and the lack of a human rights culture.
We have enough examples to go by - the Tshombes, Savimbis and Sani Abachas.
What I am saying is that we need to initiate a revolutionary ethic among
the states of the continent, and this must be our new cry. We need to build
this ethic, an ethic worthy of Africa, and the role of the DFA, again, is
paramount in this.

I now want to come to the question of economics and beneficiation. I want
to ask a question here and to those outside. Why is the magnitude of
industrialisation that must lead to cohesion, cultural homogeneity,
interdependence and co-existence not present in Africa? If we were to go by
the example of Ghana, it is significant that the cocoa cartels in Europe
were instrumental in bringing down Kwama Nkrumah. The gold in South Africa
is controlled by a cartel based here and in the Western world. Copper in
Zambia is managed by a cartel which is not indigenous to Zambia. Oil in
Nigeria and Angola are not processed for the benefit of the African
continent. Diamonds in South Africa, the DRC and Angola are, in fact, part
of our problem today in the region.

One major ancient field in which we are involved is quinine. Is there any
factory in Africa that has transformed quinine into a drug to fight
malaria? And yet that quinine was and still is available in Africa. Where
is this processed? Have we built industries around quinine? Are there any
collective enterprises between the African continent and the recipients or
beneficiaries of these? Instead the cartels of the West have, in fact,
controlled the prices and the markets. We want to ask the overlords of
Africa some questions. [Time expired.]

Debate suspended.

The House adjourned at 18:04.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 10 MARCH 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 10
         March 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     National House of Traditional Leaders Amendment Bill [B 15
              - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Portfolio Committee
              on Provincial and Local Government - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 20973 of 10
              March 2000.]

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication Board for
     1998-99.

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Nuclear Safety Council for 1998-
     99.

3.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    Report of the Medical Bureau for Occupational Diseases for 1998-
         99.


     (2)    Government Notice No 344 published in the Government Gazette No
         20848 dated 4 February 2000, Mental Health Care Bill published for
         comment.

     (3)    Government Notice No 93 published in the Government Gazette No
         20837 dated 4 February 2000, Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied
         Health Service Professions Amendment Bill published to inform the
         public that the Minister of Health intends to table the Bill in
         Parliament during 2000.

     (4)    Government Notice No 105 published in the Government Gazette No
         20855 dated 11 February 2000, Correction Notice to Government
         Notice No 10 of 7 January 2000 made in terms of the Choice of
         Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1996 (Act No 92 of 1996).

     (5)    Government Notice No R.137 published in the Government Gazette
         No 20880 dated 18 February 2000, Regulations regarding performance
         of community service by dentists made in terms of the Medical,
         Dental and Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974 (Act
         No 56 of 1974).

                            MONDAY, 13 MARCH 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Housing on 9 March 2000 submitted a draft of the
         Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Bill, 2000, and the memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Housing and the Select Committee on Public Services,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

     (2)    The following papers have been tabled and are referred to the
         relevant committees as mentioned below:


         (i)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Health and the Select Committee on Social
              Services:


              (a) Report of the Medical Bureau for Occupational Diseases for
                  1998-99.

              (b) Government Notice No 344 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20848 dated 4 February 2000, Mental Health
                  Care Bill published for comment.

              (c) Government Notice No 93 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20837 dated 4 February 2000, Chiropractors,
                  Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions
                  Amendment Bill published to inform the public that the
                  Minister of Health intends to table the Bill in
                  Parliament during 2000.

              (d) Government Notice No R.137 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 20880 dated 18 February 2000, Regulations
                  regarding performance of community service by dentists
                  made in terms of the Medical, Dental and Supplementary
                  Service Health Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).


         (ii)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
                  on Health, the Select Committee on Social Services and
                  the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality
                  of Life and Status of Women:


              Government Notice No 105 published in the Government Gazette
              No 20855 dated 11 February 2000, Correction notice to
              Government Notice No 10 of 7 January 2000 made in terms of the
              Choice of termination of Pregnancy Act, 1996 (Act No 92 of
              1996).
         (iii)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
                  on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on
                  Economic Affairs:


              Report and Financial Statements of the Nuclear Safety Council
              for 1998-99.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The following private member's legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker on 1 March 2000, in accordance with Rule
         234:


         (i)     Fund for the Victims of Crime Bill (Mr D H M Gibson).


         The legislative proposal has been referred to the Standing
         Committee on Private Members' Legislative Proposals and Special
         Petitions by the Speaker, in accordance with Rule 235.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The Report of the Department of Education for 1998-99 [RP 62-2000].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson and the Deputy Speaker, as co-chairpersons of the
     Joint Rules Committee, present the First Report of the Joint Rules
     Committee, dated 10 March 2000, as follows:


     The Joint Rules Committee, having considered proposals for the
     amendment of the Joint Rules, recommends the following amendments to
     the Joint Rules:


     Joint Rule 71:

     To amend Joint Rule 71 (dealing with the Joint Subcommittee on Support
    for Members) by the addition of the underlined words and the deletion
    of the words in bold brackets:

     Chairpersons
     71.    The [Deputy Speaker and the permanent Deputy Chairperson of the
              Council] chairperson of the Assembly Subcommittee and the
              chairperson of the Council Subcommittee are the co-
              chairpersons of the Joint Subcommittee.

G N M PANDOR     B MBETE
Co-chairperson   Co-chairperson
Joint Rules Committee  Joint Rules Committee
Parliament  Parliament

10 March 2000

Report to be considered.

National Assembly:
1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     Competition Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 10 March 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the subject of the Competition Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         JTM as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 10A
         - 2000].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on Auditor-
     General's Satra Report, dated 13 March 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
         Special Report of the Auditor-General on an investigation at the
         South African Telecommunications Regulatory Authority [RP 47-
         2000], referred to it, reports -


         1. that it has noted the contents of the Auditor-General's report;

         2. that it has noted that other matters raised in the Committee's
              Report, dated 9 November 1999, may be subjected to further
              investigation by the Auditor-General during the normal course
              of the regularity audit; and


         3. that, on the basis of the Auditor-General's report, it cannot
              take the matter any further, and consequently regards the
              matter as closed.

                           TUESDAY, 14 MARCH 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following paper was tabled on 10 March 2000 and is now referred to
     the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and the Select Committee on
     Social Services:

     Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication Board for
     1998-99.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Education:


     (1)    Government Notice No 1398 published in Government Gazette No
         20650 dated 19 November 1999, Notification that the President has
         assented to the Education Laws Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No 48 of
         1999).

     (2)    Government Notice No 1399 published in Government Gazette No
         20651 dated 19 November 1999, Notification that the President has
         assented to the Higher Education Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No 55 of
         1999).

     (3)    Government Notice No 1400 published in Government Gazette No
         20652 dated 19 November 1999, Notification that the President has
         assented to the National Student Financial Aid Scheme Act, 1999
         (Act No 56 of 1999).

     (4)    Government Notice No 1422 published in Government Gazette No
         20666 dated 25 November 1999, Appointment of persons to serve as
         members of the South African Qualifications Authority made in
         terms of the South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act
         No 58 of 1995).


     (5)    Government Notice No 1423 published in Government Gazette No
         20669 dated 10 December 1999, Transfer of funds and other moveable
         assets of the State to the public schools made in terms of the
         South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

     (6)    Government Notice No 1473 published in Government Gazette No
         20692 dated 10 December 1999, National policy regarding
         instructional time for school instructional offerings made in
         terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of
         1996).

     (7)    Government Notice No 82 published in Government Gazette No 20844
         dated 4 February 1999, Norms and standards for educators made in
         terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of
         1996).


