---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 May 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-05-19
---

FRIDAY, 19 MAY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:02.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I give notice that on
the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent statement by Prime Minister Tony Blair, supporting
       President Thabo Mbeki's approach of quiet diplomacy in the Zimbabwean
       crisis;

  (2) believes that -


       (a)  this statement confirms our long held view that quiet diplomacy
           is contributing significantly to the resolution of problems in
           Zimbabwe; and

       (b)  the increasing support of the President's approach reflects the
           ascendancy of the voice of reason;


  (3) welcomes the statements by Mr Blair; and

  (4) hopes that Britain will honour its pledge of financing the land
       reform programme in Zimbabwe.

[Applause.]

Mr M L DA CAMARA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that no member of the ANC in the Mpumalanga legislature rose in
       defence of Premier Mahlangu during a motion of no confidence in the
       Premier, moved by the Leader of the Opposition in that province;

  (2) recognises that Premier Mahlangu appears to be without supporters in
       Mpumalanga, even within his own party;

  (3) observes that the ANC has no answer to the appalling record of
       corruption, mismanagement and broken promises which has marked the
       Premier's time in office; and

  (4) calls on the President to reconsider Premier Mahlangu's appointment
       to this important position.

[Interjections.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Mr Chairman, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the escape of eight awaiting-trial prisoners from
       the holding cells of the Johannesburg magistrates' court recently;
       and

  (2) calls -


       (a)  for strong and urgent co-operation between the Department of
           Justice, the Department of Safety and Security, incorporating
           the SA Police Service, and the Department of Correctional
           Services to deal with escapes while in police custody;

       (b)  on the Department of Safety and Security to investigate fully
           the possibility of police involvement in the escape and, if this
           is found to be the case, to take appropriate disciplinary
           measures against those police officers responsible.

Mr T M GONIWE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the strides made by our Government in fighting crime;

       (b)  the great progress made in fighting vehicle hijackings in
           Gauteng;

       (c)  the elimination of violence and massacres in KwaZulu-Natal;

       (d)  that the Asset Forfeiture Unit has confiscated assets obtained
           from the proceeds of criminal activity worth R75 million to
           date;

       (e)  that major advances have been made in combating drug trafficking
           in the Western Cape; and

       (f)  the continued success of Operation Crackdown;


  (2) believes that these facts bear testimony to the commitment of the ANC-
       led Government to combating crime; and

  (3) commends the Government for its commitment to reduce levels of crime
       and thereby enhance the safety and security of all citizens.

[Applause.]

Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat die grondbesettingsdebakel in Zimbabwe die
       gronddebat in Suid-Afrika en Namibië op die spits dryf;

  (2) daarvan kennis neem dat uitlatings soos dat blankes eiendom
       onregmatig bekom het, blankes grondpryse kunsmatig hoog hou om
       herverdeling te verhoed en afsettings van plase oorwegend onregmatig
       is, onnodige emosies ontketen, wat enersyds kan lei tot
       grondbesettings, soos waarmee in die Noord-Kaap gedreig word, of
       andersyds kan lei tot 'n afname in welwillendheid en verswakkende
       tussengroepverhoudings;

  (3) van mening is dat gewaak moet word teen uitsprake soos dat
       eiendomsbelasting as 'n instrument vir grondherverdeling gebruik sal
       word, die Wet op Verblyfsekerheid versterk moet word sodat
       vervolgings teen boere meer effektief kan wees en die Wet op
       Onteiening gewysig gaan word sodat markwaarde 'n kleiner of selfs
       geen rol sal speel nie; en

  (4) daarop let dat die stilswye van die President oor hierdie kardinale
       aangeleenthede aanleiding gee tot omstandighede wat die stabilitiet
       en sekuriteit van ons samelewing bedreig.

[Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr E A SCHOEMAN: I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day I shall
move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the land occupation debacle in Zimbabwe is bringing the
       land debate in South Africa and Namibia to a head;

  (2) notes that statements such as that whites acquired land unlawfully,
       whites are keeping land prices artificially high in order to prevent
       redistribution, and evictions from farms are predominantly unlawful,
       unleash emotions unnecessarily which, on the one hand, can lead to
       land occupations, as is being threatened in the Northern Cape and, on
       the other, can lead to a decline in goodwill and deteriorating inter-
       group relations;

  (3) is of the opinion that statements such as the following should be
       guarded against, namely that property tax will be used as an
       instrument for land redistribution, that the Security of Tenure Act
       must be strengthened so that prosecutions against farmers can be more
       effective and that the Expropriation Act is going to be amended so
       that market value will play a smaller role, or even no role at all;
       and

  (4) notes that the President's silence on these vital issues is resulting
       in circumstances which threaten the stability and security of our
       society.

[Time expired.]]

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises the significance of a meeting of the coalition of amakhosi
       of South Africa with the President of the Republic and shares the
       concerns of the amakhosi and their communities;

  (2) notes that the concerns of the amakhosi are, inter alia, that the
       certification of the final Constitution is coached in vague terms and
       that the provisions for the role of the amakhosi at local government
       level create confusion;

  (3) further notes that the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act
       does not provide for the role of traditional authorities in local
       government structures, and that the new demarcation incorporates land
       under the jurisdiction of traditional authorities and their
       communities into urban municipalities;

  (4) recognises that traditional authorities are de facto local government
       structures in the rural areas and should be transformed and
       recognised as the primary level of rural local government; and

  (5) calls on the Government to accept the recommendations by the task
       group of amakhosi that local government elections be postponed until
       problems pertaining to the demarcation process and the legislative
       processes for traditional communities have been resolved amicably.

[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr S J LEEUW: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the comments by the spokesperson of the Department of Justice
       and Constitutional Development, Mr Simon Ngomane, regarding the
       implementation of the Domestic Violence Act;

  (2) regards with concern the report that victims and communities still
       prefer to keep quiet and therefore indirectly condone domestic
       violence;

  (3) welcomes the report that the Justice College has trained 850
       magistrates, prosecutors and court clerks, who are, in turn, running
       domestic violence courses to sensitise their colleagues on humane and
       sensitive ways to deal with domestic violence crimes; and

  (4) calls upon all who have knowledge of or are victims of domestic
       violence to speak out in order to bring the perpetrators of this most
       cowardly crime to book.

[Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die VF sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat die omstrede konsepwetgewing op die beheer
       van vuurwapens vandag in die Huis ter tafel gelê word;

  (2) sy kommer uitspreek omdat die doel van die wet is om wettige
       wapenbesit te beperk, terwyl onwettige wapens in oorvloed beskikbaar
       is;

  (3) met kommer kennis neem van die reaksie oor hierdie wetsontwerp onder
       die boeregemeenskap, wat weens die gevaar van plaasmoorde vir
       selfbeskerming en ter beskerming van hul gesinne en plaaswerkers,
       meer as net een wapen per boer nodig het;

  (4) derhalwe besluit dat -


       (a)  geen wapens van bestaande wettige lisensiehouers weggeneem mag
           word -


           (i)   wat nodig is vir selfverdediging in die omstandighede waar
                  so 'n persoon bly nie, met inbegrip van outomatiese en
                  semi-outomatiese wapens; en

           (ii)  wat 'n erfstuk in die familie van so 'n bestaande
                  lisensiehouer is nie; en


       (b)  ruim voorsiening in die wet gemaak moet word vir wapens van
           bestaande lisensiehouers wat kultuuraktiwiteite soos jag en
           skyfskiet beoefen.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day I shall
move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the controversial draft legislation on control over
       firearms is being tabled in the House today;

  (2) expresses its concern because the aim of this legislation is to
       restrict the legitimate possession of firearms while illegal firearms
       are available in abundance;

  (3) notes with concern the reaction to this Bill of the farming community
       which, owing to the danger of farm murders, needs more than one
       firearm per farmer, for self defence and to protect their families
       and farmworkers;

  (4) therefore resolves that -


       (a)  no firearms may be confiscated from existing legitimate licence
           holders which -


           (i)   are needed for self defence, owing to the circumstances in
                  which such a person is living, including automatic and
                  semi-automatic weapons; and

           (ii)  are family heirlooms of such an existing licence holder;
                  and


       (b)  ample provision must be made in the legislation for the firearms
           of existing licence holders who participate in cultural
           activities such as hunting and target shooting.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the acute water shortage in the Nebo area of the Northern
       Province where some of the largest and most densely populated
       villages are to be found;

  (2) believes that the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry should
       explore the prospect of constructing a dam, using the fairly reliable
       Tubatse River; and

  (3) further believes that if water can be brought over long distances,
       for example from KwaZulu-Natal to Gauteng, relief can be brought from
       the Arabie Dam and other large dams of South Africa to this huge
       segment of the South African population.

Ms B O DLAMINI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -
  (1) notes that Mpumalanga premier, Ndaweni Mahlangu, has announced plans
       for the development of rental housing units amounting to R209 million
       in Witbank;

  (2) further notes that this project, part of the Presidential Jobs Summit
       housing project, will lead to job creation and help to reduce the
       housing backlog in the area;

  (3) believes that this is further confirmation of the commitment of the
       ANC government to addressing the needs of the poor and the
       historically disadvantaged; and

  (4) commends the premier and government of Mpumalanga and all those
       involved in bringing about this initiative.

[Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the new evidence implying that the Helderberg was indeed
       carrying a deadly cargo when it crashed into the Indian Ocean in
       1987;

  (2) calls on the Minister of Transport to subject the original flight
       recorder to exactly the same testing and sound enhancement techniques
       to which the duplicate has now been subjected;

  (3) acknowledges that no costs should be spared in pursuing the truth and
       verification of this new evidence found by an American forensic audio
       laboratory;

  (4) given the current crisis of confidence in the Civil Aviation
       Authority over the cash-for-exam papers scandal, calls for the
       removal of the Civil Aviation Authority from the investigation
       process; and

  (5) calls on the Minister to appoint an independent judicial commission
       of inquiry into the disaster in the interests of the loved ones of
       the 158 passengers and crew, who are no closer to the truth than they
       were 13 years ago.
Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the findings of the investigation into school
       report-card fraud in the Western Cape where hundreds of learners got
       into their grades on fake reports;

  (2) acknowledges that this problem of fake reports is not limited to the
       Western Cape;

  (3) notes the damage such acts of dishonesty do to the reputation of the
       teaching profession;

  (4) commends the national Minister of Education who promised urgently to
       look into the matter; and

  (5) urges teachers to realise that giving false reports is tantamount to
       signing a cheque that bounces.

Mrs Z A KOTA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that on Tuesday the United States Agency for International
       Development pledged more than R1,772 billion for social service
       development programmes for South Africa;

  (2) further notes that USaid director, Stacy Jones, in his statement
       said: ``Good progress had been made so far, and I believe the
       increasing speed of implementation of our joint development
       programmes reflects the deepening of our working relationship'';

  (3) acknowledges that this pledge will assist in tackling South Africa's
       most pressing economic, health, education and service delivery
       challenges; and

  (4) welcomes this agreement as it constitutes a significant contribution
       to building a better life for all our people.

         FAST-TRACKING OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT: MUNICIPAL ELECTORAL BILL
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the House ratifies the decision the Joint Programme Subcommittee on
  17 May 2000 took in accordance with Joint Rule 216(2), namely that the
  Local Government: Municipal Electoral Bill, 2000, be fast-tracked by,
  where necessary, shortening any period within which any step in the
  legislative process relating to the Bill must be completed, in order to
  make it possible for the Bill to be passed by both Houses of Parliament
  by 23 June 2000 (see Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p
  410).

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Mr Chairperson, I do not
really know what to do because we have a very good speech prepared, but my
director-general yesterday said to me that when I read a speech, it has no
``oomph'' or punch. So, I said: What should I do? Should I just speak
without looking at my notes? He said: ``Then you are very incoherent.'' So
he has instructed me to memorise my speech, and I will be speaking from
memory. Here I start: Madam Speaker ... [Laughter.] Those are the
instructions of my director-general. Members know what they are like.

We thought that in presenting this input today, we should attempt to judge
our priorities and what we do as a department against some of the national
concerns, and that is job creation and economic growth, redistribution,
environmental protection, the building of a common patriotism, and the
promotion of the African renaissance. I hope that when speakers pick up on
what we do, that, perhaps, they may want to say whether or not we are on
the mark as far as this is concerned.

As everybody knows, a tremendous amount of emphasis has been placed, both
by Government and the private sector, on the role which tourism can play to
grow the economy and also to create jobs. In fact, the quarterly bulletin
of the Reserve Bank reported that in the first nine months of 1999, there
has been a 9% growth in employment in the catering and accommodation
sector. This, of course, is welcome news.

For our part, as Government, we are leaving no stone unturned in order to
ensure that tourism does indeed grow. There is a number of important
statements that we can make here today. The one is that between January and
April this year, we had South Africa's biggest-ever international marketing
campaign, which was a joint campaign between Government and the private
sector.

In this coming year, we will become a truly global player. We will be
spending R225 million on an international marketing campaign.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, you are going to
participate in this debate; and if you are not participating in the debate,
may I request you to give a chance to those people who are going to
participate in the debate to listen to the Minister as he delivers his
speech. Could you kindly respect that. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: Mr Chairperson, thank you very much for that. We have also
made a number of fundamental changes to Satour. It is in the process of
transforming itself into a lean and mean, world-class marketing
organisation, under its new chief executive officer, Moss Mashishi, and it
has also become the embodiment of the partnership between Government and
the private sector with the appointment of the new board, of which the
chairperson is Transnet's Saki Macozoma and the deputy chairperson is
Anglovaal's Rick Menell.

The capacity of the department itself has been enhanced quite
significantly, particularly with the creation of a post of deputy director-
general, and Cabinet recently appointed Dr Patrick Matlou as the new deputy
director-general for tourism. This is the highest post that has ever
existed in the Public Service, dedicated to tourism.

In order to unlock the potential of tourism, in December last year, we
launched the so-called Welcome campaign in an attempt to raise the level of
awareness about the role of tourism among the general public and why
tourism actually should be everyone's business if we want it to play the
role that it can play in our economy.

In order to expose disadvantaged children to tourism, we hope that over the
next period we will be able to send thousands of learners from
disadvantaged areas to spend periods of time in hotels around the country.
Already a pilot project has been completed through the facilitation of the
National Business Initiative. Children from schools in Mitchells Plain,
Mamelodi, and Ndwedwe in KwaZulu-Natal, were recently given the experience
to overnight at hotels run by the Protea group.

This year we will attract new investment in tourism and, at the same time,
create opportunities for disadvantaged people to enter what is still a very
white-dominated industry. As part of the Lubombo spatial development
initiative, we will be putting on the market 16 ecotourism investment
opportunities worth over R650 million in the Greater St Lucia Wetlands Park
area. This we hope will create much needed jobs in a very neglected part of
KwaZulu-Natal.

This year SA National Parks will award concessions to private-sector
operators from no fewer than nine lodge sites, seven of these being in the
Kruger National Park. Seventeen restaurants and 23 shops currently being
operated by SA National Parks will also be offered on public tender. The
growing demand for cultural tourism provides our country with an
opportunity to reclaim our proud history, promote nation-building and
advance the renaissance.

The Soweto heritage route is being upgraded at present at a cost of R16
million. An important element of this project is the development of the
Hector Petersen Memorial Square, which will not only serve to contribute to
the memory of those who paid the ultimate price for our freedom during the
Soweto uprisings, but also boost the township's tourism industry. Already -
and many hon members may not know this - Soweto is the 16th most popular
destination for international visitors to South Africa.

This year we will also begin the process of making accessible the ruins of
our oldest city, Mapungubwe. The site of the famous golden rhino,
Mapungubwe reveals that gold was being mined and traded with the East at
least 500 years before the arrival of Jan van Riebeeck. [Applause.]
However, by far South Africa's richest, most expensive and most significant
cultural treasures, past and present, are the 15 000 rock art sites which
we have inherited. No other country has a larger number of rock art sites.
Perhaps their real significance is that they are the world's oldest record
of human culture and art forms. Yet, so few South Africans have come to
comprehend this staggering wealth. This year some of these sites will be
developed, both to protect them and to allow South Africans and others to
visit them.

As if we were not sufficiently indulged, Unesco declared Sterkfontein and
its environs a world heritage site last year. This is the cradle of
humankind, and the Gauteng province this week released a tender for
Sterkfontein so that we will be able to display, for all the world to see,
some of the world's oldest hominid fossils in a world-class museum.

Sustainable and responsible tourism means that as we grow tourism, we must,
at the same time, ensure that we enhance environmental protection and
promote conservation. I must say that I think that what this country has
achieved over the past five years is something that this House truly can be
proud of, and I would like also to extend my compliments to my predecessor
for much of this work which I will talk about right now.

Just a week ago President Mbeki and President Mogae of Botswana opened, in
a moving ceremony, Africa's first transfrontier park, the Kgalagadi
Transfrontier Park. This three-million-hectare park straddles South Africa
and Botswana, making it even bigger than the Kruger National Park. It
provides not only for the natural migratory patterns of the herds of
gemsbok, but also, and more importantly, for the free and unhindered
movement of tourists between Botswana and South Africa on both sides of the
park. This is a monument to both conservation and regional friendship and
solidarity.

Just two weeks ago, on 2 May, successful talks were held in Harare between
the governments of Zimbabwe, Mozambique and South Africa, at which an
agreement was reached in principle on plans for the creation of the world's
largest wildlife destination. The aim is to link the Kruger National Park
with Gaza province in Mozambique and Gonarezhou in Zimbabwe by bringing
down the fences between the three countries and allowing for the free
movement of both wild animals and visitors. The three countries intend to
sign the protocol in this regard on 19 June at the Kruger National Park.

The Addo Elephant Park in the Eastern Cape is in the process of being
transformed into the Greater Addo National Park by extending its boundaries
right up to the coastline just east of Port Elizabeth. My appreciation goes
to the Eastern Cape government for having agreed to transfer the Woody Cape
Nature Reserve to the SA National Parks for this purpose. As a new ``big
five'' destination, it will rival the Kruger National Park as a tourist
attraction and will serve as an anchor project for tourism development in
the Eastern Cape.

Our 20 national parks are some of the greatest assets for both biodiversity
and tourism in this country. A little-known fact is that more new national
parks have been proclaimed, or existing parks expanded, since the first
democratic elections in 1994 than at any other comparable period in the
history of South Africa's national parks. [Applause.]

Cape Peninsula National Park, Vhembe-Dongola, Agulhas and Namaqua National
Parks are all new parks; and Addo, Marakele, Karoo and Mountain Zebra have
had significant new sections added to them, representing an overall
increase of 188 000 hectares. Another achievement we can be proud of is
that the status Kirstenbosch Gardens now enjoys is that of being voted as
one of the world's seven most magnificent botanical gardens. [Applause.]

Walker Bay, in the Southern Cape, is a highly significant breeding area for
whales which come in from the southern seas. It is one of the few sites in
the world that provides the opportunity for all of us, including
international tourists, to engage in shore-based whale-watching. In recent
years, the owners of recreational boats and other craft like jet skis have
tended to ignore regulations aimed at protecting the whales. It is,
therefore, my intention to prohibit boats and other vessels from entering
the bay during the whaling season, from July to December. In today's
Gazette draft regulations are published for public comment in this regard.
[Applause.]

The protection of our 3 000 km coastline requires more attention. During my
recent walk along the Wild Coast, I witnessed the uncaring and
irresponsible attitude of 4x4 drivers on the beaches. [Interjections.]
While some drivers take extreme care, others seem to take pleasure in
driving over our sensitive dunes, well above the high-water mark. I will
shortly be publishing regulations aimed at the total prohibition of private
vehicles on our beaches. [Applause.] Derek, will you trade your vehicle in?
[Interjections.]

Brown environmental issues, such as air pollution and waste management,
deserve far more attention in this country, as they impact directly on the
quality of life of our citizens, in particular those living in
underprivileged areas.

It is simply unacceptable to allow the air we breathe to become more and
more polluted and our streets and countryside to become filthier and
filthier. There is a rampant lawlessness amongst industrial polluters and a
don't-care attitude amongst many citizens. The rot must stop.

It is our intention to put industrial polluters on terms this year.
Following the recent chlorine leak from the Polifin plant in KwaZulu-Natal,
the department will be withdrawing its permit until the department is
satisfied that sufficient preventative steps have been put in place to
protect the public. [Applause.]

On Tuesday next week, we will release draft regulations aimed at
prohibiting the use of plastic carrier bags as we know them. [Applause.]
Cabinet has approved the draft regulations, and the public and the industry
will be given 90 days within which to comment. The Deputy Minister will
elaborate on some of these issues.

South Africa's fishing industry will also receive special attention this
year. This R2,5 billion industry, which provides 25 000 direct jobs and
probably 60 000 indirect jobs, with an additional 750 000 recreational
fishers, has an urgent need for stability, certainty and transparency. On
the occasion of this debate, we announce the following as the way forward.
Firstly, this year we will issue medium-term to long-term fishing quotas.
These will be nontransferable and conditional on compliance with a set of
criteria. In July this year we will publish a policy framework for the
allocation of each species. This will set out the relative quotas for
large, medium, small and subsistence fishers, and we will remove the purely
discretionary and ad hoc decision-making processes that everybody has been
subjected to in the past.

The grading of the players in the industry will be underscored by proper
pricing of fishing rights and applications. This is to encourage small-
scale and subsistence fishers, while limiting applicants for macroquotas to
the genuine players in the industry. Through this we hope to start to weed
out the paper quota holders so that the people who are genuinely interested
in the industry can start fishing.

We are doing a great deal to increase and to improve the capacity within
the department. This year Cabinet appointed Mr Horst Kleinschmidt in the
newly created post of deputy director-general so as to elevate the status
of marine and coastal management from that of a chief directorate to a full
branch within the department. A dedicated rights-allocation unit will be
established to drive the transformation of the industry and a high-powered
legal unit is being established to ensure the requisite capacity on the
part of the department to deal with the proper implementation and upholding
of the law. The Deputy Minister will give further details on this matter.

In order to improve our service to the public and ensure value for money to
the taxpayer, the department is undergoing a modernisation process. The SA
Weather Bureau will no longer be a chief directorate in the department. We
will be tabling a Bill before Parliament later this year to establish the
Weather Bureau as a self-standing and professional statutory body. This
will allow it to focus on its core business of weather monitoring and
forecasting. It will become financially more viable by implementing user-
charges for commercial enterprises requiring the services of the Weather
Bureau, as is the case elsewhere in the world. It will continue to be
wholly state-owned.

The management and maintenance of the department's seven ships have already
been outsourced. Steps will be taken to transform the Antarctica programme
from a directorate in the department to a dedicated statutory research
agency. The State Information and Technology Agency, Sita, has been
contracted to transform the department into a so-called paperless office by
introducing cutting-edge information technology into all aspects of the
department's work.

May I express my gratitude to Deputy Minister Mabudafhasi, Director-General
Chippie Olver, members of the department and my own staff for the
professional and dedicated support with which they provide me. May I take
this opportunity to call on you, Chairperson ... My speech notes say
``Madam Speaker''. Can I just be allowed to say ``Madam Speaker'', because
this is important! [Interjections.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Are you implying that he is Madam Speaker? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER: Chairperson, I am not implying that at all. [Interjections.]
May I call on Madam Speaker and all members of this House to join us in the
rewarding campaign to protect and restore South Africa's proud cultural and
natural heritage. I urge all members, for the sake of the tourism industry
and for their own sake, to take a long and extended holiday. [Applause.]

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Chairperson, the hon the Minister expressed reservations
about his style of delivery, but I do not think he needs to be too troubled
about his style, as long as the content of what he delivers is good, and
that content was good. We do congratulate the hon the Minister for the new
and fresh approach which he has brought to this department. We can
associate ourselves with most, if not all, of what he spoke about this
morning.

In the short time allocated to us, my colleague the hon Opperman will be
dealing with marine and coastal management, the hon Semple will be dealing
with tourism, which the hon the Minister quite rightly dealt with at some
length this morning, while I should like to concentrate on the wider issue
of sustainability and the provision or nonprovision made for it in the
budget.

According to the latest figures issued by the department of tourism, the
percentage of tourists who visit this country for reasons of its scenic
beauty and wildlife has risen to just under 75%, in other words all of
South Africa's other attractions, including its diversity of cultures, its
relative inexpensiveness, etc, account for only about a quarter of the
visitors to our shores.

Therefore it is very easy for us to identify the goose that is laying the
golden eggs. My concern is the sustainability of our care for that goose.
For example, are we as a nation satisfied that the scenic attractions which
bring tourists flocking to our land are adequately protected against
ruthless exploitation by irresponsible and greedy property developers? And
are we satisfied with the meagre 7% of our land surface which has been set
aside for nature conservation? I would submit that we cannot be satisfied.

On the amount of land conserved for posterity, and which should include
those wonderful vistas and attractions which tourists find so irresistible,
we fall woefully short of the minimum of 10% which has been suggested by
conservation bodies and which even densely populated countries such as
Japan have more than ascribed to.

One has only to travel up the much publicised Garden Route to witness how
greedy and unsustainable development has ruined what used be one of our
premier beauty spots. The area known as the Wilderness which, as its name
suggests, owed its popularity to the untamed nature of the terrain, is
being steadily and remorselessly buried under layers of concrete and tar.
It is no longer a wilderness to be marvelled at, but an overcrowded
hotchpotch of holiday homes, shops and apartments. No attempt has been made
to strike a balance between conservation and development. It is all on the
side of development. This is but one of many examples, and by no means the
worst.

We have been warned that with the world's population growth and the demands
which are being made on land, we are the last generation that will be able
to make a difference. I submit that, in view of the importance of tourism
in the battle to raise the standard of living of all our people, the hon
the Minister and his department should make a concerted effort for more
suitable land to be brought under the custodianship of his department. The
figure of 10% of land for conservation which I have mentioned, should be
set as the minimum target. Moreover, the consequences of the kind of
unsustainable development which has characterised our landscape in the past
should be addressed with more determination. The private sector could play
a greater role in this regard. For example, the National Trust ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M U KALAKO: Madam Speaker and hon members, it is very important to take
stock of what has happened since the Marine Living Resources Act has been
in place.

The development of the Act was one of the democratic and transparent
processes that have been displayed by South African communities, with the
participation of representatives from different political parties and other
stakeholders. Indeed, it was a very tedious process, but showed good
results in the end. The implementation of the Act, which deals with quite
highly complex international issues of marine resources, which have not
been mastered even by the so-called developed countries, amid the
reconstruction of the industry, is not yet what we envisaged.

However, over the past six months, we as the ANC have been analysing the
problems that have bedevilled the industry rather than sitting down and
complaining. The Ministry rescued the situation on several occasions, while
the department was dragging its feet. The failure to implement the Act is
twofold. Firstly, that created by administration, and, secondly, that
created by a failure to analyse the workload created by the new Act and to
create an administration that will be able to administer and implement it.

Marine and Coastal Management failed to develop any strategic plan on how
to implement the Act and deal with the restructuring of the industry as
envisaged in the Act and in line with the policy of the Government. It is
very clear that we have given the task to people who have no understanding
of interpreting our policies and putting them into motion. This creates an
enormous task for the Ministry.

The other problem is the capacity in the department, which is clearly
indicated in the way allocations were made over the past years. People were
allocated quotas twice, received permits and then, after the fishing, told
that they had not been successful. Their quotas for fishing were allocated
to the wrong companies. Another problem is the understanding, in the
economic sense, of what they are handling and its contribution to the GDP
of the country. The other weakness of the department is in the
understanding and following of procedures. As we all know, the department
is still under the old order. They undermine procedure and this opens us up
to litigation, resulting in most cases in a negative impact on
restructuring and delivery.

While we are critical of the failures of the department, we must also
understand the workload created by the new Act. Before the new Act, things
were done differently and work was allocated to different areas. For
example, prawn-netting and other fishing in the KwaZulu-Natal area were
delegated to the Natal Parks Board. The allocation of quotas was done by
the Quota Board and the department dealt with nonquota species and the
administration of permits. Today, all this work has been allocated to
Marine and Coastal Management, without additional staff.

So, while we criticised the failure of the department to implement the Act,
we expected the impossible from the department, as it is understaffed and
is dealing with a complex new role. Firstly, it has to implement a
comprehensive and complicated new structure under the Marine Living
Resources Act of 1998. Secondly, the department has to develop the policies
under the Act which we did not care to add flesh to ourselves. Thirdly, it
has to manage new structures, such as the consultative advisory forum and
the fisheries transformation council, without legal and administrative
support and a clear mandate to such structures. Fourthly, it has to survey
the needs and wants of all people who gave us the mandate to govern.
Fifthly, it has to control and negotiate with foreign governments on
fishing rights without the support of the requisite Ministries and
diplomatic personnel. Sixthly, it has to produce regulations and compliance
measures required by the new Act. Finally, but most important of all, it
has to put the allocation and the restructuring of the industry in the
framework of the RDP and macroeconomic strategy of the Government.

We need to understand the failures of the department to develop a strategic
plan for the implementation of the Act, understand the complexity of the
fishing industry and redistribution, and understand ``the long walk to
fishing'' for those who were marginalised, and SMMEs in general. The ANC is
seeking long-term solutions to sustain fishing in order to give good
results for the long journey. The analysis of these failures is an
indication of the commitment of our party to the ideas that are enshrined
in the RDP, in our macroeconomic strategy, in the Act and in our manifesto.
The darkness of the past shall never be victorious over the rise of the
dawn, nor shall the dark day of despair resist the season of hope.

While our people were disappointed on many occasions by our machinery for
delivering, they identified, at the same time, the reasons for the failure
to deliver and understood the difficult process which the country is
undergoing. In conclusion, I want to commend the new Deputy Director-
General of Marine and Coastal Management for the work he has done so far,
under difficult conditions, with the support of his staff. He is in the
process of flushing out ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Nkk L R MBUYAZI: Somlomo neNdlu ehloniphekile, ngifisa ukubonga
ukukhushulwa kwezimali kulo mnyango njengoba zikhushuliwe, ikakhulu ukuze
kubhekwane nezinto eziningi ezibhekene nalo mnyango. (Translation of Zulu
paragraph follows.)

[Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Thank you, Chairperson and honourable House. I would like
to say thank you for the increase in the budget of this department, as it
will enable the department to perform other services well.]

The environmental co-ordination and communication programme has the
intention of informing the public about the National Environmental
Management Act and sustainable development, but all too often the
information that is submitted to the public does not reach the community at
grass-roots level. It remains, however, at the level of direct
stakeholders. The department has to ensure that its communication strategy
reaches all South Africans, from stakeholders to the local communities in
rural areas. Another problem is that grass-roots communities are not being
informed of the idea and practice of sustainable development. Furthermore,
the Government has to combine its integrated rural development strategy
with the concept of sustainable development. It will only be in this way
that rural development of our grass-roots communities will be successful.

Njengoba sazi ukuthi iNingizimu Afrika ifuna ukubamba le ngqungquthela
enkulukazi, ye-Rio+10 Conference, sifisa ukuba abantu baziswe kabanzi
ngokuthi kubhekeke ukuthi benzeni phansi laphaya ezinhlakeni zasezindaweni
nakohulumeni basekhaya. Amakhansela kudingeka abe nolwazi lokuthi kufanele
enzenjani uma ethuthukisa leyo miphakathi.

NomThetho-sivivinywa woMasipala sifisa sengathi ungangena kakhulu kulolu
daba lokuthuthukisa okuzohlala isikhathi eside. Njengoba kuza le
ngqungquthela lapha kithina kuzofuneka sazi ukuthi, njengeNingizimu Afrika,
simi kanjani ekongeni nasekuthuthukiseni umphakathi wethu.

Maqondana nezasemanzini nokudoba nazo zonke izinto ezinjalo, nakhona
ngifisa ukukuncoma ukukhushulwa kwale mali ngendlela ekhushulwe ngayo yaba
yizigidi ezingama-R27. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[As we know South Africa wants to host the Rio+10 Conference, and we want
people at community and local government level to be informed of what is
expected of them. Councillors should be given knowledge so that they will
know how to go about improving their communities.

We wish the Bill on municipalities to deal thoroughly with the permanent
development of our communities. As we will be hosting this coming
conference, we as South Africans should know where we stand with regard to
the development of our society.

I wish to congratulate the department on the increase in its budget to R27
million for water, fishing and other similar necessities.]

While this programme has been increased, we have to question whether this
increase is sufficient to protect our marine living resources. Every day we
read stories about large-scale poaching of perlemoen, crayfish and other
coastal resources, which cannot be stopped owing to capacity and resource
problems in marine law enforcement agencies. The department urgently has to
take steps to increase the resources available to the enforcement agencies
to stop the illegal poaching of our coastal resources.
Abantu bakithi mabanikezwe futhi namathuba okuthi bakwazi ukuyozidobela,
benze nakho konke okunye. Mabanikezwe namathuba okuthi bangene kule mboni
yokudoba.

Okunye engifisa ukungena kukhona kumaqondana nezangoma zezulu. Kuhle ukuthi
abantu bakithi basheshe baluthole ulwazi lokuthi kuzokwenzakalani.
Akufanele kungenwe ngoba sekungenwa ngezibhicongo, sekuvele izikhukhula,
kwavela imimoya neziphepho ezithile. Kuhle abantu basheshe batshelwe ukuthi
mabaqheluke kuleyo ndawo ngoba kuzobe kukhona ukuthi nokuthi.
 
Siyakuncoma kakhulu ukuthi umnyango vele uyasebenza kulolu daba. Sengathi
kungaqhutshekwa nakho ukuze kube khona ... (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Our people should be given opportunities to fish and perform other similar
services. They should also be given opportunities to play a role in the
fishing industry.

I would like to comment on climatology. It is good for our people to know
what to expect from the weather. They should know if a flood, heavy rain or
a hurricane is coming. They should be told in advance so that they will
stay away from areas where these disasters are likely to strike.

We are pleased that the department is now working on this issue. We wish
the department to take this further so that there is ...]

... early warning to the affected communities, including our rural
communities and emergency services. The communication function is therefore
crucial and the department should pay specific attention to ensuring that
affected people are warned long before an identified disaster strikes.

Kwezokuvakasha, maqondana nokuthi imali yakhona ikhushulwe ngale zigidi
zamarandi eziyi-11 lokho kuyithuba elihle kakhulu lokuthi abantu bakithi
bangene kule mboni yezokuvakasha, ikakhulukazi abantu bakithi abakade
besasalele emuva maqondana nezokuvakasha. Siyazi kakhulu ukuthi ngobani
abangene kule ndaba.

Ngike ngaya kwi-Tourism Indaba, eThekwini. Okungiphathe kabi lapho ngukuthi
ngithe uma ngifika khona ngathola ukuthi amatafula akhona akusiwo awabantu
bakithi. Abantu bakithi abanawo amatafula kuleya ndawo, kepha silethe
abantu abaqhamuka ezindaweni ezikude ukuba bazobona ukuthi kwenzekani
eNingizimu Afrika maqondana nezokuvakasha.

Okubuhlungu kakhulu ngukuthi abantu bakithi abakangeni kule ndawo. Ayikho
into ekhombisayo ukuthi uma abantu bethi bazovakashela eNingizimu Afrika
bazofike bayibone ngempela yini indawo lapho mayelana nokuthi kwezokulala
sebekhona abantu bakithi asebengene kuzona, kanye nokuthi kwezokuthutha
abantu bakithi sebengene nakuzona.

Ngakho-ke kukhona izinto ezibuhlungu, ikakhulu kulesi khumulo sezindiza
sakithi, khona la. Abantu bakithi abavunyelwe ukuthi bangaba nezimoto ezima
laphaya kulesiya sikhumulo sezindiza zikwazi ukuthutha abantu zize lapha.
[Ihlombe.] Izinkampani ezikhona laphaya ngezabamhlophe, kunalokho abantu
bakithi banikezwe ukuthi bangahweba uma nje mhlawumbe umuntu
ezintshontshela, ahambe afike abeke bese eziphumela, kodwa hhayi ukuthi abe
nenkampani yakhe emileyo.

Ngakho-ke kule ndaba yezokuvakasha, nginxusa futhi nemiphakathi yakithi
ukuthi ake yakhe izindlu zakithi zesintu ukuze kuthi abantu abavakashayo
kade behlala emahhotela aphambili, besuka phesheya lapho behlala
kumahhotela akhona omhlabuhlangene, bafike lapha babone i-Afrika njengoba
injalo. [Ihlombe.]

Sithi-ke lo mnyango, njengoba ukhushulelwe kangaka le mali, awubalekelele
laba bantu ukuze bakhe izindawo zokuhlala. Kukhona umama okhona lapha
eKhayelitsha noma eGugulethu oseqale kancane umsebenzi wokuthi enze indawo
yokuhlala nokuthi abantu bafike badle, kodwa lowo mama udinga ukuthi
athuthukiswe. Kukhona nentombazane encane lapha esiyitholileyo ezama
izindlela zokuthi ipheke iphe abantu ukudla. Ikufundele lokhu kupheka futhi
iyapheka kahle kakhulu. Abantu abanjalo mabanikezwe phela leyo mali yokuthi
bakwazi ukuthi balekelelwe. Uma kufika abantu bokuvakasha abayithole le
mali, baxhaswe. Kukhona abantu bakithi koMkhuze lena nakwezinye izindawo,
nabo mabanikezwe labo bantu ukuze bakwazi ukuxhaseka ngale mali
yezokuvakasha, njengoba kufanele.

Yingakho-ke bengifisa ukuthi ngikwedlulise lokhu ukuthi siyamncoma kakhulu
uNgqongqoshe, kodwa abantu bakithi mabafakwe. Ngiyazi ukuthi uNgqongqoshe
uyimelele indaba yokuthuthukisa abantu bakithi kodwa naye ngiyethemba
ukuthi akathokozanga njengoba wayefika laphaya eThekwini engafici ngisho
noyedwa nje umuntu omnyama owayenendawo, kunalokho kwakuyilaba bantu
bamahhotela aphambili nalaba bezindawo esezivele zithuthukile - ondlebe
zikhany'ilanga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[This is a great opportunity for our people to take part in the tourist
industry, besides the fact that the budget of this department has been
increased by R11 million. This is a great opportunity, because most of our
people were left behind as far as tourism was concerned. We know the people
who are involved in this issue.

I attended the Tourism Indaba in Durban. What surprised me was that the
places where or tables on which street traders sell their products were not
owned by our people. Our people do not have their own tables in the
streets. This was not good since we brought people from other countries to
see what was taking place in our country as far as tourism was concerned.
What is more painful is that our people are not involved in the tourist
business. There is nothing that people from outside can see which shows
them that they are in South Africa, because when it comes to hotel and
transport services, our people are excluded.

There are painful things happening at our airports. Our people are not
allowed to transport people from airports. [Applause.] Only white-
controlled companies operate at airports. Black people are given the right
to transport people on a casual basis. They cannot have stable companies
operating at airports.

Therefore, on the issue of tourism, I appeal to our communities to build
traditional huts so that visitors from overseas, who have been staying in
expensive hotels, will see Africa as it was before. [Applause.]

We say, since this department has received a big budget increase, that it
should assist black people so that they can build these hotels. There is a
middle-aged woman who stays either in Khayelitsha or Gugulethu township.
She has started to build holiday accommodation in which people will be
served with food. She needs to be sponsored. There is also a young woman we
have recently heard from who is trying to find ways of cooking and selling
food. She is a trained cook and she cooks very well. Such people should be
sponsored with money to enable them to improve their service. When visitors
come here, our people should be sponsored with money. There are a number of
such good people in Mkhuze and many other places. They must be given
assistance from the tourist fund. This should be done because it is a must.

That is why I have been eager to mention that we congratulate the hon the
Minister on this improvement. However, we want our people to be included in
this industry. I know that the hon the Minister stands for the improvement
of our communities. I am sure that he was not happy when he arrived in
Durban, only to find that not a single black person owned a kiosk or table
where street traders sell their products. Instead, people who were there
were the owners of big hotels and other whites who were already rich.
[Applause.]]

Mrs J CHALMERS: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, members of this House, the
following statement is made in the annual report of the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


  Before 1994, when South Africa held its first democratic elections, the
  policy on natural resources was to set them aside for the benefit of a
  few.

This is no longer the case. Our aim and objective now is to conserve those
resources and use them sustainably for the benefit of all the people of our
country. South Africa is extraordinarily rich in its biological diversity.
It has the third highest level of biodiversity in the world. It has more
than twice the number of plants found in the USA, a country over five times
the size of South Africa.

We have the privilege of having two internationally renowned biodiversity
hot spots, the succulent Karoo and the Cape floral kingdom, as well as five
other African hot spots which occur wholly or partially in South Africa.
Visitors come, whether as tourists, scientists or students, from all over
the world to experience our flora and fauna. It is truly a treasure-trove
that needs to be guarded with dedicated care.

But what needs to be recognised is that our biodiversity, and the land that
supports it, is not only to be considered for the pleasure of its visual
beauty, or the scientific academic value of its diversity, or even, major
consideration though this is, for its touristic value. What we must also
consider with the utmost seriousness is that if humankind is to survive on
this earth, there is a limit to the number of species we can lose through
carelessness and greed, a limit to the amount of soil we can lose through
overfarming and stupidity and a limit to the wetlands we can lose through
ignorance and wrongful use, for these assets are irreplaceable essentials
to our very survival.

Internationally there has been a growing recognition that our earth is at
risk. The distress signals have become clearer. Global deforestation has
meant increasingly severe and devastating floods. Shipping industries have
collapsed through overfishing. A pall of smoke hangs over the Amazon
rainforest where fires are set to clear the land. The list is endless.

In 1992 at the Rio conference the United Nations brought together 178
governments to focus on development and the environment. Five documents
were adopted, including Agenda 21, an action plan and blueprint for
sustainable development, and the Convention on Biological Diversity. South
Africa is a global partner to sustainable development and a signatory to
the biodiversity convention, as well as to the convention on
desertification.

Our Government is taking our responsibilities as a member of these and
other environmental conventions extremely seriously. It is responding by
passing new and appropriate laws, by monitoring and instituting research,
and by raising awareness through education.

We have a particular responsibility to recognise and foster traditional
methods and the indigenous knowledge of our people and their communities,
emphasising the particular role of women, with regard to the conservation
of biological diversity and the sustainable use of biological resources. We
need to ensure an opportunity for the participation of those groups in the
economic and commercial benefits derived from the use of such traditional
methods and knowledge.

South Africa is not a land of rich agricultural potential. Nearly 91% of
the country is arid, semi-arid or dry subhumid and falls broadly within the
UN Convention to Combat Desertification definition of ``affected
drylands''. It is estimated that water erosion affects 6,1 million hectares
of cultivated soil, and wind erosion affects an estimated 10,9 million
hectares. This results in an estimated mean annual soil loss in South
Africa of 2,5 tons per hectare, which is eight times faster than it is
being replaced by natural processes. This is a loss we can ill afford.

The objective of the Convention to Combat Desertification is to combat
desertification and mitigate the effects of drought, particularly in
Africa, within the framework of an integrated approach which is consistent
with Agenda 21. It focuses on process and ensuring public participation in
the development and implementation of plans to combat desertification - a
bottom-up approach.

The substantial report on land degradation in South Africa, produced last
year, has followed this directive, incorporating the results of 34
workshops participated in by 453 people drawn from all over the country. It
is a most remarkable document. Now the challenge is to implement a national
action programme and to produce a White Paper in due course.

Finally, let me say that internationally there is a growing recognition
that it is far less expensive to halt destructive practices than it is to
try to put things back later. It is exciting in this country to see that
recognition of that fact is being translated into environmental laws and
practices - and here our Minister is a prime mover - that are laying a
positive and permanent foundation for future generations in South Africa.
[Applause.]

Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, South Africa is ranked 25th in the world's
top tourism destinations, but we rank 42nd when it comes to tourism earners
in the world. We should ask: Why?

It is interesting to note that 75% of all South Africa's foreign arrivals
are from Africa, and that they spend an average of R1 081 a day, while the
average British visitor spends only R568 a day. Therefore, the African
tourist market - the tourist from our continent - needs to be expanded and
marketed vigorously.

Tourism brings an estimated R20 billion a year into our economy. For every
eight tourists who visit South Africa, one new job is created. However,
South Africa attracts only 0,2% of the annual estimated 300 million
tourists in the world. We must ask: Why? Where are we failing? Is it our
marketing? Is it our service? Is it perhaps our people, or crime, or
standards?
Of course, sentiments such as those expressed by the Minister in his speech
at the indaba in Durban recently, stating that tourism would not be
adversely affected by small hitches such as what happened in Zimbabwe
recently, does not help either, especially as the exhibitors from Zimbabwe
at the indaba proved that it did affect them. Some had cancellations of up
to 40%.

The growth of 40% in foreign arrivals since 1994, has also inspired 64
schools around the country to now offer travel and tourism as matric
subjects. This is a trend that needs to be expanded and strengthened.
Tourism or hospitality training enables a person to be successfully
employed, be an entrepreneur in many aspects of life and enter the trade
market with confidence.

But why do those tourists who come to South Africa come here? It is, inter
alia, because some 18 000 plant species are found in South Africa, of which
80% occur nowhere else in the world; our wildlife is beyond comparison; our
weather is unbeatable; and our scenery is breathtaking. However, there are
a few crucial points that need to be taken note of. The unfettered growth
in the world's population, especially South Africa's population, is killing
our natural assets and resources.

Population growth is among a handful of underlying conditions that
determine the type and intensity of human activities that lead to
biodiversity loss. In 1960, 70% of the world's population lived in
developing countries; today it is 80%, and these countries account for 95%
of population growth. Can South Africa afford to let this continue in our
land? Population size itself is an important determinant of the scale of
human utilisation of natural resources, resources upon which other species
depend as well.

Terwyl kommentators juig as die landsekonomie met 3,5% groei, sien weinig
raak dat die landsbevolking terselfdertyd met 'n geskatte 4% gegroei het en
die per capita-groei dus in werklikheid negatief was. Wil Suid-Afrika
voortgaan om soos Indië pro rata agteruit te gaan weens te veel mense en 'n
te hoë bevolkingsgroei? Dit plaas te veel druk op ons natuurlike
hulpbronne.

So 'n situasie sal meebring dat minder toeriste na Suid-Afrika kom, omdat
ons natuurlike skoonheid - ons water, plantspesies, dierelewe ensovoorts -
uitgeput sal raak. Die mensemassa sal die land tot niet laat gaan,
vernietig, opeet en opgebruik. As die Regering ernstig is oor die uitbouing
van die toerismepotensiaal, as die Regering ernstig is om 'n beter lewe vir
al Suid-Afrika se mense te skep - en ek glo hulle is - sal daar met die
innoverende en oorredende bemarking van 'n idee soos ``'n kleiner gesin kan
'n beter lewe en meer geleenthede tot welvaart bied'', begin moet word.

Ek pleit vir hierdie land met sy hulpbronne en natuurskoon se voortbestaan.
Ek vra die Regering om nie so 'n doodse stilte te handhaaf oor hierdie
belangrike aspek nie. Die Regering moet sterk standpunt inneem teen die
roekelose lewenswyse van baie van ons mense. Ons moet die etniese stigma
verwyder wat onder die dekmantel van kultuur steeds die werk in dié verband
pootjie. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[While commentators cheer when the country's economy grows by 3,5%, few of
them notice that at the same time the country's population increased by an
estimated 4%, and that the per capita growth therefore was in fact
negative. Does South Africa want to continue to deteriorate pro rata, like
India, because of too many people and a population growth rate which is too
high? This places too much pressure on our natural resources.

Such a situation will result in fewer tourists coming to South Africa,
because our natural beauty - our water, flora and fauna, etc - will become
depleted. The mass of people will ruin, destroy, devour and use up the
country. If the Government is serious about developing our tourism
potential, if the Government is serious about creating a better life for
all of South Africa's people - and I believe they are - then they will have
to start with the innovative and persuasive marketing of an idea such as
``a smaller family can offer a better life and more opportunities for
prosperity''.

I am appealing for the survival of this country with its resources and
natural beauty. I am asking the Government not to maintain such a deathly
silence on this important aspect. The Government should take a strong stand
against the reckless lifestyle of many of our people. We must remove the
ethnic stigma which, under the guise of culture, is still hampering work in
this regard. [Time expired.]]

Ms S B NQODI: Madam Speaker, history tells us that the past 300 years have
seen many improvements in the conditions of life of humanity and this is
what we term ``development''.

The few positive effects of development, as we live and experience them on
a daily basis, are that, unlike in primitive societies and owing to many
factors, we are witnessing unprecedented population growth all over the
world. This is due to improved medical care, which has led to the
eradication of dreaded diseases such as polio and leprosy.

The other important factor is the advancement of technology, which has led
to industrialisation, job creation and urbanisation. Because of this we
also experience high levels of literacy and job security. This, indeed, is
good for our generation.

However, the other side of the coin of development gives us a negative and
gloomy picture about our future survival. The emissions from factories and
automobiles are polluting the very water we drink and the air we breathe.
They contribute to the greenhouse effect and the destruction of the ozone
layer, which, in turn, is causing climate change worldwide. This then
causes a change in rainfall patterns. Hence the El Niños and the widespread
destruction we are experiencing as a result of tornadoes these days. The
effect is then a change in the livelihoods of many of our rural communities
which make a living out of agriculture.

Furthermore, this always ends people migrating to cities and towns in
search of greener pastures in the form of jobs. This then creates another
problem, and that is the ever-increasing mushrooming of shacks or ``African
cities'', as one speaker once termed them, on the peripheries of our cities
and towns where our people live in unhealthy and unsafe conditions.

With this introduction I am trying to give members a picture of the
environment we live in as a result of development, and by this I am not
implying that development should come to a stop. As Brundtland puts it:


  The environment is where we all live; and development is what we all do
  in attempting to improve our lot within that abode. These two are
  inseparable.


Agenda 21, a global action plan and a blueprint for sustainable development
mentioned earlier by speakers before me, expects of us as a country to
carry out and implement the 1992 Rio de Janeiro conference agreements.

Since 1994 our Government has developed new policies based on the
principles of sustainable development. The Constitution itself acknowledges
the importance of sustainable development. The new policies, however, are
not integrated in a unified whole. Hence the newly developed integrated
development plan at local government level. South Africa therefore urgently
needs to co-ordinate and integrate sectoral policies because sustainable
development is equal to integrated decision-making.

As we are all aware, the major challenge and priority facing this
Government today, is the total eradication of poverty. The war we have to
wage against poverty in order to achieve sustainable development,
necessitates and demands an integrated, multisectoral, interdepartmental
and intergovernmental approach in the spirit of co-operative governance.
This is what the RDP and its strategy for implementation, Gear, calls for.

For us to do so, we need to educate our people and raise their awareness of
environmental issues. Furthermore, we need to put in place some machinery
for the implementation of Agenda 21. We also need to capacitate the
institutions and organs of delivery at all levels of governance. This calls
for adequate budgeting for these structures in our integrated development
plan, especially at local government level.

One of the functions of this department entails the quality and protection
of the environment. This function is located in Programme 6 of this
department's Vote. Although we highly appreciate the increase of R4,1
million, the committee feels it is still underbudgeted for, considering the
mammoth task and challenges facing it, such as massive pollution
management, waste management reduction, etc.

The committee is equally concerned about the budget allocation for
Programme 2 of this department, which is about environmental co-ordination
and communication. Once again, compared to last year's budget, the
programme was fortunate to receive an increase of R8,9 million. I wish to
highlight the fact that this is the directorate assigned with the
responsibility to develop a national strategy on sustainable development,
which will enhance this country's chances of hosting the second earth
summit, or the Rio +10 conference, mentioned earlier, in the year 2002.

Amongst other things, it has to alert and prepare our communities and local
authorities about the environmental issues which will be reviewed,
appraised and focused on in the national state of the environment report
which is to be tabled in two years' time during that particular conference.
Surely this calls for adequate budgeting for such things as personnel,
infrastructure, travel costs, subsistence allowances, publications, public
education and awareness campaigns, to mention a few.

Local authorities play a key role at the local implementation level of
Agenda 21 and they therefore need to be adequately financed and resourced
by the national Government to enable them to deliver. Knowing and
understanding the limited financial resources with which this Government
has to operate, I think it is proper to remind the House that environmental
issues are cross-cutting and that they deserve to be considered by all
people, including the private sector. They are shared responsibilities.

I support the Vote. [Applause.]
Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, the 36% increase in the Vote
must be seen in context, as the department continues with its most
ambitious world marketing campaign ever.

This increase clearly illustrates the repositioning of the department as a
core department in Government. This is the department that has created, and
can continue to create, jobs in South Africa. There is, however, a greater
need for the marketing of South Africa in Africa. It is significant that
the department's annual report indicates that the average African visitor
to South Africa spends almost twice per day what the average British
visitor spends. This indicates that there is a huge potential market for
visitors from Africa, which must be targeted.

We share the department's concern that the departure tax, as announced by
the Minister of Finance, is not aimed at increasing the marketing of
tourism. This should be a dedicated tax used solely for the marketing of
South Africa.

There are many aspects relating to the environment which are encouraging.
The department is to be complimented on its achievements in this regard.
The continued instability and litigation surrounding the fishing industry
is, however, a major concern and can result in the over-extended Marine and
Coastal Management branch grinding to a halt.

Also in this regard, the department's inability, owing in the main to
budgetary constraints, to prevent the poaching and illegal trading of
abalone and rock lobster is a further serious concern. We accordingly
support the department's attempts to curb these practices and call upon the
SA Police Service and the Department of Justice to ensure that penal
provisions contained in the Marine Living Resources Act, which provides for
fines of up to R5 million, are imposed to the fullest extent.

In conclusion, we wish to congratulate the Minister and his department on
their achievements during the past year, as well as on the very attractive
and highly informative annual report, which I would encourage all members
to peruse. [Applause.]

Mr S P GROVÉ: Madam Speaker, I wish to address this House on some issues
relevant to the South African national Antarctic programme which is funded
by the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. This programme
directs our activities in Antarctica and our two islands in the Southern
Ocean, being Marion Island and Prince Edward Island, as well as our
presence on Gough Island.

To put this into perspective, let me tell members something about
Antarctica and the Prince Edward Island group. The Prince Edward Island
group consists of two small little islands, being Prince Edward Island, and
Marion Island roughly 20 km apart. They are situated approximately 2 200 km
south-southeast of Cape Town, and are the twin peaks of a volcanic mountain
rising up from the ocean floor to some 1 200 m above the surface of the
ocean. The islands are right in the so-called Roaring Forties and therefore
subject to violent weather conditions.

Some things about Marion Island: It is small, not wider than 20 km. It is a
volcanic island, and the last eruption occurred in 1980. The average annual
rainfall is 2,5 m. The average air temperature is 6°C and the average
humidity is 83%. On some days, one may start the day in wonderful sunshine
and thereafter, on the same day, experience rain, high winds, sleet, hail,
snow, mist, and everything. I was there. I can attest to that.

Although the average temperature is not so low, the high winds sometimes
reach speeds of up to 150 km/h and 200 km/h and the wind-chill factor can
reduce the temperature to -18°C or -20°C. On 308 days out of 365 days it
rains for some part of the day. The wind blows for 107 days per year at
gale-force speed.

In vast contrast, Antarctica is one of the largest continents on earth, the
cleanest, the highest, the coldest and the driest. It is covered in a 2-km-
thick layer of ice, some of which is thousands of years old.

Members may ask, and many people do ask, what we are doing in these strange
places. [Laughter.] Are we just sending ... [Interjections.] I am hearing
all kinds of comments here that I like it there! Are we just sending some
lucky people there to have a nice enjoyable adventure or is there any value
for this country in our presence there?

From a scientific point of view I would like to quote a publication by Dr
Steven Chown called An introductory guide to the Marion and Prince Edward
Island Special Nature Reserves. On page 17 the author says:


  Scientific work, and mainly biological research, now forms one of the
  major reasons for maintenance of the scientific station at the Prince
  Edward Islands. The information gained from 33 years of continuous
  biological research has resulted in an almost unparalleled understanding
  of the islands' animals, plants and ecosystems, both in a South African
  and global context. In consequence, the stage has been well set for
  addressing many of the environmental management problems at the islands
  and for examining additional important ideas in ecology.

And that is important. He continues:


  But perhaps the most important ecological ideas that can be tested using
  the islands' ecosystems are those that have to do with global climate
  change. Over the past few hundred years a slow, but steady increase in
  average temperatures has been recorded around the world. This increase
  has been very rapid in the sub-Antarctic - as much as 1°C in the last 50
  years - and the trend seems set to continue.
If I could try to put that 1°C into some perspective: on a continent where
the average temperature differs, on a yearly basis, between 4°C and 6°C, a
l°C temperature change is close to 25%. If that temperature change takes
place in South Africa, we will mostly certainly wipe out most of the
agriculture of this country and the Karoo will most probably become a
desert. Therefore, we need the scientific research that we have done on
those islands to know how ecosystems will react under such conditions, even
if it takes place over 50 years, because then we can try and do something
about it.

Secondly, the Southern Ocean is one of the last untapped oceans on earth,
with vast resources comprising plankton, krill, fish and others. Even new
species of fish are being found there. This represents a vast food store
that we can exploit to our advantage. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Speaker and
hon members, one of the key environmental challenges facing our country is
how to manage our marine resources and take care of our enormous coastline.
We are faced, as the world, with a real possibility of global warming and
similar dangers emanating from atmospheric change. Our country is getting
dirtier every day and our people's lives are being endangered by ill-
managed and hazardous waste.

These are the core issues that I would like to address, as we take a look
at the work of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism through,
amongst others, Marine and Coastal Management, the Weather Bureau and the
Antarctica programme that we have just heard about. All of these programmes
are aimed at entrenching the principles of sustainable development geared
at the improvement of the people's quality of life.

South Africa is richly endowed with a diverse coastline of more than 3 000
km and an adjacent exclusive fishing zone stretching 200 nautical miles,
which is 386 km, seaward. This vast region comprises the cool and rich
fishing grounds that provide enormous benefits to the people of South
Africa and offer unique opportunities for economic and social development.

Against the background of widespread poaching of marine resources, the
department has identified the improvement of marine compliance as a very
high priority and has provided additional funding towards this cause.
Actions that are to be taken include a partnership with the SA Police
Service to relaunch Operation Neptune, at a cost of R1 million, which will
increase the capacity we have to patrol our marine resources. But that is
still not enough: I think we need even more in order to do that. The other
action is the procurement of four purpose-built fishery and environmental
protection vessels to re-establish an effective fishery patrol service and
to provide an oil-spill countermeasure service.

For South Africa to meet its obligations in terms of conservation of our
marine life and at the same time transform an industry which is still
substantially characterised by its apartheid past, we have to bring into
the industry new entrants from historically disadvantaged backgrounds,
something which continues to constitute a major challenge to us.

We would like to give hon members a glimpse of the changes we are
initiating in Marine and Coastal Management, if members would listen
properly. We are establishing a dedicated rights-allocation unit,
adequately resourced and professionally staffed, a prerequisite for
restoring public confidence in the fraught and acrimonious processes that
currently surround the allocation of rights.

Shortly we will announce a set of additional policy directives and other
arrangements that will govern the allocation of rights, some of which hon
members have heard from my Minister. Since there is no capacity at present
to go out and verify the information that fishing rights holders provide to
the department, we shall institute such capacity within a new and credible
unit.

Subsistence and artisanal fishing also have to be given their due
recognition and place in an effort to deal with the acute poverty along our
coastline. These sectors, especially artisanal fishing, have been
neglected. We shall make further announcements about this in due course.

Also, a key aspect of our new approach will be to give adequate and proper
recognition to coastal communities. These communities will have first
access to rights, above any others. [Applause.] We intend to divide the
coastline into eight regions, in order to have dedicated attention to the
development and support of fishing communities. We feel that the
communities along the coastline need to be developed, empowered and
assisted with many things, for instance with filling in forms and many
other things. So we are interested in developing these people in order that
they can also develop SMMEs and the big companies, especially our
disadvantaged people. Finally, the development of new and under-utilised
resources, such as mariculture, will be promoted through the support of
public initiatives of this kind and through the provision of relevant data
and the projection of trends.

This House should note the importance of our international obligations with
SADC and a variety of other international treaties on fishing. Early next
month, during World Environment Week, we will release the White Paper for
Sustainable Coastal Development which will deal with the sustainable use
and management of our coast.

Pollution and waste management issues are foremost on Government's agenda,
some of which have been mentioned by the hon the Minister. Visible action
will be taken to establish waste management infrastructure in townships to
deal with medical and other hazardous waste that continue to threaten
communities and contribute to increased poverty and degradation of the
environment.
It is simply unacceptable that as we speak here today there are industries
and businesses that are endangering the health and livelihoods of poor
communities through pollution. Air pollution in particular has received
prominence recently with the release of a poisonous chlorine gas cloud by
Polifin at uMbongintwini in KwaZulu-Natal. This follows a number of ongoing
community struggles around sulphur dioxide pollution by oil refineries in
the Durban South basin and Milnerton in Cape Town, and the poisoning of
schoolchildren by Sappi with sulphur dioxide in Umkomaas. This is
unacceptable.

I want to state clearly that as Government we have zero tolerance for
companies that damage the health of residents and workers through their
activities. We will not hesitate to prosecute and recover damages from
companies that disregard environmental norms and standards. Over the past
three years we have shut down a number of companies for this kind of
conduct.

In the interim we have agreed to start negotiations with the refineries on
putting in place co-operative agreements in terms of the National
Environment Management Act which will entail the operation of ambient and
emission monitoring, independent auditing of monitoring results and
agreeing on emission reduction programmes.

While I welcome the spirit in which industry has come forward to negotiate,
I would like to put it on record today that these negotiations do not
preclude more drastic action against the major polluters in this country. I
would like to give notice that we will not tolerate the damage that they
are doing to people's health and the environment. If one pollutes one must
pay to clean up the mess. [Applause.]

The renewed vigour with which the department will be tackling this issue is
in line with our White Paper on Integrated Pollution and Waste Management
which will be publicly released next week together with the regulations
that the Minister alluded to on the use of plastic bags. Details of the 20
new waste management projects supported by this department will also be
unveiled on that day.

We are very encouraged by the overwhelming support that this call has
received from the public. We recently learnt that Douglas, a town in the
Northern Cape, has been declared a plastic-free zone. Why can we not do the
same? I challenge this Parliament to lead by example by declaring
Parliament a plastic-free zone, starting on World Environment Day, on 5
June 2000. [Applause.] And this must also be done in our constituencies,
from where we come.

Internationally, we are already playing our part in this area - South
Africa has been mandated to host the Basel regional training centre on
behalf of English-speaking countries. It is intended to build capacity in
hazardous waste management and transboundary movement of waste in the
Southern African region and on the entire continent. This will further
assist South Africa's programme to implement the Basel convention.

As is the case with the Weather Bureau, we are looking to agentise the
Antarctica and islands programme of the department. Linked to this is the
establishment of an Antarctic experience centre in Cape Town, so that
people who are not able to travel to Antarctica can experience the sheer
beauty of this arctic wilderness. Fortunately, I was with member Grové and
we had that experience.

In brief, this programme provides scientific, liaison, logistical,
administrative and personnel management support to Sanap and its
international partners. During the past year it launched the Indian
Antarctic expedition from South Africa. This is in line with establishing
Cape Town as the gateway to Antarctica and a supply route to many of the
international bases there. International co-operation was further
strengthened when South Africa and Germany signed a letter of intent with
regard to establishing joint logistic and research ventures to Antarctica.

This year the programme will focus on contributing to conservation and
resource use through research, monitoring and the management of the Prince
Edward Islands as special nature reserves, enhancing public awareness of
global climate changes and ozone depletion, as well as providing research
and monitoring opportunities for the Weather Bureau and research
institutions through project funding and logistic support.

Coming to climate change, South Africa's ratification of the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change signifies Government's commitment to join the
global community in finding solutions to the escalating greenhouse gas
concentration in the atmosphere. South Africa's economy is coal-based,
coupled with emissions from domestic coal burning as a result of a still
underdeveloped electricity infrastructure.

Despite the fact that South Africa is not obligated to a reduction target
on greenhouse gas emission, we have committed ourselves to a sustainable
development growth path, underpinned by the following aspects which form
the basis of the programme of action on climate change that will be
implemented by the department.

Firstly, we will urgently look at alternative sources of energy with less
reliance on coal if necessary. Other energy-intensive sectors which produce
a significant amount of greenhouse gas emissions are also targeted to
contribute a decrease in emissions. An increased export sector will result
in greater scrutiny of South Africa's exports in as far as their coal
intensity is concerned. In order to comply with increasingly stringent
requirements, South African industries will need to invest in more
environmentally sound technologies. Avoidance of future emissions is the
strategic business approach to more sustainable production.

Government intervention in response to the effects of climate change
requires an integrated approach. It is for this reason that the Cabinet has
approved the collective involvement of the the Departments of Minerals and
Energy, of Trade and Industry, of Water Affairs and Forestry, of Transport
and of Agriculture and Land Affairs in working towards this objective. This
collective action will culminate in a response strategy which has already
been outlined and approved by the Cabinet and is due for finalisation in
December 2000.

I think all these initiatives will enable South Africa to take its rightful
place on the world stage, in the implementation of the resolution of the
United Nations' commission on sustainable development. For this reason
South Africa is bidding to host the earth summit - my colleagues have
already mentioned this - to be held in 2002. This initiative alone will
bring untold investment in South Africa and the entire continent, amongst
others in terms of tourism growth. If we get this bid it is going to
highlight the poverty in Africa as a whole and bring it to the attention of
the international community.

All these initiatives will also assist us to develop tourism. The member
Olckers said that one of the factors that would delay tourism was the
numbers of people. I do not think that tourism would like us to legislate
that the police should exercise that control. I think they are more worried
about the increased number of blacks. It has nothing to do with that.
[Interjections.] It is nonsense, because I know the member means the blacks
who are in the majority.

Another international convention which this department is responsible for
and which is worth noting is the Convention to Combat Desertification. This
convention has the potential to reduce the vulnerability of affected
populations by securing their environments, increasing food security and
creating new opportunities for alternative livelihoods. The successful
implementation of programmes such as Agenda 21 requires a global
partnership for sustainable development with all nations. We also say that
the recent hosting of a regional conference on African solutions held in
Pretoria neatly fits in with the vision of Africa's rebirth.

I would like to thank my Minister, who has been very supportive and has
been grooming me, the director-general, Dr Olver, and the whole staff of
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, who have been helpful
and who are working tirelessly to transform this department to become a
department that will be accountable to the citizens of this country, in
order to build South Africa to be what it is supposed to be. [Applause.]

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and fellow members, I
want to start by saying that I am not delivering Mrs Mbuyazi's speech, but
I want to suggest to my chairperson that perhaps it is about time that the
ANC and the IFP caucused before they came to speak here. It seems I will be
talking about the same topic, so I think it is about time that we had a
caucus. [Laughter.]

Firstly, I take this opportunity to congratulate the recently appointed
Satour board, under the chairmanship of Mr Saki Macozoma. I wish them well
and success in their endeavours in marketing our beautiful South Africa to
the world. We also hope more efforts will be made to enhance our African
renaissance idea by opening more offices in Africa. I believe at present we
only have one office, situated in Zimbabwe. Charity begins at home. An
average African visitor spends R1 081 per day, while a British visitor
spends R568. This is more reason for us to have more offices in Africa than
in Britain. I hope the Minister will take note of this. [Applause.]

The apartheid system severely limited the scope of South African industry
and caused serious economic imbalances. Many tourists abstained from
travelling to South Africa during the apartheid years. It was only after
the democratic elections in 1994, under the ANC-led Government, that this
country gained worldwide recognition. South African tourism has increased
substantially during the past six years. Today, it brings R20 billion,
annually, into our economy, and is second only to the manufacturing and
mining industries in its contribution to GDP.

However, let us look closely at the participation of the disadvantaged
communities in this field. I want to say ``disadvantaged'' because I know
that Oom Reg September always says that they are not previously
disadvantaged, they are still disadvantaged. [Interjections.] In that
sense, I will refer to them as disadvantaged communities.

Two weeks ago, Satour had an indaba in Durban. The indaba is South Africa's
premier show, attended by more than 1 400 delegates from over 70 countries.
There were more than 3 000 exhibitions. The aim of the indaba is to provide
a platform for overseas delegates to familiarise themselves with South
African tourism products and to interact with business leaders in the
travel and tourism industry. This would eventually present foreign tourism
with an opportunity to do business with local product-owners or
manufacturers, in order to increase international tourism to South Africa.

If this is the aim of the indaba, I am sorry to say that, from what I
witnessed in terms of participation last week, it is very clear that
tourism still benefits a certain section of our society. It was painful and
a shame for me to move around those stalls and witness very few stalls
owned by emerging entrepreneurs. This indaba was held in Durban. The
indigenous form of transport of that province is the rickshaw, and those
rickshaws were not even exhibited.

It seems that in this industry the rich are getting richer and the poor
poorer. The few black people who were there were mainly manning their
masters' stalls. I believe that we have passed good legislation in this
Parliament, but the majority of people in this country still continue to be
disadvantaged. These are the people who voted us into power and we owe them
a better life. [Applause.]

I want to know how these exhibitors were chosen to participate in Indaba
2000. Is this indaba accessible to emerging entrepreneurs? We have to
question ourselves about that. Even though Satour is responsible, the
Ministry has to take responsibility for this. The situation cannot be
tolerated any more, and I am happy that the Minister has committed himself
to intervening in this area. We will be happy to see a plan of action for
future participation of emerging entrepreneurs in Indaba 2001. Some
solutions could be found that will involve Satour, the provincial Satour
boards and the established businesses in order for them to exhibit their
products.

Our people are not interested in hand-outs any more. They want to be
recognised, developed and marketed from being emerging businesses to big
businesses. Just here in Khayelitsha there are a number of bed-and-
breakfast businesses, owned and run by locals. They are professionals, they
have an African touch and are quite reasonable. We have a bed-and-breakfast
establishment called Kopanong, which is situated in C329 in Khayelitsha.
That is a typical example. This family has converted their house into a
business and a family home. Business has to be channelled to these people.
There are many similar cases in all our townships in South Africa.

Foreign tourists say they are attracted to South Africa by wildlife, the
scenery and its many cultures. They say visiting South Africa makes them
see things with fresh eyes, and I think we have to make sure that they go
and taste the Africa that we know - not the Africa that is being imitated.
[Applause.]

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Speaker and Minister, Marine and Coastal Management
was the hot favourite when we had discussions with the director-general and
other officials in preparation for the debate on our Vote.

In hierdie komponent is daar ernstige probleme wat uitgelig en opgelos moet
word, en ek waardeer die gedagtes van die Minister en Adjunkminister in
hierdie verband. [Tussenwerpsels.] [There are serious problems in this
component, which need to be singled out and resolved, and I appreciate the
thoughts of the Minister and the Deputy Minister in this regard.
[Interjections.]]
We blew the whistle months ago.

Dit is jammer dat dit toe afgemaak is as politieke sensasiesoekery, ook in
'n aanval wat gelei is deur die agb Adjunkminister. [It is a pity that at
the time it was slated as political sensationalism, also in an attack led
by the hon the Deputy Minister.]

We will not cease our watchdog responsibility as official opposition.

Dit is ironies dat ons vandag die voorreg het om oor 'n begroting te
debatteer terwyl baie vissermanne as gevolg van swak administrasie en swak
beplanning geen begroting het om brood op hulle tafel te plaas nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is ironic that we have the privilege of debating a budget today while,
as a result of poor administration and poor planning, many fishermen have
no budget with which to put food on the table.]

The crayfish season for subsistence fishermen ends at the end of May, yet
many of their applications have not been processed and finalised.

In baie vissergemeenskappe is daar groot woede, pyn en 'n gevoel van
verwerping. [In many fishing communities there is a lot of anger, pain and
a feeling of rejection.]

``We have been excluded from the process of transformation,'' they say.

Baie skryf hul verknorsing toe aan burokratiese knoeiery. Die feit dat die
oorgangsraad ook in duie gestort het, het nie gehelp om hul vrese te
besweer nie. Ons verneem dankbaar dat die langlynstokvistoekenning vir 1999
uiteindelik sal plaasvind op 22 Mei 2000! In die afwesigheid van die
oorgangsraad wonder ons net wie die toekennings sal doen of gedoen het.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Many of them blame their predicament on bureaucratic bungling. The fact
that the transitional council has also collapsed has not helped to allay
their fears. We were grateful to learn that the 1999 allocation for long-
line hake will eventually take place on 22 May 2000! In the absence of the
transitional council, one wonders just who will be making or has made the
allocations.]

We in the DP believe that the process for the allocation of fishing rights
must be objective, transparent and free from any political interference.

Geen wanbestuur, geen korrupsie of enige vorm van nepotisme kan geduld word
nie. Die donker wolk van wantroue wat oor die nywerheid hang, kan net deur
'n onafhanklike ondersoek verdryf word, en ons het onlangs gehoor ons het
baie, baie ondersoekeenhede, van Heath tot by Baqwa. Laat ons hierdie
eenhede gebruik en laat ons die bevindings van hierdie eenhede op 'n
verantwoordelike wyse soos 'n verantwoordelike Regering hanteer. Dit sal
vir my die begin wees van die Afrika-renaissance. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[No mismanagement, no corruption or any form of nepotism should be
tolerated. The dark cloud of mistrust that hangs over the industry can only
be banished by an independent investigation, and we have recently heard
that we have very many investigative units, from Heath to Baqwa. Let us use
these units and deal with the findings of these units in a responsible way,
like a responsible Government. To me, that would be the beginning of the
African renaissance.]

We also believe that we need to remain focused on our mission to be
responsible custodians, protectors and guardians of our marine and coastal
resources and ecosystems. So, even in our striving for equity, we can learn
from the present crisis in the taxi industry. One can only have a specific
number of participants in a specific market. Therefore we in the DP say:
Let the real fishermen do the fishing; then they will have a vested
interest in helping to eliminate poaching.

Die vlak van wat ek die arrogante stropery van ons mariene bronne noem - en
ons verwys nie net na perlemoen nie, maar ook onder meer na ons
lynvisbronne - werp 'n pynlike blik, eerstens, op die respek wat
verbruikers behoort te hê vir die delikate balans wat ons in verhouding tot
ons omgewing moet handhaaf, maar, tweedens, ook op die vermoë van die
departement om ons bronne effektief te bestuur en te beskerm, en ek is
dankbaar vir die finansiële bydrae wat gegee is sodat hierdie aspek
uitgebrei kan word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The level of what I call the arrogant poaching of our marine resources -
and we are not only referring to abalone, but also to long-line fishing
resources, inter alia - is a painful reflection, firstly, on the respect
which consumers ought to have for the delicate balance that we must
maintain in relation to our environment, but also, secondly, on the ability
of the department to manage and protect our resources effectively, and I am
grateful for the financial contribution that has been made towards the
development of this aspect.]

Poachers are destroying part of our future, and this is a situation that we
cannot allow to continue unchallenged. We in the DP hope that with
education and zero tolerance from our communities, our marine inspectorate
and other law-enforcement institutions, we will deal with the problem
effectively. [Applause.]

Mr R K SEPTEMBER: Madam Speaker, a great deal has been said about the
importance of developing international tourism, and quite rightly so
because of its tremendous potential. But what about local tourism - an
industry which is, of course, essentially white in our country,
unfortunately?

Black South Africans need to become acquainted with South Africa. This is
an avenue which has always been open to white South Africans only. Even if
one had the money, what hotel would have let one in? What golf course would
welcome one? For that matter, where could one even swim? Members can ask
Peter Hendrickse about that. After all, one did not just want to go from
one township to another to be greeted by a rubbish dump, something which
most people on the more privileged side of the House know absolutely
nothing about.

For the first time in the history of our country, we can now pay serious
attention to the question of tourism for black South Africans - all of us
of colour. Tourism needs to be opened to black South Africans in the
country of their birth for the first time. This means that we need to cater
for those of our people who cannot afford five-star accommodation and
expensive airfares. For example, it costs more to travel to Nairobi than to
fly to London. Yet we know how important it is for our people to become
acquainted with the people in neighbouring countries.

Only today can we go to Knysna or the Kruger National Park, but
unfortunately most of our people cannot afford it. When I returned from
exile, I was shocked to discover that there was no passenger train service
between Cape Town and Port Elizabeth - none at all, only the goods train.
That, of course, has been changed since. Our mainline train service for
white South Africans, in the days when mainline trains were used by MPs and
civil servants, was excellent. It even included silver service in the
dining room - for whites only, of course, and we were given only one coach
next to the engine of the train.

Thereafter, when people like ourselves were anxious to use the facilities,
we found them to be sorely neglected. Of course, by then most South
Africans were using planes. I propose that whoever is responsible for
mainline train services, should ensure that we improve our intercity train
service if - and I want to stress this - we want to attract passengers and
develop tourism.

Let us look at Europe and see what I mean. I must ask the question: Was the
mainline service allowed to run down simply because black South Africans
began using it? Our bus service has suffered in the same way. A recent
shock survey revealed that over 90% of the buses tested were below standard
and not roadworthy. A modern up-to-date mainline train service and a well-
maintained bus service will, certainly, contribute significantly to tourist
travel in our country.

Let me say a word or two regarding transport for the disabled. Should a
disabled person in a wheelchair wish to travel from Cape Town to
Johannesburg, the only practical form of travel is by air. This means, in
effect, that only those who can afford the airfare can travel. However
necessary the trip, the person will not be able to undertake the journey.
Mainline trains, at least, need to provide facilities to enable the poor
disabled to board the trains with their wheelchairs and be properly
accommodated.

I believe that if such facilities were provided, we would attract many
needy local and foreign travellers. Certainly, it would be in keeping with
the Government's attitude towards the disabled. Today, for example, it is
easier to transport a car by rail than it is for a person travelling with a
wheelchair. We must stop providing for so-called normal people only.

If we think of transport between cities in South Africa, we will no doubt
find that a significant number of people travel by minibus taxi. We observe
that the proposed new scheme for city taxis is still at the discussion
stage, and the differences among transporters continue to plague our
cities. Perhaps the Department of Transport should consider the earlier
introduction of the scheme among those licensed to ply their taxi trade
between cities. The result will be a distinct improvement in comfort and,
of course, safety and tourism.

In our sister state of Tanzania, which is linked to us historically by the
slave trade, one cannot but help notice the frequency with which visitors
are greeted with the word ``karibu'', meaning ``welcome''. What a
difference it would make to our tourist industry if our own population
welcomed visitors with such courtesy! But this will only come about once
black South Africans are brought into the whole process of tourism. This
can only come about when black South Africans become joint beneficiaries
and owners of this industry. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and hon members, the
responsibility of environmental management resides in various Government
departments such as Agriculture and Land Affairs, Water Affairs and
Forestry, Health and Minerals and Energy. However, the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism serves as the policy-formulating and co-
ordinating body in this regard.

South Africa ranks as the third most biologically diverse country in the
world. The flora and fauna in this country are envied by people from most
countries. Our country is a highly attractive tourist destination, full of
promise and potential, if we can only overcome some internal constraints
that inhibit tourism, among others crime and violence. The country's
workers are inadequately trained for the service industries. However, we
hope, as the Minister indicated earlier on, that something is being done in
that regard. The country has to develop a tourism-friendly attitude, so
that when people come over here, they will appreciate and see, as we always
say, that there is passion for people.

It is, however, not a lost cause at all, because the country also boasts
some strengths which facilitate growth in tourism. Our tourism assets are
of incomparable quality in some instances. Apparently that is why people in
some cases have pledged them as security for their own interests. There is
a depth to and diversity of tourist products, such as cultural attractions
and ecotourism. The peaceful political transition in this country resulted
in a very positive global perception. For that we can pat ourselves on the
back.

The Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park between South Africa and Botswana, to
which the Minister referred earlier, was opened by President Mbeki last
Friday and is a clear indication that tourism is a unifying factor. We look
forward to the establishment of transfrontier conservation areas that will
bring the parks of Gaza in Mozambique, the Kruger National Park in South
Africa and Gonarezhou in Zimbabwe together. This will benefit not only
these three countries, but also the greater Pan African community.

There is, however, some concern in that the regulations governing the
National Environmental Management Act of 1998, which was promulgated in
1999, still have to be drafted. We hope, in the able and capable hands of
the Ministry, that this will be done in such a way as to ensure that things
go well in this industry. We support the Vote. [Applause.]

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Madam Speaker, first of all allow me to congratulate
the Minister on his impassioned approach to his portfolio. The tourism
industry has been identified as a key sector of our economy on the basis of
its multiplier effect and therefore its impact on job creation and economic
development. The diverse services and facilities that go into the tourism
experience range from the major hotel and casino developments to the
pavement curio vendor on a beach front promenade. The opportunities seem to
be unlimited, or so it seems.

The one sector within the tourism industry that has up to now not received
the attention it deserves is the tourist guide sector. This crucial sector
provides our industry with the ambassadors that profile our country and
what it stands for. This sector has been dominated by only one section of
our population and, believe it or not, by expatriates. This dominance has
resulted in our tourists being taken on routes that excluded the majority
of our people, the areas we live in and the experience of the South Africa
we hold dear.

Recent media reports have highlighted this state of affairs. Our tourists
are subjected to a clinical Eurocentric view of our country. The true South
African experience that offers our multicultural ethos and the spectacular
splendour of our landscapes is excluded. The couriers of our country's
message are second-hand. Rather than engaging the very people that live and
understand the issues, our community leaders and people are excluded. Is it
any surprise then that the tourism industry remains an intrigue?

The proposition that tourists do not feel safe in our areas is ludicrous.
How can one feel and experience safety when an alien or bizarre arrival
seeks to exclude rather than include the very communities? The tourist
guide accompanying the group professes to be the all-endowed expert, but
merely verbalises an acquired knowledge. In most instances, the guide
advises the tourist against an integrated approach. The tourist guide is
the one that is not embraced by the communities, as he or she has not
bothered to meet with, understand or engage the communities.

Who better to tell the stories about the history of our country, to give
explanations of rock art, our lifestyle and our surroundings, than those
who lived and live it? Hence, we have the ``zoo approach'' in which coach
buses rove the streets of our townships, tourists merrily clicking their
cameras without as much as exchanging a word with the locals. Where then
will be the benefits of tourism that we talk about, the promise of the
great delivery?

The Welcome campaign seeks to turn South Africans into a welcoming nation.
How can this be done if we exclude the majority of our people from any
tangible benefits? For our people to understand and accept the promise we
need to demonstrate and ensure the delivery of these benefits. Economic
barriers and obstacles to trading and registration give limited access to
the industry. The answer has to be to make entry into the industry more
accessible. The cost of training courses, where these courses are
conducted, the criteria for registration and the recognition for prior
learning must be part of this scheme of things to come.

The content of training courses and the development of itineraries and
scripts need to be refined and updated. In the eighties the script of a
tour of Cape Town, when tourists viewed Robben Island in the untouchable
distance, would be completely different to the script of today. One can
even hear those tourist guides talking about ``the island that housed the
terrorists''. Has our general knowledge and content changed by virtue of 27
April 1994? Has this been tested, and by whom?
The routes and itineraries marketed in South Africa still offer the black
experience as an annexure to the main experience. The ``ghetto approach''
to engaging blacks in tourism is still prevalent. Should the true South
African experience not be mainstreamed?

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, together with the
portfolio committee, has spent an enormous amount of time piloting
amendments that govern this sector of the tourism industry in order to
ensure that this very practice ends. It has set the pace for the first
stages of the transformation of this industry.

We are confident that these changes will address some of the concerns
raised by our communities in seeking a role in this industry, particularly
in regard to an integrated approach to the tourist guide sector. We trust
that the other amendments that address the tourism industry at large will
soon follow. The ANC will give its full support to such a process.

We must see to it that our people get access to the industry, are provided
with a quality tourism experience, enjoy a market share of the sector and,
more importantly, that they will be full partners in growing the tourism
industry for the benefit of the country's economy. Let the ``Oom Dawies''
be part of this sector and they will do us proud.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Mr Chairperson, actions speak louder than words. Nothing
could indicate the Government's commitment to tourism as a powerhouse of
job creation and foreign exchange earnings more than the fact that the
budget for tourism has been increased by more than R100 million rand at a
time when all other Government departments are having their budgets
squeezed.

Marketing is, of course, a never-ending, money-eating machine. Australia,
which could be seen as our biggest competitor in the longhaul travel
market, but which, I would argue, does not have nearly the quality or
quantity of South Africa's natural and cultural attractions, spends almost
four times the amount that we do on the marketing of tourism. However, the
increase in our marketing budget, the stature and high calibre of our new
Satour board and the streamlining of Satour's function to being solely a
marketing body certainly gives all players in the South African tourism
industry hope for great improvement in this regard.

The announcement by the Minister of Finance of a R100 departure tax would
greatly alleviate further resource problems if that money could be
channelled into tourist activities instead of the general fiscus. The DP
does not believe another separate tourists' tax is necessary. The money
raised from the departure tax - estimated at R280 million a year from Cape
Town International Airport alone - would go a long way towards funding, for
example, more immigration officers at our international airports. In many
cases, immigration officers are the first impressions tourists receive.
That impression would be vastly improved if they were fast, efficient, and
friendly. [Interjections.]

No matter how much money is spent on marketing, there are, of course, still
some problems to be sorted out. Once tourists have been lured to
destinations, they must feel that they have had value for money, and most
important of all, they must want to come back again.

The DP welcomes the Minister's announcements regarding the accommodation
grading system. We would, however, like some commitment to timeframes.
Nearly a year has passed since any grading took place and some hotels have
not been inspected for as much as four years. We still maintain that the
section 21 committee, with the standard set by the Department of Trade and
Industry, against which accommodation could be graded, is the right way to
go. We need to move fast on this issues or else our credibility as a world-
class tourist destination will be further compromised.

In 1997, a comprehensive accommodation guide was published containing
detailed information of all Satour's accredited and graded accommodation
establishments. This was distributed worldwide by all Satour branch
offices. It has not been published since 1999. Many small accommodation
establishments, which cannot afford to pay for advertising in more
expensive brochures, rely on that Satour publication for referrals. The
guide is apparently no longer available in some overseas Satour offices,
and this has led to a decline in business for the many listed accommodation
establishments.

It is an accepted fact that it is in the small business sector,
particularly in the service industries, where jobs are created. Many
tourists also prefer the more personal atmosphere of smaller
establishments. It is essential for SMMEs in the tourism sector to get
maximum benefit and exposure from Satour's marketing strategies.

Further issues of safety and security, training standards, etc have all
been addressed. We cannot afford not to give our tourists a good
impression. We need them to go away and spread the word about our wonderful
country, its people and its places. Too many South Africans have invested
time, money and expectations in tourism for us to fail in this regard.
[Applause.]

Mr M I MOSS: Chairperson, Minister Valli Moosa, Deputy Minister and
colleagues, I would first and foremost like to congratulate and applaud the
hon the Minister for his endeavours to improve environmental affairs and
tourism, in particular.
The tourism industry is currently the second largest income earner in our
economy. It is also seen as one of the key areas in terms of the
Reconstruction and Development Programme's job creation and poverty
alleviation strategy.

The White Paper on an Integrated National Disability Strategy states:


  Through the establishment of the Office for Disabled Persons, our
  Government wishes to express its unswerving commitment to the upliftment
  and improvement of the conditions of those members of our society who are
  disabled.

The disabled communities, of which the majority are black and poor, have
been oppressed and disadvantaged by the past regimes and their legacies.
The position of the present Government in this respect is clear. It aims to
ensure our society's transformation into a nondiscriminatory one in which
all people, and disabled people in particular, can participate fully and
enjoy their rights.

Tourism needs to be made more accessible to disabled people. Disabled
people are less likely to find jobs in the tourism sector, or to enjoy its
full benefits as tourists. Most prices are too high for them. Many tourist
destinations have price rebates for children, students and pensioners
because of their lower-than-average income levels. This should be extended
to include disabled tourists.
Most disabled people do not have their own cars, and thus are reliant upon
public transport. However, most forms of public transport, in terms of
infrastructure and staff, do not meet the needs of disabled people. Trains,
buses and taxis were not built to accommodate disabled people, as the hon
Reggie September has pointed out. Yet they are the cheapest modes of
transport.

The airline industry has made some progress in this regard, but much still
needs to be done. Their high prices are also largely out of reach for the
majority of our disabled people. There is a colleague of mine, Debbie, in
the gallery. She was not allowed to take her dog on board, although she was
using the dog as a companion. These are some of the issues that need to be
addressed, as disabled people are different people.

Most buildings and places of recreation, like sportfields and hotels, are
still inaccessible. Incidentally, I would like to use Newlands rugby
stadium as an example. Physically disabled people from the Netherlands
could not watch a soccer match between Ajax Cape Town and Jomo Cosmos
because of the lack of facilities. On Wednesday 17 May 2000 the same thing
was repeated when a group of disabled children had to sit and watch
inconveniently from the allocated standing area. Needless to say, they
could hardly see the whole match or enjoy the event.

Tourist destinations are particularly inaccessible to blind and deaf
people. Tour guides, for example, need to be trained in sign language so as
to be able to communicate with deaf people more effectively. Cinemas and
places like Table Mountain, Robben Island and other tourist attractions
need to provide audio services and guides that can verbally describe such
activities and the movies. Disabled people should not be seen as people who
must be hidden or isolated, but must be treated as an integral part of
society.

However, there are also good points of improvement. The Cape Metropolitan
Council has, for example, disabled people who serve on the board to advise
them on transport for disabled people in the Western Cape. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, I would like to start by congratulating
the Minister, the Deputy Minister, the Ministry, on the job that they are
doing in this department. I should also like to congratulate the
chairperson of the portfolio committee on enabling us to participate and
make our contributions. [Applause.]

I would like to make a few remarks. I think one of the problems within the
department is the matter of the fishing industry, where quotas and our
natural resources are placed under pressure. I think the Minister should
give attention to that. I am particularly worried about our natural
resources along our coasts. I do some skin-diving, and when I look at what
is going on, I am worried. At night, when the fishing boats come in, I
think that they have caught the fish that I should catch from the shore.

Een van die probleme in ons land met toerisme is dat ons ons toespits op
buitelandse toerisme, maar wat van die binnelandse toeris? Dit kan 'n
belangrike rol speel om mense mekaar te laat leer ken sodat ons mekaar se
kulture kan sien en, veral in die nuwe Suid-Afrika, mekaar kan herontmoet.
Ek dink die binnelandse toeris kan 'n baie groot bydrae lewer om Suid-
Afrika werklik te laat ontwikkel in die rigting waarin ons wil gaan.

Een van die probleme hier is egter - en dit is wat die agb lede nnr
September en mnr Moss ook nou net gesê het - dit word net te duur. 'n Mens
kan maar vandag probeer om met jou gesin teen Tafelberg uit te gaan en kyk
wat dit jou kos. 'n Mens kan probeer om 'n naweek in die Nasionale
Krugerwildtuin te gaan bly, dan kos dit 'n fortuin. Die meeste mense kan
dit nie bekostig nie, en op die ou end raak die fasiliteite wat in Suid-
Afrika deur die buitelanders benut word vir ons eenvoudig te duur.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[One of the problems in our country with regard to tourism is that we are
now concentrating on foreign tourism, but what about the local tourists?
This can play an important role in helping people to get to know one
another so that we can see one another's cultures and, especially in the
new South Africa, meet one another again. I think the local tourist can
make a very big contribution in allowing South Africa really to develop in
the direction in which we want to move.

However, one of the problems here - and this is what the hon members Mr
September and Mr Moss have also just said - is that it is simply becoming
too expensive. One need only try to take one's family up Table Mountain
today and see what it costs one. One can try to spend a weekend in the
Kruger National Park, and it will cost a fortune. Most people cannot afford
it, and eventually the facilities utilised by foreigners in South Africa
simply become too expensive for us.]

I think that we should look at the price differentiation between the
tourists from outside and the tourists within South Africa to make
facilities affordable, or, at least, to make concessions to those poorest
of the poor who cannot afford them, so that they could also access the
different facilities which we have in South Africa.

As ons kyk na 'n belangrike ding wat gebeur het, maar waaroor ek baie bly
is, is dit die samevoeging van parke, byvoorbeeld in die geval van die
Kalahari Gemsbokpark en die Kgalagadipark van Botswana. Dit is 'n baie
goeie, positiewe ontwikkeling, en ek dink dié tipe ontwikkeling behoort
verder gevoer te word deur die Nasionale Krugerwildtuin, soos beplan word,
in samewerking met Mosambiek in 'n groter park te omskep. Dit is
noodsaaklik. As ons op die ou end ons wild en ons bronne wil laat oorleef,
het ons groter eenhede nodig waarin die diere in 'n natuurliker omgewing
kan voortleef en waarin ons die navorsing wat ons gedoen het, werklik kan
toepas. Dit is belangrik, en ek wil die agb Minister bedank vir die werk
wat hy in dié verband gedoen het. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Let us look at something important that has happened, but about which I am
very glad, namely the consolidation of parks, for instance in the case of
the Kalahari Gemsbok Park and the Kgalagadi Park in Botswana. This is a
very good, positive development, and I think this type of development
should be taken further by converting the Kruger National Park into a
larger park, in co-operation with Mozambique, as is being planned. This is
necessary. If our ultimate aim is the survival of our wildlife and our
resources, we need bigger units in which the animals can exist in a more
natural environment and in which we can really apply the research we have
done. This is important, and I want to thank the hon the Minister for the
work he has done in this regard. [Time expired.]]

Ms G L MAHLANGU: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister and other
Ministers present ...

Mr D H M GIBSON: Are there any?
Ms G L MAHLANGU: Yes there are! [Interjections.] I know the hon member
aspires to be one. [Interjections.]

It becomes so difficult to say anything after the excellent speeches that
we have had this morning.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Especially from Janet Semple! [Laughter.]

Mr G L MAHLANGU: Political stability, good governance and greater social
and economic equity are essential elements for sustainable development.
South Africa's transition to democracy is the first step towards achieving
that goal. While managing resources in a sustainable manner, an
environmental policy that focuses mainly on the conservation and protection
of resources must take due account of those who depend on the environment
for their livelihood.

We have in this country a Constitution which guarantees a clean and safe
environment for everybody. How do we achieve this in the absence of
punitive measures against those who degrade the environment? The National
Environmental Management Act emphasises the polluter-pays principle, which
becomes impossible when the industrial sector is self-regulating.

The new White Paper on Integrated Pollution and Waste Management for South
Africa, which aims to totally change South Africa's approach to handling
waste is awaited by all South Africans. When that is launched, we can start
talking about pollution prevention and waste minimisation.

A clean and protected environment is what all of us need, and for a country
to be in a position to market itself internationally, one of the tools to
attract tourists is a clean environment. Just to give an example, a tourist
who has just arrived in Cape Town, while waiting for his or her luggage, is
welcomed by a stench which actually gets stronger, I believe, when planes
land in Cape Town. This is that tourist's first impression. On his or her
way from the airport to the city are the Athlone cooling towers, also with
their legendary stench. If it is a clear day he or she will be able to
glimpse the Caltex refinery. With a bit of luck one is even able to see
Koeberg and, eventually, if it is a windy day, the streets of Cape Town,
littered with plastic bags.

Most developed countries have dropped the use of coal, and are starting to
phase out nuclear energy. South Africa, on the contrary, is pouring a lot
of money into efforts to revive old sources of energy. At this rate we are
at risk of attracting the northern industries that do not want to comply
with environmental regulations. There are short-term benefits from these
kinds of practices, but for business only. South Africa as a nation will
not benefit in the long term.

I know I certainly sound as if it is doomsday, but it is definitely not.
The programmes that the Minister's department has put in place have made us
all proud. We can do still better. We have seen the projects the Minister's
department is involved in, such as the transfrontier conservation areas,
the world heritage sites, the Lubombo and Wild Coast spatial development
initiatives, the Cape floral kingdom, the expansion of the Addo Elephant
Park, waste management projects and community-based resource management
projects. We received with excitement the Minister's announcement on
plastic bag regulations and the official release of the White Paper on
Integrated Pollution and Waste Management for South Africa.

The establishment of proper waste-management services requires a change of
attitude in those with the power to make decisions. Many people are quick
to blame local councils for nondelivery without studying the situation on
the ground. The scrutiny of the problem, many a time, lies in the history
of the past, which cannot be changed by the councils alone. We are now in
an era that requires national planners, administrators and leaders to
realise that cleaning the environment is as important as the defence of a
country. The mindset must change. The fact of the matter is that waste
management has never ever enjoyed the priority given to its sister, social
services.

There is also a phenomenal tendency to blame the poor and less privileged
for indiscriminate littering. Yet, it is evident that the worst culprits
with regard to improper waste management practices are the rich, the
educated, the industrialists, the institutions of learning, the Government
institutions and the business communities. We must balance the facts and
set the record straight.

This change of attitude can be achieved through an intense sensitisation
programme for members of the public. This is what the Government has sought
to do through the waste management strategy. This task needs collaboration
between agencies of Government, nongovernmental organisations, the private
sector, the academic world and the business community.

We as public representatives have a role to play. We have communicated with
the Secretary to Parliament about this institution itself becoming an
example. Members will see a number of changes. For example, we get two
copies of Order Papers, but we only need one. It should be our
responsibility to bring that one into the Chamber. [Applause.]

For many here at home and within the international community, South Africa
remains the twinkling star of the nursery rhyme. It is a destination which
they feel is so near and yet so far. Because of its great political
achievements it has endeared itself to these multitudes, the majority of
whom feel its embrace which seems to overwhelm them. It overwhelms them
because to them it is both a reality and a miracle.

As in the nursery rhyme, they say ``how I wonder what you are''. This is
the longing of both our former colonisers and the former slaves of
countries beyond and those who were colonised within the borders of the
continent to know and better appreciate this part of our continent.
Therefore, when the reggae singer Eddy Grant sings Hello Africa - those
members who love music will understand what I am talking about ...
[Interjections.] [Laughter.] I do not know whether the Chairperson of
Committees will allow me to sing. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] ... he
expresses this longing ... [Interjections.] I can sing very well; members
can ask me after the sitting.

Everyone out there feels that they are bound to this beautiful country by
something, something they cannot understand, yet something powerful. During
the years of isolation they heard so much about the people of this country
and their struggles. Yet, when apartheid South Africa spoke to them, they
could only hear about the climate, the animals, the beaches and,
occasionally, the chance for the former colonisers to come back to live
like kings with blacks in attendance.

No wonder the reggae singer Eddy Grant, expressing his longing for Africa,
can only ask the question: ``How are you, Africa? How are the lions and the
tigers?'' Yet, we are the home of many graves of British soldiers, French
Huguenots, German missionaries and their grandchildren. We live with their
grandchildren, they are part of our nonracial nation. We are the country
whose gold and diamonds glitter on their fingers.

Today we expose ourselves, our bond to them and theirs to us. It is
culture, our culture, the things we have seen done and articulated, the
worshipful cultivation of our land, the seas, our mountains, the valleys
and everything that defines us as human. It is a fact that South Africa and
the Sterkfontein Caves are the cradle of mankind, the origin of all
humankind.

But there is another side to South Africa. I present to members the
country's rainbow people and their colourful cultural heritage. We believe
that they are even more exiting and diverse than our beautiful country
itself. Our people have a unique and wonderful expression of life. We dance
and sing and make music in many different ways, we speak and paint and tell
stories as no other people do, we eat, we wear, we create value and
celebrate that which is uniquely our own. We are South Africans.

And the Minister is not wrong by allocating much money to tourism, because
we can create more jobs. We can make South Africa a better place for
everybody, only if we start revisiting our patriotism. We are not
patriotic. We do not support South African goods, we do not support South
African food. I can ask my officials and I would be very happy if one of
them has spent the night at a bed-and-breakfast owned by a disadvantaged
person.

We speak about disadvantaged people participating in the tourism industry,
but we do not create the market. What are we doing? I challenge all the
people who have budgets. I challenge all the chairpersons of committees.
Those finger lunches can also be made by women around this area.
[Applause.] The sandwiches for the functions that we have in this
Parliament can be made by people who are begging in the streets of Cape
Town.

An HON MEMBER: Bua! [Speak!]

Ms G L MAHLANGU: We can make a difference only with the money that is given
to us.

An HON MEMBER: Amagwinya! [Vetkoek!]

Ms G L MAHLANGU: I have taken a decision with my committee and a number of
chairpersons that never ever will we spend a cent on an advantaged person.
We must create a market for our people to start participating. [Applause.]
That is why we are not going to give members any finger lunch after this.
We are taking our party to Gugulethu to get the facilities that black
people can also offer so that we start slicing the cake. There is enough of
this cake, but it is only concentrated in a few. We need to say, South
Africa belongs to all. We need to set an example.

As public representatives, how many of us use travel agents that belong to
black people? [Interjections.] How many of us support taxis that belong to
black people? How many of us eat from the hands of disadvantaged people?
[Interjections.] How many of us stop just one day to greet a disadvantaged
person? [Applause.] [Interjections.] How many of us do those things? We
should not come and take public stages like this one and say that
disadvantaged people should participate when we do not create a market.

We want to create the market and this department itself, as a department
given the responsibility of tourism, should lead the way. We say to the
director-general that we will boycott all those parties that are hosted by
the Holiday Inns and the Mount Nelsons. We will not come to those parties.
[Interjections.] We will make sure that we go and have umngqusho [samp and
beans] at home. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, that was
the closing speech of the debate. I am worried about speaking for too long
because I would like this atmosphere to stay with us for quite a long time.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

I would like to address just two matters. The first is that a number of
people have made reference to the fact that the tourism industry in this
country is still very white-owned. I would just like to make one or two
comments about that. Like the hon Mbuyazi and the hon Ramotsamai, I was
struck by this when I attended the indaba for the first time in Durban just
over a week ago.

For those members who do not know, Indaba 2000 is a major tourism expo in
the world. It is hosted in Durban every year. There are about 800 companies
that have exhibits there and some 4 000 exhibits across Durban's ICC. It is
so huge that the ICC, the biggest convention centre in Africa, is actually
too small. So what they do is to close a whole lot of roads and link up the
ICC with the Durban Convention Centre and all of that becomes a huge expo
centre, very beautiful, very nice with lots of nice things to do and to
see. But as I walked through those aisles, what struck me was that only
white people were involved in tourism. One could not help but be struck by
it. One just had the feeling that here we are, working so hard, spending so
many taxpayers' rands to make white people rich or richer.

HON MEMBERS: Richer! [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: One got that sense without being ethnic about it. It struck
one very much.

I met with all provinces earlier this week, on Tuesday. I met with the
provincial MECs, and this is a matter that we then placed on the agenda. We
decided that, at the next meeting of Minmec, we are going to clear all the
items on the agenda. All that we shall be doing is to have a discussion
between me and the nine provincial MECs, supported by all of the tourism
authorities, about what can be done to change this unhappy situation.
[Applause.] I would like to invite the chairperson of the portfolio
committee to participate in a meeting with us. Perhaps she will be able to
reflect the kind of mood and sense of this debate in that particular
meeting.

The second point that I would like to pick up on is the one made by the hon
Moorcroft about greedy developers. What he did not say, which I would like
to just comment on, is that, in many parts of the country, particularly in
coastal areas and along the beaches, there are wealthy people who are
putting up illegal holiday homes. They are not poor people who do not have
a roof over their heads, but reasonably wealthy people who are simply
ignoring or bypassing the law. Quite a lot of this is happening along the
former Transkei coast. There are many illegal dwellings over there. I have
asked the department to begin to take steps in that regard, and I hope that
the House will support me, because it is not going to be easy. A lot of
people are going to be talking about their property rights and such things,
but it is really illegal properties that they have put up over there. I am
quite determined not to rest until we are able to bulldoze all of those
illegal dwellings along the coastline, owned by wealthy people, and which
spoil the beaches for everybody. [Interjections.]
The hon Kalako - I do not know whether he is still here - made a few
comments about the department. May I assure him that we have a department
that I consider to be competent ...

Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairman, is the hon the Minister prepared to take a
question? [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: Yes, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The Minister will take a question.

Dr C P MULDER: Thank you, sir. I hear the Minister saying that he is
determined and will not rest until he has bulldozed all the houses
belonging to the so-called wealthy people. Is the Minister determined to do
that only with regard to the so-called wealthy people's houses or with
regard to all illegal houses being built in those areas? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER: Let me say to the hon Mulder that I was responding to a point
which the hon Moorcroft raised and what he was speaking about. The point
was that, if we are not careful about development, what we would do is to
forever destroy the environment, particularly along the coastal areas. That
is more or less the point he was making, and I was responding to that as
such.

What I was saying is that apart from the rampant development, what is even
worse is the illegal development that is taking place, and that illegal
development is what we will put an end to. I am quite determined to
bulldoze all the illegal homes that have been set up in these ecosensitive
areas as such. Let me assure the members that along these beaches there are
no poor people that have come there to put up shacks because they do not
have homes. It is generally wealthy people, who have homes elsewhere.

I was saying that I should assure the hon Kalako that we have a department
which is not only competent and professional, but also loyal. I must really
say to the hon member that any suggestion that anything we may or may not
be doing sufficiently is as a result of the old order in the department, is
completely untrue. In fact, there would not be any justification for any
Government department to be controlled by the old order after six years of
democracy. So, I must put at rest any sleepless nights that the hon member
may be having as far as that is concerned.

Let me finally take this opportunity to thank my predecessor, Dr Pallo
Jordaan, and his former Deputy Minister, Mr Peter Mokaba, for the work
which they have done and for the manner in which the handover took place,
which made it possible for us, so to speak, to hit the ground running. I
think that we have succeeded in being able to do that. I would also like to
thank members of the portfolio committee and the chairperson, Gwen
Mahlangu, for the support which we have received from the portfolio
committee. We hope that we will be able to continue working as a team.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.
                           TOURISM AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Mr Chairperson,
hon members, we stand before members today with very warm hearts as we
debate this Tourism Amendment Bill. This is a continuation of a process of
transforming our tourism sector. The present Tourism Act narrowly defines
the qualifications necessary to become a tour guide.

This Bill seeks to facilitate the entry of persons from the disadvantaged
sectors of the community by the recognition of prior learning and
experiential learning in accordance with applicable education and training
legislation. Further, this Bill seeks to remove the tourist guides'
registration functions from Satour in pursuance of the objective to convert
Satour into purely a marketing agency.

The Bill provides for the transfer of the proposed national tourist guide
function from Satour to the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism, and the proposed provincial tourist guide function down to the
provincial level. This will require co-ordination between the department
and the provinces to facilitate the implementation of the provincial
tourist guide functions.

The tourist guide staff members residing at Satour at present will be
accommodated in the department. The logistics are being put in place for
this transitional arrangement, which will be finalised as soon as this Bill
becomes law. It will be the responsibility of the national registrar and
the department to establish and maintain a national database of all tour
guides.

The national registrar will, in consultation with the provincial tourist
guide registrars, prepare a code of conduct for tourist guides, hear and
determine appeals lodged, roll out programmes to improve quality of service
in the guiding sector, facilitate broader access of historically
disadvantaged communities into tour guiding, monitor trends in the tourist
guiding industry by conducting research and analysis and publishing tourist
guide information. The department will assist provinces in establishing
tour guide registers as an ongoing process. Those provinces that have
indicated their inability to consolidate the function into their provinces
at this stage will have to be assisted.

The Bill further devolves the tourist guide registration function to
provinces and provides for the appointment of a provincial tourist guide
registrar whose function, as prescribed in the Bill, shall be to register
tourist guides and maintain a provincial register for this purpose, to
promote and develop the tourist guiding industry in the province, to
publish information about other matters relating to the industry and to
handle complaints and exercise disciplinary powers in respect of tourist
guides as provided by law.

Furthermore, the provincial registrars will liaise with the National
Registrar of Tourist Guides in an effort to ensure that all activities
associated with the position are conducted and completed to the highest
standard of service, quality and professional behaviour possible, attend
meetings and functions associated with the position and manage and maintain
standards of tourist guiding on a provincial basis.

They will also ensure that meaningful training is applied and that the
students are afforded this opportunity, which has never happened in the
past. They will also deal with enquiries - telephonic, written and in
person - associated with the tourist guide sector. They will also manage
and convene the registration panel process, in association with the
National Registrar of Tourist Guides, assist with the administration of
financial transactions associated with the registration process, and ensure
full co-ordination of this responsibility with the relevant financial
officer.

South Africa is a country of numerous natural and human wonders waiting to
be discovered by both domestic and foreign tourists. South Africa is
uniquely distinct from other world destinations. It boasts modern
infrastructure and sophisticated communication networks that make it
completely competitive in the world market. It is blessed with a unique and
varied cultural heritage, rich biological diversity and probably one of the
earth's most beautiful surfaces.

With a coastline that stretches for about 3 000 km between Namibia in the
west and Mozambique in the east, South Africa has the third highest level
of biological diversity in the world with over 10 000 plant and animal
species. Almost 15% of the coastal species known worldwide are found in
South African waters, with 12% of these occurring nowhere else in the world
but in South Africa. Our wetlands, 16 of which are of international
importance, and our cultural and heritage sites, three of which have world
heritage status, boost South Africa's status as a formidable world
competitor in tourism.

These features, including the many I have not mentioned, have remained
unexposed to the world. It is these tourism features that must be fully
optimised to sell South Africa to tourists, while conserving their worth
and sustainability to ensure their life through generations to come.

We are, however, challenged to put the industry on the route towards
transformation. If our work as Government is to be justified and credible
in the eyes of the majority, we surely have to define a course for ensuring
not only access for the emerging entrepreneur, but mass involvement in
tourism products and business. We are, through this Bill, seeking to open
up the field to as many people as possible, especially those from the
previously disadvantaged communities. This opening up will occur by
creating greater job opportunities for them as, amongst other things, tour
guides, and placing formerly excluded local destinations and attractions
squarely on the domestic and international tourism maps.

The growth of tourism in this country should not perpetuate the
exploitation of our people, especially of those in the poorer communities.
These concerns recently came to the fore during the Tourism Indaba in
Durban. Tour guides let South Africans know more about other parts of their
country and lay the foundations for effective nation-building. Proper
knowledge of our past and present will assist to build a solid future. Tour
guides open up South Africa to the rest of the world, allowing more and
more people to get the proper and accurate picture of the country.

This Bill will also ensure that the many illegal tour guides out there can
become legitimate ones. Members of the public will now be able to report
them to the provincial registrar if they have complaints and also commend
them when they have done the right thing. These watchdogs will hopefully
encourage better services and products in the sector.

Tour guides must know their environment. They must live in it and take
pride in it. It is this that makes local people the best guides to lead
tourists through these experiences and wealth of products. As we know, when
one travels one finds that there are tour guides who may be, for example,
from Gauteng and are out there operating in the far north even though there
are people who reside in that area, who understand and know the history of
the place. That must come to an end. Most of our tour guides are amongst
the best, but are not recognised, and this Bill is going to assist us in
changing that.

In conclusion, the tourism sector is not standing aloof as the winds of the
African renaissance blow across this continent. In the same way that larger
numbers of tour guides will be needed in order to market South Africa, it
will also be necessary for the rest of the continent. As we market Africa
by subregion, as groups of destinations, countries and so on, we will need
tour guides who are experts in more than a few destinations, countries and
regions. These tour guides will need to be multiskilled, multicultural and
know a number of languages. This is very exciting, as it will now allow for
knowledge about African people to rapidly expand and hopefully engender
African opportunities for trade, investment and greater tourist flows, etc.
Tourism, if well harnessed, can make the African renaissance a reality in a
short time.

In an attempt to mobilise the support of our public, we have launched the
South African Welcome campaign as a flagship tourism awareness programme
aimed at establishing us in tourism. Our people need to understand the
value of tourism to our country in general and in their daily lives. This
campaign acknowledges that our success as a tourist destination rests on
how we package our products and services, and the treatment we give to our
tourists. All of our people, from the woman and man selling arts and crafts
on the street and the petrol attendant in a remote petrol station to the
frontline staff at the hotels, the ports of entry and in Guguletu, need to
know how to treat tourists and travellers alike. This is the essence of the
Welcome campaign. The message is simple: Tourism is everybody's business.

The tourism and hospitality, sports, education and training authority will
be responsible for the setting of standards and norms pertaining to the
tour guide sector. Whilst we encourage the maintenance of high standards,
barriers in these areas should not be erected. We should also endeavour to
embrace as much experience as possible in the training of the tour guides.

The department, through its tourism enterprise development, provides
assistance to small, medium and microtourism enterprises, especially those
who were previously disadvantaged. Our people have to improve service
standards, increase the range of services and products that we offer
tourists and treat everybody with dignity and respect. This will surely
make us a winning nation and really grow our tourism sector and its related
industries. [Applause.]

Ms G L MAHLANGU: Mr Chairperson, today marks a momentous occasion in that
it constitutes an important milestone in the quest to transform the tourist
guiding sector in South Africa. I say this because the hurdles and
challenges which faced the portfolio committee, and many others who were
involved in the drafting of this Bill, are emblematic of the problems which
continue to beset the tourism industry in general.

This Bill assumes a greater significance if we consider that it is one of
the first steps towards meaningfully transforming the entire tourism
industry and ensuring that the vision and principles underlying the Bill
inform the future transformation of the industry. It is fitting that the
Tourism Amendment Bill should set a precedent in this transformative
process.

The guiding sector is one of those sectors of the tourism industry in which
one still finds a representation of less than 10% of persons from the
disadvantaged sectors of our society. Tourist guides are, by and large,
ambassadors for our country and we, therefore, have a responsibility to
ensure that our guides are not only professional, but are capable of
constructing and depicting our country as it should be. Guides are not
simply the windows through which the local and overseas travellers see the
country, but they also fashion visitors' views and experiences of the
country.

They are constantly involved in the process of constructing images of the
host community's culture, and the character of the country and its peoples.
Hence, in the case of developing economies, this reconstructive function
cannot be underestimated. While, in the past, this frontline function was
heavily nuanced by the prevailing political ideology, in our newly
democratised society, it has to be harnessed to a common national agenda -
that of ensuring economic prosperity as well as positive promotion and
imaging of the country.

The Tourism Amendment Bill seeks to lay the foundation for developing a
socially, environmentally and culturally responsible tourist guiding sector
- a tourist guiding sector which will, in accordance with the tourism
vision of our country, contribute to the development of an internationally
competitive industry in South Africa.

This Bill provides for the devolution of all administrative functions
related to the registration of tourist guides to the provinces and, at
national level, it relocates the oversight role from Satour to the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. This will ensure that our
communities have access to tourist guiding as an economic activity, and
that they are meaningfully involved in the tourism industry.

I understand that there has been a request that we shorten our speeches, so
that members can get their flights. I do not think that that argument is
very good, because we spend endless hours in the portfolio committees
debating issues, and we want members to hear what we are doing in the
portfolio committee. Therefore I would urge that the debate on
environmental affairs and tourism be more favourably accommodated. I know
that I am not the right person to make such a request, but it took place on
Friday last year and we did not complete our speeches. It is taking place
on Friday again this year and now we are told that we should cut short our
speeches, which I think is very unfair. I think the people who are
responsible for making sure that debates take place, should please make
sure that they give us a Tuesday or a Wednesday, so that they understand
the importance that we attach to this portfolio that they have given us.
[Applause.]

Just before I resume my seat, I want to raise a question about the
protection of tourists at our airports. I am very happy that I see Mr
Matola here from the SA Tourism Board. We need to make sure that we
maximise the protection of tourists at the airport. One's clothes are
almost ripped off by people who want one to get into their taxi without one
even saying that one needs a taxi. Foreign travellers do not have the
necessary support at the airports.

Regarding the immigration side, we have foreigners who wait there for long
hours. If we are serious about tourism, we need to make sure that there is
access and that people do not have to wait there for many hours to get just
one person to stamp their passports. Yet, we have domestic travellers who
live in South Africa and they have free access to the airports. I also want
to say a word about the very expensive limousines that ferry people between
Cape Town and the expensive hotels. They are ripping off tourists.

We need to be very vigilant about tour guides. We need to pass a message on
to the travel agents. I hope the SA Tourism Board is taking note of that.
We need to pass this information on to the travel agents so that they make
a point that whomever they bring into South Africa does not get into any
car or any vehicle if the tour guide does not have a badge. The badge must
be there to identify the person so that one knows that this is a registered
person.

Most of the people who are taking travellers from airports to destinations
of tourism are not legal, and I think we need to put punitive measures in
place. That is why people get mugged, because they get into the wrong cars
and we have no control over those cars. So, we would like to see, in these
weekend newspapers, a statement by the tourism board, addressing the
protection of our tourists. We love our country. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Jannie Momberg, the hon Mahlangu
has made a request. I do not know whether she was referring it to me, but I
am referring it back to you. That is a request that ...

Mr J M MOMBERG: It will be on a Tuesday next year. [Applause.]

Mr M L DA CAMARA: Chairperson and hon members, although the DP usually
takes a dim view of any form of Government interference in private
industry, the success of our tourism industry depends on this particular
intervention.

The DP takes pleasure in supporting this Bill. If properly implemented, it
will go a long way in establishing a modern and competitive tourist
industry. This Bill, after all is said and done, forms just one part of
South Africa's needed preparation for the expected influx of tourists which
should result from the new emphasis on marketing and everyone's recognition
of tourism's potential for economic development in South Africa. This, of
course, provided that these efforts do not become diluted by political
imperatives rather than economic ones.

Some concerns did preoccupy the committee during deliberations. Of
particular concern was the effect of setting standards which would have
prohibited guides with little education from participating in the industry,
as the standards have not, as yet, been generated. It would have been
regrettable if the new standards penalised potential unregistered guides in
communities which would potentially offer unique tourist attractions. In
the end, the department saw its way clear to make the appropriate
amendments which deal with this issue, whilst still maintaining high
standards.

It is precisely this aspect of attracting new and previously excluded
communities from the benefits of the tourist industry that gives cause for
excitement. These communities will be able to compete in a lucrative
industry with a definite advantage, as they are in a position to develop
their own niche markets. This allows them to claim a significant stake in
the tourism industry.

The possibilities here are astounding. However, having said this, a note of
caution needs to be struck. South Africa's preparation for a bigger and
better slice of the tourism market must extend beyond this Bill and beyond
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, if we are indeed to
benefit from it. We need to ask ourselves: Is South Africa fully prepared
for an increase in tourism? Important attention needs to be given to
increasing our infrastructural capacity and the social services necessary
to service tourists. Only then can we truly say we are ready for a tourist
influx.

Our transport system is one case in point. This Bill's positive
contribution will not have the desired effect of growth if it is not
matched by an equivalent improvement of our public transport system. This
entails a reversal of the deteriorating transport infrastructure in South
Africa. Issues of crime and the preparedness of the general population for
the influx of tourists are vital. All the department's efforts and all the
portfolio committee's work on this Bill will come to naught if we do not
demonstrate to visitors that South Africa is a safe destination to visit.

In our preparations particular attention needs to be given to our
environment and surroundings. This is particularly important as many
tourists arrive to see the natural attractions of our countryside and in
far-flung communities. It therefore becomes essential that proper planning
and investment regarding our environment take place. Over and above the
direct and potential negative impact that tourism may have on our fragile
ecosystems, which necessitates proper capacity evaluation, consideration
needs to be given to the probable increase in pollution that will stem from
increased amounts of consumption.

Many towns and less developed areas in South Africa will not cope with the
increase in refuse which will certainly result from the increased tourist
consumption, to use one example. Urgent attention needs to be given to
rapidly improving the capacity of communities to deal with issues such as
these as part of their preparations to take advantage of new opportunities.

In order for the economy to truly benefit in the long term and in a
sustainable way further preparations have to be undertaken to support the
initiatives presented in this Bill and other amendments, including the
reform of Satour. This picture in front of us is bright, but we need to
maintain and sustain the momentum presented by this Bill; we need to
prepare for a tourism boom. [Applause.]

Nkk L R MBUYAZI: Mphathisihlalo neNdlu ehloniphekile, i-IFP isishayela
ihlombe lesi sichibiyelo sokuba abantu babhaliswe ezifundazweni
njengabaphelezeli bezivakashi. Kuqala, kade lokhu kwenzeka le phezulu
ezingeni likazwelonke, abantu phansi laphaya beshiyiwe. Ngakho-ke abantu
bazokwazi ukubhalisela ukuba ngabaphelezeli bezivakashi ezindaweni
abakuzona. Kodwa esikucelayo ukuba kumenyezelwe kahle ukuthi kubhaliswa
kuphi nendawo ukuze abantu basuke baye kobhalisa lapho. Kudingeka bazi
ukuthi kubhaliswa kuphi, ubani obhalisayo kanye nokuthi ubani abangaxhumana
naye futhi.

Kukhona abantu abanolwazi olunzulu, esikhulume ngabo laphaya ekomidini
ngenkathi silungisa lesi sichibiyelo, okungabantu abathile abanolwazi
oludala nokho abakade bengebona abaphelezeli bezivakashi. Labo bantu-ke
nabo kufuneka babuyiswe ngoba kuyadabukisa ukufica ibhasi liza lizongena
endaweni linezivakashi. Uma selifika lelo bhasi, kutholakale ukuthi lihamba
nomuntu nje ongayazi leyo ndawo. Nakhona lapha eKapa lokho kuyenzeka. Lapha
kukhona abantu abangazi ngempela ukuthi kukuphi lapho kuhlangana khona
izilwandle ezimbili. Umuntu uvele akhombe nje indawo ethile athi-ke
yilaphayana kanti akazi ukuthi kukuphi ngempela. Labo bantu abazifunela
amathuba bazophela-ke uma kubhaliswa, kuthi abantu babe ngabaphelezeli
bezivakashi ngokusemthethweni, futhi babe nalelo bheji ebelishiwo usihlalo.
Umuntu ongumphelezeli wangempela kufanele abantu abavakasha lapha bambone
ngalelo bheji okufuneka lifakwe ukuze phela sibe sezingeni lomhlaba.

Isigaba 21A esilapha sikhuluma ngokuthi osebhalisile uzothola isitifiketi
abuye athole naleli bheji. Laba bantu abathatha abantu babase ezindaweni,
umuntu azokhuluma ngomfula wangakithi engawazi, kanti kukhona umkhulu
wakuleyo ndawo ongakwazi ukubatshela ukuthi kule ndawo kwakwenzeka ukuthi
nokuthi, kanye nokuthi kuleya ntaba kwenzeka ukuthi nokuthi kuyo. Kukhona
abantu ebesibabiza ngo-Oom Dawie lapha ekomidini, kukhona nabanye abanjengo-
Oom Piet abangakutshela mhlawumbe ngezindawo ezinjengoNcome ukuthi
kwenzakalani kuzo, abangakutshela ngemifula ethize nangezindawo
ezinjengoPhathe ukuthi kwenzakalani khona, nezinto ezithile abangakwazi
ukuthi bakutshele ngazo.

Njengamanje siphumelelise amagama ezindawo esezizokwaziwa njengezindawo
zomlando kumhlabuhlangene. Lezi zindawo zamagugu omlando kuzodingakala
ukuthi abantu bakulezo ndawo kube yibona ababachazela kahle laba bantu
abavakashe kuzo, okuyizindawo ezinjenge-Robben Island. E-Robben Island
kuhle kube khona abantu abazi kahle ukuthi kule ndawo kwenzakala ini. Leyo
ndawo enjalo izoba yindawo yamagugu omlando, ngakho uma kufika noma imuphi
umfana ofundile noma intombi ethile ikuchazele ibe ingenayo leya nto
ngaphakathi yokuthi kwenzakalani ngempela, nokuthi kuleya ndawo kwaba
yibuphi ubuhlungu obaba khona kanye nokuthi lapha kwaba yibuphi, lokho
akukuhle. Yilokho esikufunayo ukuthi kube nabantu abanolwazi olunzulu kodwa
babhalise bese bazeka ukuze bazithathe kahle izivakashi zethu ezize kule
ndawo.

Ngibale ukuthi kunezindawo esesiziphumelelisile ezingo-Robben Island,
Sterkfontein, St Lucia Wetlands nemifula ethize nezintaba ezithize
okudingeka ukuthi kube ngabantu bakithi abachazayo ukuthi kwenzakalani
kulezo ndawo.

UNgqongqoshe ukhulumile lapha wathi kufanele kube ngumuntu onolwazi
lwendawo ophelezela izivakashi. Lokho okushiwo nguSekela Ngqongqoshe
sikushayela ihlombe njengoba ekushilo ukuthi makube ngumuntu oqeqeshekile
futhi owaziyo lo msebenzi, futhi awenze kahle esethole nesitifiketi sakhe
sokuthi uyawenza. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu
speech follows.)

[Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Chairperson and honourable House, the IFP applauds the
amendment made to the Bill which says that people should be registered as
tour guides even at provincial level. All along this has been taking place
only at national level. People at grass-roots level have been ignored. Now,
people will be able to register as tour guides at the places in which they
live. We want a clear announcement to be made so that people will know at
exactly which places the registration process will take place. It is
important for them to know the place where they will be registered. They
should be given the names of those who will register them as well as the
names of those they can contact if they have a problem.

There are experts whose names were mentioned when we were amending this
Bill as a committee. These experts were not regarded as tour guides,
although they had the in-depth knowledge required for this job. They should
be brought into this field, because it is disappointing to see a bus full
of visitors who are accompanied by somebody who does not know the history
of the area they are visiting. This happens even here in Cape Town. There
are people here who do not know where the two oceans meet. A tour guide
just points anywhere, thinking that that is where the two oceans meet.
Those chancers will disappear once the registration process has been
started. Registered tour guides will accompany visitors legally. They will
also wear the badge to which the chairperson was referring. A registered
tour guide will be recognised by this badge, which should be worn to show
that tourism in our country is at an international level.

Section 21A of this Bill stipulates that once a person has registered, he
or she will be given a certificate and a badge. There are people who
accompany visitors to places with which they are not familiar.
Nevertheless, one finds that old people residing in those places can tell
visitors the complete history of a place or a river at that place. This is
true because they were born and brought up there. There are people in the
committee, like the one we have been referring to as Oom Dawie. People like
Oom Piet can tell a lot about places like Blood River and events that took
place near this river. There are people who can tell stories about the
Ophathe area, its history, and many other stories.

Up to now we have succeeded in suggesting the names of places which will be
known as national historical sites. People who live in those places will
tell the history of their places to visitors. I am talking about places
like Robben Island. For instance, on Robben Island there should be tour
guides who know the exact history of this island. Such a place will be a
treasure of history. It is not good to learn about the history of a place
from an educated boy or girl who does not have enough knowledge of the
place, and who has no idea of the pain felt by people at that time. That is
why we need people who have an in-depth knowledge of these places. Such
persons should register so that they will be known. This will enable them
to treat visitors with respect.

I have mentioned that there are places which we have identified as national
historical sites. These include Robben Island, Sterkfontein, St Lucia
Wetlands, as well as some mountains and rivers. It is from historical sites
that we should get people who know the history of those places.

The hon the Minister mentioned in his speech that a tour guide should be
someone who knows the area very well. We applaud the words of the Deputy
Minister that it should be a knowledgeable and trained person who will
perform the duty after he or she has received a certificate. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Mev M E OLCKERS: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is vir die Nuwe NP aangenaam om
hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp te steun. Die waarde van toerisme vir 'n land
is van groot belang, nie alleen weens die geld wat dit die land inbring
nie, maar ook weens die werkskepping wat dit meebring. Daarom is dit
belangrik dat toeriste se skakel met die land en met wat dit bied - sy
kulture, sy geskiedenis, die kookkuns en die gewoontes van verskillende
mense wat die tafereel of skildery of kunswerk wat die land uitbeeld - op
'n eerlike en entoesiastiese wyse oorgedra word.

Die toergids is juis hierdie skakel tussen die toeris en die land, want dit
is dikwels die eerste persoon met wie 'n toeris in 'n land kontak maak. Die
entoesiasme en kennis van 'n goeie toergids kan die toeris só beïnvloed dat
hy of sy weer wil terugkom na die land, maar die skade wat vals of
verkeerde inligting aan toeriste aan die beeld van die land kan doen, is
onherstelbaar, want almal in dié land word dan so beoordeel.

Daarom is die toergids so 'n belangrike bemarker van hierdie land, en om
aan so 'n standaard te voldoen, verwelkom die Nuwe NP hierdie verandering
in die wet, ook omdat minder gesofistikeerde toergidse wat tans in die
bedryf werk steeds sal kan voortgaan met hul werk, al is hulle akademies
nie hoog gekwalifiseer nie. Hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp sal hulle steeds
in staat stel om hul kennis met besoekers aan die land te deel. Daar sal
dus geen diskriminasie wees nie. Daar was skreiende gevalle van uitbuiting
wat onder die komitee se aandag gekom het. As sulke gevalle voortaan
voorkom, sal teen die skuldiges opgetree kan word, en aandag sal ook in die
toekoms nog gegee moet word aan toerleiers wat die land skade aandoen.

Die Nuwe NP verwelkom ook die erkenning en die outonomie wat ingevolge
hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp aan die LUR'e van die verskillende provinsies
verleen word, sodat die provinsies hul verskeidenheid aantreklikhede self
en op hulle eie wyse kan bemark en hul gidse kan moniteer. Hierdie
wysigingswetsontwerp sal dien om die bedryf te reguleer en die mense wat
daarin werk meer status te gee, onder meer deur die onwettige toergidse vas
te vat en te ontmasker.

Ek wil graag die voorsitter van die komitee, die agb lid Gwen Mahlangu,
bedank vir die aangename en bekwame wyse waarop sy die komitee en hierdie
wysigingswetsontwerp gehanteer het. Partykeer was haar geduld selfs
frustrerend, maar ons bedank haar daarvoor en vir die deeglikheid waarmee
sy haar werk doen. Ons is trots op haar. Ons steun graag die
wysigingswetsontwerp. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs M E OLCKERS: Mr Chairperson, it is a pleasure for the New NP to
support this amending Bill. The value of tourism for a country is of great
importance, not only for the money it earns the country, but also as a
result of the job creation. It is therefore important that the link
tourists have with the country and what it offers - its cultures, its
history, its cuisine and the habits of different peoples, which portray the
scenes or pictures or artwork of the country - is conveyed in an honest and
enthusiastic manner.

The tour guide is precisely this link between the tourist and the country,
because this person is often the first person with whom a tourist comes
into contact in a country. The enthusiasm and knowledge of a good tourguide
can influence a tourist in such a way that he or she wants to return to the
country, but the damage which false or incorrect information which is given
to tourists can do to the image of a country, is irreparable, because
everyone in that country is then judged in that way.

It is for this reason that the tour guide is such an important marketer of
this country, and to comply with such a standard, the New NP welcomes this
change in the legislation, also because less sophisticated tour guides who
are currently working in the industry will still be able to continue with
their work, although they are not academically highly qualified. This
amending Bill will still enable them to share their knowledge with visitors
to the country. There will therefore be no discrimination. There were
blatant instances of exploitation which came to the attention of the
committee. If such instances occur in future, action can be taken against
the offenders, and attention will also have to be given in future to tour
leaders who harm the country.

The New NP also welcomes the recognition and the autonomy being granted to
the MECs of the different provinces, in terms of this amending Bill, so
that the provinces can market their different attractions themselves and in
their own way, and can monitor their tour guides. This amending Bill will
serve to regulate the industry and will give more status to the people who
work in it, inter alia by clamping down on and exposing illegal tour
guides.

I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee, the hon member Gwen
Mahlangu, for the pleasant and competent manner in which she chaired the
committee and dealt with this amending Bill. Sometimes her patience was
even frustrating, but we thank her for that and for the thoroughness with
which she does her work. We are proud of her. We gladly support this
amending Bill.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP supports this Bill, which introduces a
radically redesigned tourist guiding system for South Africa. The
importance of the tourist guiding sector to the broader tourism industry
cannot be overemphasised, as it is the first line of contact most visitors
have with this country. We must bear in mind the crucial aspect as pointed
out by the Centre for Applied Management Science, namely that we must guard
against commercial ineptitude.

The performance of tour guides must be evaluated and controlled properly.
It means further that tourists offended by commercial ineptitude will
simply stay away and encourage others to stay away too, without the tourist
industry even being aware of the reasons for lacklustre tourism figures. It
is imperative, therefore, that guides should provide a professional service
to visitors, professional in core and commitment, and professional in
providing an objective understanding of all information relating to the
place visited. As representatives of the country, they should welcome
visitors and act in such a way as to bring credit to our country and
promote it as a tourism destination. There are a large number of
unregistered tour guides who need to be brought into the net, however.

The transitional provisions contained in the Bill include a period of grace
to enable unregistered tour guides to come under the ambit of the Act. The
ACDP calls on all unregistered guides to make use of these provisions to
legitimise their activities. The issue of proper control and evaluation
referred to earlier must, however, be adhered to for this Bill to succeed
in achieving its aims. Unregistered guides who do not come forward should
be brought to book and can easily be found at tourist hot spots.

In conclusion I wish to thank the hon Gwen Mahlangu - the previous speaker
also thanked her - for the gracious manner with which she has chaired the
committee at times when it was quite difficult to find a way forward. My
thanks to her. The ACDP supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, daar word 'n geweldige hoë premie
geplaas op toerisme in Suid-Afrika. Dit is een van die bedrywe wat in Suid-
Afrika geoormerk is vir geweldige groot ontwikkeling. Die agb
Adjunkpresident het verlede week by 'n konferensie in Durban gesê dat die
toerismebedryf waarskynlik die bedryf is wat die potensiaal het om die
meeste werkgeleenthede in die land te skep. Daar bestaan dus geweldige
potensiaal in die bedryf.

Ek dink ons moet ook kennis neem van die gevaar vir toerisme as dinge
polities partykeer skeef gaan. Almal in die Huis dra kennis daarvan dat die
onlangse ongelukkige gebeure in Zimbabwe 'n geweldig negatiewe effek op hul
toerismebedryf gehad het en tot geweldige kansellasies gelei het. Ons moet
miskien altyd onthou dat ons ook in Suid-Afrika die toerismebedryf slegs
kan uitbou solank ons politieke stabiliteit in die land kan handhaaf, wat
in die toerismebedryf se belang is.

Dit is inderdaad so dat 'n mens moet weet dat die toerismebedryf 'n bedryf
is wat op 'n sekere manier gehanteer moet word. Om dit in gewone Afrikaans
te stel, dit moenie sommer 'n flentergatbesigheid wees nie. [Gelag.] Ons
het 'n onlangse voorbeeld in die koerante gesien van 'n toergids hier in
die Wes-Kaap wat 'n klomp niksvermoedende toeriste in 'n bus gelaai het, en
R800 later vir hulle Kommetjie se vuurtoring gaan wys het en vir hulle
vertel het dat dit Kaappunt was. Hulle het nie van beter geweet nie.
Hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp sal daardie tipe onprofessionele gedrag op 'n
einde bring. Ons dink dit is baie noodsaaklik.

Ook die onderliggende gedagte dat gesag in 'n sekere mate afgewentel word
na die provinsies deurdat elke provinsie die reg sal hê om sy eie
provinsiale registrateur van toergidse aan te wys, wat dit dan op
provinsiale vlak sal hanteer, is 'n positiewe ontwikkeling. Die VF sal baie
graag die wysigingswetsontwerp steun. Lede van die Huis weet dat wanneer
hulle as toeriste in die buiteland gaan toer het, dan het hulle van daardie
land se toerismebedryf verwag om op 'n professionele manier te werk te gaan
en sake op die beste professionele manier te hanteer. Suid-Afrika moet met
niks minder as dit tevrede wees nie en daarom is die wetgewing noodsaaklik.
Ons steun dit baie graag. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Dr C P Mulder: Mr Chairperson, an extremely high premium is placed on
tourism in South Africa. It is one of the industries in South Africa that
has been earmarked for very great development. The hon the Deputy President
said last week at a conference in Durban that the tourism industry is
probably the industry which has the potential to create the most job
opportunities in the country. Therefore enormous potential exists in the
industry.

I think we also have to take cognisance of the danger to tourism if things
sometimes go wrong on the political front. Everyone in the House knows that
the recent unfortunate events in Zimbabwe had an extremely negative impact
on their tourism industry and lead to numerous cancellations. We should
perhaps always bear in mind that in South Africa, too, we can only develop
the tourism industry as long as we can maintain political stability in the
country, which is in the interest of the tourism industry.

It is a fact that one must know that the tourism industry is an industry
which must be handled in a certain manner. To put it quite plainly, it must
not just be another below par industry (flentergatbesigheid). [Laughter.]
We recently saw an example in the newspapers of a tour guide here in the
Western Cape who loaded a group of unsuspecting tourists onto a bus and
after charging them R800 showed them the lighthouse at Kommetjie and told
them that this was Cape Point. They did not know any better. This amending
Bill will put a stop to that kind of unprofessional behaviour. We think it
is very necessary.

Also the underlying idea that power can, to a certain extent, be devolved
down to the provinces, in that every province will have the right to
appoint its own provincial registrar of tour guides, who will then deal
with this at the provincial level, is a positive development. The FF will
very gladly support the amending Bill. Members of the House know that when
they went abroad as tourists, they expected the tourism industry of those
countries to operate in a professional manner and to handle matters in the
most professional manner. South Africa must be satisfied with nothing less
than that and that is why the legislation is necessary. We gladly support
it. [Applause.]]
Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson, hon members, legislation, like all
institutions, has to be kept alive by constantly revisiting it to make sure
that it addresses the needs of the people at the present time.

The principal Act on tourism was promulgated before the democratisation of
South Africa. As such, it had limitations. It has become necessary to
refine it in order to accommodate the present political dispensation and
thus enable provinces to have their word heard in this instance.

In keeping with the other professions, it is necessary that a code of
conduct and ethics be introduced, so that the conduct of those involved in
tourism - such as our tour guides - will be above board. They should know
how to treat their clients, and they should treat them in such a manner
that they find time to come to South Africa again.
Provincial administrations are, through this amendment, being enabled to
have their registrars who will be charged with seeing to the keeping and
maintenance of a register of tour guides in the respective provinces. This
is also in line with ensuring that no work is centralised at head office
with the national department. The departments down there, where all these
things take place, will also have something to do. This exercise will
ensure that eight other managerial jobs are created, and concomitant with
this would be the enhancement of service conditions for the other people
who will serve as secretaries to these people.

We are aware, however, that there will be no additional posts to the
establishments. But the argument is that whoever will be serving as
provincial registrar, will be holding a position of responsibility in one
way or another. This progressive piece of legislation seeks to be
proactive, as it lays down what routes to follow in the event of a
complaint being laid. The national registrar will hear appeals against
certain decisions meted out by the provincial registrars which may not have
gone well for the tour guides.

It is on this note that the UCDP fully supports this amendment, and goes on
to say that we are very grateful for the chairpersonship of a person like
Gwen Mahlangu. As they say ga go na yo o tshwanang le ena [there is no one
like her]. [Time expired.]

Ngaka M S MOGOBA: Modulasetulo le Lekgotla le le hlomphegago, boeti le
pabalelo ya tlhago ke mokokotlo wa boiphidišo bja rena. Botse bja naga ya
rena ke gauta yeo e lego ka godimo ga lefase. Ge gauta yeo re e epago e
fedile, yona e tla no šala e le gona, e bonagala neng le neng.

Lekgotla la Maafrika leo ke le emetšego, le thekga Molaotšhišinyo wo, ka
baka la gore melao yeo e šišinywago ya go leka go laola boeti bjokhwi e tlo
thuša gore bo bolokege, bo se ke bja phatlalala.

Batala ba gešo bare Ngwana yo a sa llego o hwela tharing. Lehono ke nyaka
go llela batho bao ba dulago metseng ya gabo rena ya kgale, bao re sa
bolelego ka bona lehono, ka ge re ba lebetše. Nna ke tswaletšwe lefelong
leo e ka bago iri le seripa go ya Kruger National Park. Bjale ke be ke
šetše ke le mokgalabje ge ke e ya Kruger National Park la mathomo. Bjale ke
nyaka gore ke re hle boeti a bo tle magaeng, bo tle mo batho ba gaborena ba
lego gona. [Legofsi.]

Metse ya gaborena ga re e hlokomele. Ge baeti ba goroga, ba hwetša gore
metse ya gaborena ye metala, ga e na le maina le mo dipukung tša rena tšeo
di laetšago ditsela. Le ge motho a feta go yona ga go le sešupo goba se
sengwe seo se bontšhago gore motse wo mogologolo wokhwi leina la wona ke
lefe. Motho o no feta fela. Go ra gore ga se motse, ga go batho, ga se
selo. Taba yekhwi e nyaka gore e hlokomelwe gore ge re sepetša baeti ba
rena, re ba bontšhe mo batho ba gaborena ba lego gona. [Nako e fedile.]
[Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Dr M S MOGOBA: Mr Chairperson, hon members, tourism and environmental
conservation are the backbone of our economy. The fantastic sceneries of
our country are matched only by the gold that is dug up from below its
surface. However, when gold mines finally become exhausted, those beautiful
sceneries will remain forever, and will continue to attract tourists.

The PAC supports this Bill because the proposed legislation is aimed at
regulating tourism and ensuring that the industry is conserved.

Our ancestors used to say ``Ngwana yo a sa llego o hwela tharing.'' (A
child that does not cry will suffer and die in silence). To that end, I
want to raise a complaint on behalf of people who are staying in places
that are off the beaten track.

I was born about an hour's travel from the Kruger National Park. However, I
was already grey by the time I first visited that place. I would like to
appeal to the Government to help develop tourism in our rural villages,
because that is where most of our population is concentrated. [Applause.]

We seem to be suffering from a culture of treating our villages with
indifference. When foreign tourists arrive on our shores they are quick to
discover that most of our old rural villages are not registered in any of
the books. When one is driving in and around those villages, one is struck
by the absence of signposts. So, one has a feeling that one is passing
through places where there are no villages, no people and nothing
whatsoever. When we guide foreign tourists around our country, we need to
show them the places where most of our people live.  [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members,
internationally, tourism is the world's fastest growing industry. South
Africa has evolved into an attractive tourist destination, bursting with
promise and potential. On a global level, South Africa is positioned in the
tourism industry as a world-class contender.

The Tourism Amendment Bill has initiated a redesigned tourist guiding
system, based on the provisions for an accountable, impartial, transparent
and community-orientated approach. The objective is to achieve the highest
professional standard whilst promoting national competitiveness in the
tourism industry.

Education and training, labour, gender, human rights and environmental
management receive prominence in the Bill, which collectively promotes and
develops the tourist guiding sector. The Bill also makes accommodation for
disciplinary measures and mandatory procedures in order to maintain a sound
and productive economic relationship between the national registrar and the
provincial registrar.

The MF supports the Tourism Amendment Bill, and, at this point in time, I
want to compliment Comrade G Mahlangu for the manner in which she presented
her speech. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, I
think we are all agreed that this is a very good Bill which is long
overdue, and which is going to set very high standards in our tourism
industry. It is also important to acknowledge that local knowledge will
enhance the tourists' experience, and will make tourism everyone's
business.

The provincial implementation of the Bill is also very important, as it has
to ensure that all potential guides get easy access to applications. This
is a vital point. At the moment, we still have a small hitch in that two
provinces have not yet undertaken to implement the Bill. I do not know why
that is so. I am sorry that those two provinces are the Western Cape and
the Eastern Cape, and they should be urged to do so.

I would really like to thank the portfolio committee members for their
tireless work. They have been working very hard under the chairpersonship
of Comrade Gwen Mahlangu. I know very well that committee members never
sleep when they are in her boat. She always steers this boat to safety. I
really want to commend the quality of the work they are doing as a
portfolio committee. It is so good, and it shows the commitment that we
have to building this country, South Africa. They should keep up this good
spirit, and continue with the building of our country. They have really
brought change to South Africa. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 12:20.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 19
         May 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Firearms Control Bill [B 34 - 2000] (National Assembly -
              sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security -
              National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              21193 of 19 May 2000.]

