---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 10 November 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-11-10
---

FRIDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

The Council met at 09:36.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) condemns the practice of quoting public statements out of context;


  (2) in particular, censures the hon Bengu for quoting Professor Themba
       Sono out of context; and


  (3) notes that the full passage in Professor Sono's article reads as
       follows:


  ``One way to eliminate white racism would be to enforce the emigration of
  all whites by putting all of them on ships and sending them to Europe.
  But of course that is not on. A final solution is implausible,
  undesirable and impractical.''

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note of the latest research results of the Worldwatch Institute
       in Washington which spells out the horror that 24 million Africans
       are already infected with the Aids virus and that, short of a
       miracle, will die prematurely as a result;


  (2) further notes that it was reported that Aids is likely to kill more
       people in Africa than died in World War II and that by 2010 life
       expectancy in South Africa will fall from 68 to 48, in Zambia from 60
       to 30 and in Zimbabwe from 70 to 35 years; and


  (3) consequently calls upon the Government to urgently redouble its
       efforts and to speedily produce a multidisciplinary plan which
       engages all sectors of society and government in a single
       concentrated national enterprise to cope with the plague and its
       consequences.

        ACTION TAKEN TO PREVENT CHILD NEGLECT BY COMPULSIVE GAMBLERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr E A CONROY: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) expresses its appreciation to the Minister of Trade and Industry and
       the National Gambling Board for the prompt and decisive action taken
       to prevent further neglect of children by parents while using
       gambling facilities, by launching an investigation into problem
       gambling and initiating a process of formulating a national policy in
       this regard, which will be aimed at encompassing all forms of
       gambling and not only the casino-based types of gambling;


  (2) notes that the issue of child neglect at casinos is a symptom of
       problem gambling in that parents who are obsessed with gambling,
       neglect their parental obligations; and


  (3) further notes that the youth of South Africa is our biggest asset and
       that the early steps taken by the Department of Trade and Industry to
       stamp out this problem, deserves our praise and support.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

           DESIGNATION OF PETER MARAIS AS ``MAMPARA OF THE WEEK''

                             (Draft Resolution)
Ms B THOMPSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates the Democratic Alliance mayoral candidate, Peter
       Marais, on his appointment as mampara of the week;


  (2) notes that the remarks which earned him the above honour are
       consistent with the inane remarks he has made from time to time for
       political gain; and


  (3) looks forward in great anticipation to his next silly and senseless
       comments.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion? [Interjections.] There is an objection.

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, on a point of order: I would like you to rule
on the word ``mampara'', whether it is parliamentary or not.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I think that
is a general term. It is not unparliamentary.

Mr C ACKERMANN: Well, then the hon member who moved the motion is the same.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Mr Ackermann,
you rose on a point of order and you did not do that. That is not on. If
you rise on a point of order, and you are sincere about your point of
order, you should deal with the matter in that respect. If you have any
other issue, you should stand up in an orderly fashion and respect the
decorum of this House. I will not take it. I will allow you any opportunity
to address the House, but in an orderly manner.

In the light of the objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The
motion without notice will become notice of a motion.

                        UTTERANCES BY MR PETER MARAIS

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council notes -


  (1) with growing concern the negative publicity and public outcry
       surrounding the DA's mayoral candidate for Cape Town, Mr Peter
       Marais;


  (2) that on 3 November 2000, members of the public through a public
       demonstration asked for Mr Marais' resignation as MEC for Social
       Services following alleged remarks made to his former New NP
       colleague, Ms Freda Adams, where he called her ``ugly'' and ``a pain
       in the backside'' amongst other things;


  (3) that these allegations have had some dire consequences, some of which
       led to Ms Adams, a former MEC of Gender Equity, quitting the party,
       giving emphasis to the words of one of the protestors that Mr Marais'
       comments ``undermined all the progress made in addressing racism and
       sexism''; and


  (4) with dismay that a public official such as Mr Marais would at a
       meeting in Mossel Bay, publicly denounce all the hard work that
       parties across the political divide actively participated in, namely
       the construction of our new Constitution, and that his derogatory
       statements deserve public censure and some kind of punitive action.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion? [Interjections.] There is an objection, and in the
light of the objection the motion may not be proceeded with. It will
therefore be recorded as notice of a motion.

            WELCOMING OF NATIONAL DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) recognises the presence of the National Director of Public
       Prosecutions, Mr Bulelani Ngcuka, in the Council;
  (2) acknowledges, affirms and recognises his contribution in the past as
       Chief Whip of the Council, as well as Deputy Chairperson, and his
       wonderful contribution to the development of this institution;


  (3) further recognises his sterling contribution as National Director of
       Public Prosecutions; and


  (4) therefore extends a warm welcome to him.

We would have asked him to take his old seat, Chairperson, but the Rules
would not permit that. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I am not sure
whether this is a motion, but I also take this opportunity to welcome the
honourable National Director of Public Prosecutions in our midst and to
wish him well. We recognise his presence.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

         PRONOUNCEMENT OF PREMIER GERALD MORKEL ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D M KGWARE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with dismay that in a public interview on television this week
           Premier Gerald Morkel dismissed the allegation of sexual
           harassment brought by Ms Freda Adams because she was not
           ``physically touched'' by the perpetrator;


       (b)  that Premier Morkel shows a shocking ignorance of what
           constitutes sexual harassment; and


       (c)  with outrage that a senior public official failed to understand
           that sexual harassment includes the making of sexually offensive
           remarks by the perpetrator to the victim; and


  (2) calls on Mr Morkel to resign because he does not display the capacity
       needed for a premier.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion? [Interjections.] The motion is objected to. In the
light of the objection the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion
without notice will become notice of a motion.

                 SMEAR CAMPAIGN AGAINST WESTERN CAPE LEADERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem van die ANC se persoonlike aanvalle op en smeerveldtogte
       teen DA-burgermeesterskandidaat, mnr Peter Marais, asook teen die
       Premier van die Wes-Kaap;


  (2) meen dat die ANC dit doen in die lig van die feit dat hul eie
       kandidaat vir die burgermeesterskap in Kaapstad, mev Lynne Brown, 'n
       onbekende kandidaat is en nie oor die bevoegdhede beskik om 'n
       burgermeesterskandidaat vir enige stad in Suid-Afrika te wees nie; en


  (3) verder kennis neem dat, as gevolg van die ANC se gebrekkige
       uitvoering van hul beleid op grondvlak, veral op munisipale vlak,
       hulle hierdie soort persoonlike smeerveldtogte teen leiers in die Wes-
       Kaap voer, ten einde hul eie saak te bevorder.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the ANC's personal attacks on and smear campaigns against the
       DA mayoral candidate, Mr Peter Marais, as well as against the Premier
       of the Western Cape;


  (2) is of the opinion that they are doing it in the light of the fact
       that their own candidate for the mayorship in Cape Town, Mrs Lynne
       Brown, is an unknown candidate and does not have the competency to be
       a mayoral candidate for any city in South Africa; and


  (3) further notes that, as a result of the ANC's poor carrying out of
       their policy at ground level, especially at municipal level, they are
       waging this type of personal smear campaign against leaders in the
       Western Cape in order to promote their own case.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion? [Interjections.] There is an objection to the
motion. In the light of the objection, this motion may not be proceeded
with and will be recorded as notice of a motion.

                NATIONAL PROSECUTING AUTHORITY AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I take this
opportunity to welcome in our midst the hon the Deputy Minister for Justice
and Constitutional Development and call upon her to address this Chamber.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, colleagues and comrades, I would also like to welcome my old
Chief Whip. It feels a bit like a school reunion. I had the honour of being
his accounting officer for the ANC caucus funds. Having worked directly
under him, I know that his future is bright, but much more so the future of
the national prosecuting authority.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Fortunately we have a surplus. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER: The launch of South Africa's national prosecuting
authority in 1998 introduced a new era for crime fighting in South Africa.
This timely introduction of a single national prosecuting authority
signalled the birth of a dedicated team of crime-fighters entrusted with
the appropriate armour to fight sophisticated criminals and crime
syndicates, and to take them on toe-to-toe.

The establishment in September 1999 of the Directorate of Special
Operations, or the DSO, popularly labelled the Scorpions, came at a crucial
time. While the majority of South Africans were basking in the freedom and
opportunity offered by an emerging democratic South Africa, antidemocratic
forces embarked on a crime campaign, unleashing horrendous acts of violence
that have stunned and victimised ordinary peace-loving citizens.

The DSO will function under the control and direction of the Natonal
Director of Public Prosecutions, whose constitutional mandate is to
institute criminal proceedings on behalf of the state and to carry out
those functions without fear, favour or prejudice.

The Bill before us today adds metal to the existing legislative framework
governing the national prosecuting authority, and comfirms the widened
scope and ambit of the Directorate of Special Operations.

An important consolidation of forces will take place with the passage of
this Bill. The amended legislative framework brings the existing
investigating directorates of the prosecuting authority, namely those
relating to serious economic offences, organised crime and corruption,
under one roof. The proclamation issued in respect of the latter
directorates will be deemed to have been issued in respect of the
Directorate of Special Operations, and will thereby guarantee continuity in
ongoing investigations and prosecutions.

The investigation of a crime and the gathering, preparation and
presentation of evidence are the most important elements in solving any
criminal matter, however big or small. Unfortunately, the rising number of
urban terror campaigns worldwide, and the increased sophistication of white-
collar criminals demand increasingly modern investigative techniques based
on state-of-the-art training, superior infrastructure, foolproof systems
and procedures and cutting-edge technology.

The Directorate of Special Operations will therefore provide the
prosecuting authority with an effective investigative infrastructure and a
suitably trained task force that will focus on prioritised criminal
offences and conduct, with the overriding objective of instituting
appropriate proceedings against perpetrators involved in such activities.

The directorate's activities will focus, firstly, on any criminal or
unlawful activities committed in an organised manner and, secondly, on
other offences or categories of offences as determined by the President. In
respect of these identified categories of offences, the directorate's
purpose is to conduct any necessary investigations; to gather, keep and
analyse information; and, where appropriate, to institute criminal
proceedings against the perpetrators in question. A Deputy National
Director of Public Prosecutions, who will use and perform his or her powers
and functions subject to the control and direction of the National Director
of Public Prosecutions, will head this directorate.

The following persons will assist the directorate: investigating directors,
who are directors of public prosecutions appointed to the directorate;
prosecutors, including deputy directors of public prosecutions; special
investigators, who are a newly created category of persons to be appointed
in terms of the Act; persons who are seconded to the directorate; and other
persons whose services may be obtained by the directorate from time to
time.

The directorate will further rely on a full partnership with communities,
the national prosecuting authority, SA Police Service and the National
Intelligence Agency. Moreover, the Bill makes provision for the
establishment of a ministerial co-ordinating committee, comprising the
Ministers responsible for Justice and Constitutional Development, Safety
and Security, the National Intelligence Agency, Correctional Services,
Defence and any other Minister desiganised mannernated by the President
from time to time.

The establishment of a partnership between all Government stakeholders and
civil society is a major contributor to bolstering our crime fighting
capacity. It embraces government's intention to strategically align related
organisational structures, systems and personnel to capitalise on existing
synergies and to muster the collective strengths of the various
disciplines. This follows the presidential imperative to cultivate a
clustered or sectoral approach to governance and, in this case, to the
criminal justice system.

Our National Crime Prevention Strategy is reviewed on a constant and
ongoing basis. We remain committed to the task of establishing a
comprehensive policy framework and effective implementation mechanisms to
empower the many units and divisions within the criminal justice network in
order to address crime in a co-ordinated and efficient manner.

These adjustments will be made on an ongoing basis as we tighten up and
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the criminal justice system.
The re-engineering of our court services is under way, and we are already
seeking a positive improvement in the efficiency of our courts and our case
management processes. The task-focused consolidation of the prosecutorial
system, as set out in this legislation, will no doubt further strengthen
the organisational capacity and operational efficiency of the Directorate
of Special Operations. I am confident that the Directorate of Special
Operations will become a key instrument in the efficient and effective
prosecution of criminals involved in serious and organised crime. I rise in
support of this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, I would like to indicate from the outset that
no party in this House opposes this Bill. Therefore my address to this hon
House this morning will look at a few issues which I would like to bring to
the attention of members who did not have the privilege to participate in
this process.
In his opening address in Parliament on 25 June 1999, the President
announced that a special and adequately staffed and equipped investigating
unit would be established urgently, to deal with all national priority
crimes, including police corruption. The Directorate of Special Operations
was launched in Guguletu in the same year, 1999. Since then the directorate
operated with staff borrowed from other departments and services.

I would like to quote certain creations that the two committees, that is
the select and portfolio committee, have worked on, especially with regard
to the preamble of this Bill. These are as follows:


  ... the Constitution provides that the Cabinet member responsible for the
  administration of justice must exercise final responsibility over the
  prosecuting authority;


  ... the Constitution provides that national legislation must ensure that
  the Directors of Public Prosecutions are appropriately qualified and are
  responsible for prosecutions in specific jurisdiction;


  ... the Constitution provides that national legislation must ensure that
  the prosecuting authority exercises its functions without fear, favour or
  prejudice;


  ... the Constitution provides that the National Director of Public
  Prosecutions must determine, with the concurrence of the Cabinet member
  responsible for the administration of justice, and after consulting the
  Directors of Public Prosecutions, prosecution policy which must be
  observed in the prosecution process;


  ... the Constitution provides that the National Director of Public
  Prosecutions may intervene in the prosecution process when policy
  directives are not being complied with, and may review a decision to
  prosecute or not to prosecute;


  ... the Constitution provides that the prosecuting authority has the
  power to institute criminal proceedings on behalf of the state, and to
  carry out any necessary functions incidental to instituting criminal
  proceeding;


  ... the Constitution provides that all other matters concerning the
  prosecuting authority must be determined by national legislation;


  ... the Constitution does not provide that the prevention, combating or
  investigation of crime is the exclusive function of any single
  institution;


  ... the Constitution does not prohibit Parliament from amplifying the
  powers and functions of the prosecuting authority in national
  legislation;

This is exactly what Parliament is actually doing with the enactment of
this legislation -


  ... and in order to ensure that the prosecuting authority fulfils its
  constitutional mandate to institute criminal proceedings on behalf of the
  state and to carry out the necessary functions incidental thereto, to
  make provision for -


     ... the establishment of an investigating directorate, with a limited
     investigative capacity, to prioritise and to investigate particularly
     serious criminal or unlawful conduct committed in an organised fashion
     ...

I would like to underline ``in an organised fashion'' -


  ... or certain offences or unlawful conduct, with the object of
  prosecuting such offences or unlawful conduct in the most efficient and
  effective manner; and


  the necessary infrastructure and resources to perform these functions.

The Deputy Minister has indicated how the composition of the prosecuting
authority would be structured. Obviously, we have the national director,
who was welcomed into this House, and who was a member of this House in the
past.

With regard to the operations of the directorate, the Deputy Minister and I
have indicated that its primary task is to investigate; to carry out
functions incidental to investigation; to gather, keep and analyse
information; and, where appropriate, to institute criminal proceedings and
carry out any functions necessary to instituting criminal proceedings.
It is expected that members of this authority will have to meet certain
security requirements. The national director, after gathering and
evaluating information, may appoint a person as a special investigator if
he is satisfied that there is no possibility that such a person might be a
security risk or that he or she might act in any way prejudicial to the
objectives of the Directorate of Special Operations. If he is satisfied,
the national director may issue a certificate in respect of such a person
in which it is certified that he or she has successfully undergone security
clearance. The director has a right to withdraw security clearance in cases
in which certain developments come to the fore indicating that the person
given a clearance actually does not meet the necessary requirements.

The other inclusion in the Bill relates to the conditions of service. It
provides that no permanent member of the directorate may strike or induce
or conspire with any other member of the directorate to strike. Some
members of the committee asked whether this provision did not infringe upon
the constitutional rights of members of the directorate. But I think that
members will all know that the constitutional rights are not absolute but
can be limited to the extent that such limitation is reasonable and
justifiable in an open and democratic society.

What cannot be taken away from the workers, ie the members of the
directorate, are their collective bargaining rights. The employment
contract would make it clear that there is no right to strike. These
provisions would meet the constitutional challenge because, in terms of the
Bill that we will be passing this morning, the employees in the directorate
render an essential service.

Also, the Scorpions, the directorate we are talking about, are not attached
to any geographic area in the Republic but can work throughout South
Africa. This is provided for in order to eliminate the problems of
constitutionality and jurisdiction, as well as the lack of clarity
regarding the line of command of the directorate. In conclusion, I have
addressed the question of the role that they have to play in
investigations.

With regard to the last issue that the Deputy Minister indicated, a
ministerial committee will be established which will deal with policy
guidelines and the spread of functions of the directorate, and we hope that
this legislation will help to create the necessary legislative framework
for a body that already exists. As members of the ANC as well as those of
the select committee, we support this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr L G LEVER: Mr Chairperson, the legislation that regulates the unit that
has come to be known as the Scorpions was originally introduced as a stand-
alone piece of legislation entitled the Directorate of Special Operations
Bill. In that form there were a number of objections to the Bill.

The legislation necessary to regulate the Scorpions was later drafted for
incorporation into the National Prosecuting Authority Act as an amendment
to that Act. This is the appropriate place to regulate the Scorpions, and
the objections and difficulties of the original Bill were adequately dealt
with and fell away.

The amendments to the National Prosecuting Authority Act ensure that there
is close co-operation between investigating units and prosecutors who will
be responsible for running the prosecution of a case.

This will ensure that criminals do not escape conviction owing to
misunderstandings between investigative units and the prosecutors, or owing
to legal technicalities. The Directorate of Special Operations will be
staffed by prosecutors, investigators, experts from the Public Service who
can be seconded to the directorate, and experts from the private sector who
can be hired for specific tasks. This is a flexible arrangement that will
allow the Scorpions to react quickly and efficiently to the constantly
changing practices of criminal syndicates. The aims of the Directorate of
Special Operations are to investigate, gather, keep and analyse information
and to institute criminal proceedings related to organised crime or any
other specified offence.

The amendments to the National Prosecuting Authority Act provide for the
manner in which special investigators are appointed, their conditions of
service and their remuneration. Special investigators will undergo periodic
screening to ensure that the Directorate of Special Operations is not
infiltrated by corrupt elements. The Directorate of Special Operations
shall be deemed to be an essential service in terms of the Labour Relations
Act, and members of the Scorpions shall not be entitled to strike. The Bill
provides the Scorpions with the necessary powers to perform their
functions.

In an era in which organised crime is often as sophisticated as many large
corporations and also has access to significant resources, a unit such as
the Scorpions is certainly necessary. The DP supports the Bill before the
House. [Applause.]

Prince B Z ZULU: Chair, Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, hon members, since 1994 the Government has systematically
developed policies and legislation to deal with one of the major legacies
of apartheid, namely crime. If one looks back on all the policies adopted
and the legislation passed since then, one gets a clear picture of a
government that knows what it is doing. It is a picture of a government
which has identified crime as one of its priorities and which has developed
a clear framework within which to address the issue of crime.

The South African Police Service Act, the National Strategic Intelligence
Act, the International Co-operation in Criminal Matters Act, the
Extradition Amendment Act, the Criminal Procedure Second Amendment Act, the
National Prosecuting Authority Act, the Witness Protection Act and the
Prevention of Organised Crime Act, as well as policies such as the National
Crime Prevention Strategy which links crime prevention with social
upliftment, have all contributed towards laying a solid foundation on which
we can reduce and eventually eradicate crime from our society.

The National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill builds on this
foundation. It is a logical follow-up to the Prevention of Organised Crime
Act, which was passed to outlaw organised criminal activities and to lay
siege on the proceeds derived from these criminal activities.

After the Prevention of Organised Crime Act was passed, we realised we were
sitting with a problem because while we had an Act which outlawed organised
crime on the one hand, we lacked the means to enforce its provisions on the
other. The reason we were unable to enforce the Act was because the old
policy we inherited lacked the skills that we required to investigate
organised crime. The main tool used by the old police was to beat
confessions out of suspected criminals in order to secure convictions. Such
methods have become wholly inappropriate to investigate organised crime and
are also unacceptable in our new democracy.
While we have been faced with this problem, organised criminal syndicates
have increased their activities in our country in their traditional spheres
of activity, such as prostitution, the arms trade and trafficking in drugs.
Organised crime has now added to its activities money laundering, trade in
human organs and the transporting of illegal immigrants. Money laundering
in particular can have enormous economic implications for our country if we
do not deal with it. Money laundering impacts on our country by reducing
tax revenues through underground activities, and competes unfairly with
legitimate businesses, damaging and eroding the integrity of our financial
institutions and disrupting real economic growth.

The danger posed by organised crime to our society cannot be taken lightly.
The only way we can successfully combat organised crime is to establish a
national co-ordinated body with the resources and capacity to deal with it.
I have no doubt that the Directorate of Special Operations is indeed such a
body. We need to give them our support and encourage them to continue to do
the excellent work they have performed until now. [Applause.]

Dr P J C NEL: Chair, hon Deputy Minister, hon members, the legislation to
regulate the activities of the Scorpions was initially introduced as the
Directorate of Special Operations Bill. In this format the legislation was
unacceptable in that it created a very powerful unit which was not directly
linked to an existing administrative structure, with no clear line of
authority and no clear jurisdiction. The said format has, however, been
changed and the legislation is now presented as an amendment to the
National Prosecuting Authority Act of 1998. Most of the objections now fall
away.

The Scorpions unit is being dealt with as an investigating directorate
known as the Directorate of Special Operations. The existing Act already
makes provision for the establishment of an investigative directorate.
These provisions have now been adopted to accommodate the Scorpions. The
head of the directorate shall be a deputy national director of public
prosecutions assigned by the National Director of Public Prosecutions, and
functioning within the structure of the national prosecuting authority.

The unit's aims are clearly spelled out in clause 7, namely, to
investigate, and to carry out any functions incidental to investigations;
to gather, keep and analyse information; and where appropriate, institute
criminal proceedings and carry out any necessary functions incidental to
instituting criminal proceedings, relating to offences or any criminal or
unlawful activities committed in an organised fashion; or such other
offences or categories of offences as determined by the President by
proclamation in the Gazette.

The New NP supports this Bill and trusts that the Scorpions, who are doing
excellent work and have already had some brilliant successes, will play a
major role in the reduction of the totally unacceptable high levels of
crime in our country. [Applause.]

Mr T S SETONA: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, in the light of the
unanimous support by all political parties for this Bill, I want to add the
support of the ANC on its behalf. I also want to thank everyone who
participated in the debate. [Applause.] [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order!

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr
Chairperson, I would like to congratulate the previous speaker on knowing
when to keep silent. They say it is an art. I congratulate the hon member.
[Laughter.]

I have just been advised by the National Director of Public Prosecutions,
Mr Ngcuka, that in the early hours of this morning the national prosecuting
authority arrested three prominent members of Pagad for the murder of Mr
Rashaad Staggie. They will appear in court later today. These persons were
identified by the national prosecuting authority from the tapes seized from
the media recently. They are Salie Abader, Moegsien Mohammed and Abdurazak
Ebrahem, a former emir of Pagad. [Applause.]

My congratulations go to the national director and his team. A very
important part of this effort has been the teamwork. Fighting crime is a
collaborative effort. The structure of this piece of legislation to be
passed in this Chamber today emphasises the need to unite and join forces
in the fight against organised crime, gangsterism and the urban terror
campaign of pipe and strike bombs that has gripped the Western Cape
recently.
I would like to use this opportunity to call on councillors in this House
to encourage their constituents to actively join the fight against crime.
The full participation of communities and individuals in the criminal
justice system is crucial to eradicating crime. We need to join hands to
combat crime so that everyone can claim their right to feel safe and secure
in this country.

May this legislation inspire and enable many more successful prosecutions.
To the National Director of Public Prosecutions, Mr Bulelani Ngcuka, and
the deputy national director and head of the Scorpions unit, Adv Percy
Sonn, I say: Our best wishes to them in their challenging task of bringing
all those criminals on the ``wanted list'' to book.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Affairs and its chairperson, Comrade Mahlangu,
for their thorough examination of the Bill. I also thank all members of the
NCOP for their support.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                       JUDICIAL MATTERS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I have been
informed that only the chairperson will make a statement.

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill is a Bill
that encompasses in a single Bill a variety of amendments to laws which are
administered by the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development,
which amendments do not require individual amending bills.

This Bill provides for and brings the oath that magistrates are supposed to
take before assuming office in line with the Constitution. Previously, only
magistrates who were employed in the permanent capacity had to take an
oath. Now the Bill provides for even those employed in an acting capacity
to take the oath.

Clause 2 of the Bill flows from the case of State v Manamela. This case
dealt with the presumptions regarding section 37 (1) dealing with stolen
property in the General Law Amendment Act of 1955, where it was stated that
the effect of requiring the state to bear the burden may mean that the
offence would only be effectively prosecuted in extremely rare
circumstances, if at all. For that reason, it falls as well with any class
of exemptions identified by Kentridge A J in State v Zuma in 1995, where
the judge stated that there may be presumptions which are necessary if
certain offences are to be effectively prosecuted and the state is able to
show that for good reason it cannot be expected to produce evidence itself.

The presumption that a person who habitually cohorts with a prostitute is
living off the proceeds of prostitution was upheld on that basis in R v
Downey by the Supreme Court of Canada.

Another interesting provision of this Bill is the fact that it now allows a
legal clinic that provides services free of charge to the community to
collect costs from the unsuccessful party when it wins the case. This is,
indeed, a progressive change, as it will actually help to fund the
organisations that provide free legal services.

There are other minor amendments which affect the rights of individuals,
such as with section 72 of the Administration of Estates Act of 1965. This
was done in order to substitute the archaic and stigmatising expression
``illegitimate child or minor'', which was in contrast with our culture,
especially as Africans, because we really did not have illegitimate
children, with the expression ``a minor born out of wedlock''.

The Bill also amends section 38 of the National Prosecuting Authority Act
of 1998 so as to provide that where the engagement of persons to perform
services in specific cases will not result in financial implications for
the state, the National Director of Public Prosecutions may, under an
agreement in writing and without prior consultation with the Minister for
Justice and Constitutional Development, on behalf of the state, engage
persons with suitable qualifications and experience to perform such
services. I am sure those services will help us with issues such as the one
contained in the report from the Deputy Minister that some people who are
involved in some criminal offences have, indeed, been apprehended.

Clause 22 of the Bill impacts directly on members of the National Council
of Provinces by amending section 3 of the Magistrates Act of 1993 in order
to bring the designation procedures in respect of delegates to this Council
as members of the Magistrates Commission in line with the designation
procedures prescribed in section 178 of the Constitution.

The reason we decided not to debate this Bill is that all members were in
agreement and the chairperson was tasked to present the Bill and also to
indicate that all members and parties support it. I so move. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
                 AFFAIRS - RSA/AUSTRALIA EXTRADITION TREATY

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): In this case I have
been advised that the hon member Mr L G Lever will make a statement.

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, criminals have become more sophisticated and
more organised on an international level. Criminals show no respect for the
sovereignty of nations. In fact, criminals try to abuse the sovereignty of
nations to evade capture and avoid paying their debt to society. For this
reason, extradition treaties, such as the one now before our House between
South Africa and Australia, have been used for many years as a tool in
combating the spread of crime at an international level.

Treaties of this nature are important for another reason. They are
indicative of our nation being accepted into the family of responsible
nations. Crime has to be fought by every responsible nation, for crime not
only undermines the fabric of society; it also undermines the economy of
our nation in many different ways.

Extradition treaties are usually the result of long and complex
engagements. South Africa and Australia started this process before 1995.
The domestic law of the contracting states has to be respected and complied
with.

This treaty defines offences where an extradition request would be
competent. It also sets out the circumstances in which an extradition
request may be refused. Extradition requests may be refused where, broadly
speaking, the offence in respect of which extradition is sought is of a
political nature, or where due to a time lapse, a statute of limitations
precludes a prosecution. There are certain other limitations which I do not
have time to outline. However, the committee is of the view that none of
these limitations will assist the international criminal. Limitations of
the nature included in this treaty are important and necessary safeguards.

The treaty defines the procedures and formalities necessary to give effect
to a request for the extradition of an individual. Our country cannot be
seen as or perceived to be a safe haven for criminals seeking to evade
justice in another country. We also need to pursue criminals who commit
criminal acts in our country and who flee to other countries. We cannot
allow criminals to think they can escape justice by simply fleeing from the
country.
Our committee feels that this treaty does not offend against our
Constitution. We feel that it is an important and necessary step to take in
combating crime. Accordingly we recommend to this House that it ratify the
extradition treaty between the Republic of South Africa and Australia.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
                           AFFAIRS - ROME STATUTE

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): In this case the
chairperson of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
will make a statement.

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, we have made good time and I am sure the
Chair would not mind giving me    an extra minute to complete this
presentation.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): No, I would mind.
[Laughter.)

Mr J L MAHLANGU: This presentation was supposed to have been made by Mr
Matthee, who is a member of the committee, as compensation for the good co-
operation that we got from other political parties in our committee. That
is why Mr Lever presented the other one.

The Rome Statute seeks to establish a permanent international criminal
court with inherent jurisdiction over serious crimes of international
concern namely, crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
crimes of aggression. The International Criminal Court established under
the Rome Statute is complementary to national criminal jurisdiction, and
both have the duty to exercise their respective jurisdictions over persons
responsible for the commission referred to.

The ICC shall have jurisdiction only with respect to crimes committed after
the entry into force of the Rome Statute. The Rome Statute will be
operational after 60 instruments of ratification have been lodged with the
UN Secretary-General. Presently, there are 22 ratification instruments. The
seat of the court is The Hague in the Netherlands, but it may sit in any
other country.

World Wars I and II and subsequent trials before the Nuremberg and Tokyo
War Crimes Tribunals set the stage for efforts to create a permanent ICC.
During 1949 to 1954, the International Law Commission, as mandated by the
UN General Assembly, prepared a draft statute for the ICC. However, the
General Assembly abandoned the efforts due to opposition from powerful
states on both sides of the Cold War. At the end of the Cold War, in 1989,
the General Assembly asked the International Law Commission to prepare a
draft statute. In 1992, the ILC was requested to complete the draft statute
for the ICC.

The war in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Rwanda during 1992 and 1994
respectively, and the establishment of the ad hoc tribunal for these
countries strengthened the urgent need for the establishment of a permanent
court. The General Assembly convened six preparatory committee meetings to
continue to draft documents for the ICC from 1996 to 1998. South Africa was
represented in those meetings by a delegation comprising the Department of
Justice and then the Departments of Foreign Affairs and of Defence.
In September 1997, the 14 SADC nations set out 10 basic principles to be
included in the ICC. On 17 July 1998, the United Nations Diplomatic
Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment of an ICC, at which
South Africa was represented, adopted the Rome Statute of the ICC. This was
the first important step towards the establishment of a permanent
international criminal justice system which will complement national laws
in the prosecution of individuals for the said crimes of international
concern.

Out of 160 participant states, only seven, namely China, Iraq, Iran, Libya,
Qatar, Yemen and the US, voted against the treaty. In terms of article 125
of the statute, the statute is open to signatures by all states until 31
December 2000. Thereafter, it is subject to ratification by signatory
states. South Africa has already signed the statute. In terms of article
126, the statute enters into force only after the deposit of the 60
instruments, as indicated earlier on.

The implications arising from the ratification of the Rome Statute are
twofold, namely the promotion of legislation which will incorporate the
Rome Statute into our national legal system and ensuring co-operation with
the ICC. This legislation should criminalise the crimes of genocide, crimes
against humanity and other crimes that I have mentioned. The crime of
aggression will only be criminalised once a provision defining the crime
has been agreed to by the review conference of Assembly of State Parties
that are included in the Rome Statute. Another implication involves
financial resources relating to co-operation with the ICC and State
Parties.

While the Rome Statute will become operational after 60 countries have
ratified it, and while 122 countries including Lesotho and Botswana have,
to date, deposited their instruments of ratification, South Africa's early
ratification is of paramount importance, particularly in view of South
Africa's leadership role among the SADC countries, both during negotiations
in Premcom and during the diplomatic conference of the ICC. Cabinet has
approved that steps be taken to request Parliament to approve the
ratification of the Rome Statute. This decision underscores the commitment
demonstrated by South Africa, especially with the SADC, during these
negotiations.

In conclusion, a short overview of the important provisions of the Rome
Statute is that the state law advisers and international law advisers
supported the ratification of the Rome Statute during the international
departmental meeting, and our recommendation to this House is that the
committee recommend unanimously that Parliament approve the ratification of
the Rome Statute and that, after approval by Parliament, the hon Minister
of Foreign Affairs prepare an instrument of ratification and deposit it
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations. This is so that, in the
words of Mr Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, the
ICC can target those responsible for the worst human rights crimes
personally. When tomorrow's student contemplates war crimes or crimes
against humanity, an effective international court will make him think
twice.

At this point in time I would also like to thank the department officials
for their good work. I thank the members of my committee and I recommend
that the Council ratify this treaty. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon members,
allow me this opportunity to thank the hon the Deputy Minister for her
presence in this House and for engaging this House in a debate on the
passage of a most important Bill. We appreciate her presence.

The Council adjourned at 10:37.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Reports and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication Board for
     1998-99 and 1999-2000,  including the Reports of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements for 1998-99 and 1999-2000.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on the Abolition
    of Lebowa Mineral Trust Bill [B 49B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
    75), dated 8 November 2000:


         The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having considered the
         subject of the Abolition of Lebowa Mineral Trust Bill [B 49B -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports that
         it has agreed to the Bill.


