---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 February 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-02-09
---

                         WEDNESDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                             PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS

              (Resumption of Debate on Subject for Discussion)

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, Mr President, hon members
and comrades, I am not going to say much about the crazy allegations made
by the apartheid general, hon Holomisa, yesterday. [Interjections.]

The President raised the issue of racism and fascism very sharply. Much as
apologists of racism would have us believe otherwise, it is still very
rampant in our society. Racism was used in Africa by both the explorers and
colonisers for two main reasons: Firstly, to justify their barbaric deeds
against the peoples of the African continent ...

Dr S E MZIMELA: Madam Speaker, is the hon the Minister willing to entertain
a question? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, are you prepared to take a
question?

The MINISTER: Not from crazy people. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, could you please withdraw the
reference to the hon member as a crazy person?

The MINISTER: OK, I am not going to take questions ... [Interjections] ...
and I am withdrawing ``crazy people''. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, can we have some order? I cannot
even hear.

Dr S E MZIMELA: Madam Speaker, can I request an apology?

The MINISTER: I have withdrawn it already.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I have asked the Minister to withdraw the words,
and she has done so. I think that is sufficient.

Dr S E MZIMELA: I did not hear the withdrawal. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, please take your seat. The Minister
is not prepared to take a question. She has withdrawn referring to you as a
crazy person. Can we proceed now?

The MINISTER: Racism was used in Africa, by both the explorers and
colonisers, for two main reasons: firstly, to justify their barbaric deeds
against the peoples of the continent, claiming superiority and treating us
as subhuman, and, secondly, to divide and rule. They divided us into two
categories, ie the inferior and superior races, tribes or ethnic groups. A
lot of serious and catastrophic conflicts on our continent can be traced
back to the artificial divisions that were imposed on our people by the
colonisers. In our struggle for a better world, we cannot ignore the
monster of racism within our borders and beyond.

In the developed North, racism is still very deeply rooted. Historically,
it was based on bogus scientific notions about racial differences. In the
1930s, respectable scientists, mainly physical anthropologists, biologists,
psychologists and geneticists, contributed to rassekunde, which, literally
translated, means ``race science.'' This provided a basis for racist
assumptions being widely acceptable. One of those extreme race scientists
was Hans GÃ¼nther. Though he was stripped of his university post after the
war, he continued writing his racist views until his death in 1967.

Contrary to popular belief, fascist ideas did not die with the fall of
Adolf Hitler. They continued to be celebrated by small obscure right-wing
groups like the Northern League, which was established by British
anthropologist Roger Pearson. His idea was to create a rallying point for
Nazi intellectuals in a hostile post-war environment. The October/December
1971 edition of the Northlander proclaimed that the Northern League stood
for ``the preservation of the identity and values of the North so that our
nations can have in future white, blond and blue-eyed children''.

Regrettably, these ideas are not confined to the Northern League. I would
be very surprised if they did not exist, not only in South Africa, but
maybe even in this Chamber. In January 1998, CNN carried the following
headline:


  Fascism in the German army reminiscent of the dark past. Military shaken
  to its foundation.

The report contained the following:


  A view of fascism, hate, bigotry, anti-Semitism, and senseless violence
  has been uncovered in the German armed forces, reviving images of another
  era when such attitudes turned all of Europe into a slaughterhouse.

It continued:


  Right-wing extremist incidents in the German armed forces doubled last
  year. According to statistics from the German parliament, there were 171
  neo-Nazi incidents involving at least 200 German soldiers.
It is an established fact that extreme right-wing parties base their
political interpretation on race science. For example, the National Party,
which is a breakaway from the National Front in Britain, says the
following:


  Nationalists believe that intelligence is mainly genetically determined,
  and so the difference in intelligence and other mental abilities between
  the races are inborn and hereditary. Therefore we believe that the world
  intellectual leadership shown by the white race is due to our unique
  genetic heritage, whose dilution, by mixing with alien stock, would be an
  irreversible catastrophe for all mankind.

A number of European countries do have extreme right-wing parties in their
parliaments. A few examples that come to mind would be Denmark and Sweden.
In fact, in Austria, there is an extreme right-wing government against
which the EU has introduced sanctions. One of the most worrying features
about this neofascist party in Austria is that approximately one third of
its voters are under thirty and almost half of them are workers.

Let us come back nearer home to our continent. Speke in his journal called
Fauna, has this to say about Africans:


  ... the true curly-haired, flat-nosed, pouch-mouth Negro ...

He continues:


  He works his wife, sells his children and, unless when fighting for the
  property of others, contents himself with drinking and dancing like a
  baboon to drive dull care away.

This was the inferior Negro that he discovered. Alongside this sorry Negro,
he also discovered a superior race. He says:


  ... a race of men who, unlike the natives, by virtue of their fine oval
  faces, large eyes and high noses, denoted the best blood of Abyssinia.

These were the Ethiopians. Another explorer had this to say:


  There are few people in Europe among whom one finds these three factors
  of national cohesion - one language, one faith, one law.

[Interjections.] This was Rwanda. In order to divide the Rwandans, they
dispatched scientists with measuring tapes and callipers who went about
weighing Rwandans, measuring their cranial capacities and conducting
comparative analyses of the relative protuberance of Rwandan noses. They
used the nasal index to try to differentiate between Hutu and Tutsi. If the
nose resembled the white man's long and narrow nose, they were defined as
aristocratic Tutsis, and if it was flat and broad, they were bestial Hutus.
[Interjections.]

When this was found not be a perfect tool for dividing the Rwandans, they
were asked how many cattle they had. If one had ten or more, one was Tutsi,
and if one had nine or fewer, one was Hutu. This was the beginning of a
slippery slope which culminated in the 1959 genocide and eventually in the
1994 genocide, in which almost 1 million people were killed in 100 days.
This is but one example.

We therefore cannot ignore racism - the hon the President is correct. If we
do, it would be to our own peril. Indeed we have to engage the monster of
racism deliberately and systematically. We should not be like the hon Tony
Leon who would like us to believe that it does not exist. His problem in
acknowledging its existence is that he would then have to do something
about it even if it meant merely carrying the burden of guilt. The stubborn
reality is that racism does exist in our society, and I am sure it does
exist even in the DP. [Interjections.]

The antiracist national conference is therefore very welcome. It is indeed
appropriate that the international conference on racism will take place on
the African continent. Africans are grappling head-on with questions of
ethnicity, tribalism and racism. Of course, these concepts did not exist.
They were alien until they were introduced by the colonisers in order to
divide and rule. We are the only ones in Africa who can liberate ourselves
from the scourge of racism, both in our country and beyond.
Internationally, this has to be tackled with a lot more determination for
the sake of future generations. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, our President, Deputy President, hon
Ministers and hon members of the House, it is the basic right of every
individual to exercise his or her citizenship under the conditions of
freedom, equality and transparency. To be a South African requires one to
look beyond the categories of colour and diverse groups. [Interjections.]

The majority and the nonwhite minority in South Africa have been oppressed
by the white minority for many decades. Therefore the African resistance to
Western dominance has tended to focus on black consciousness as a reference
point. Black consciousness is a reaction to the wicked attitude displayed
by the white minority to the dark-skinned people. Unfortunately, racism
still exists in South Africa. It is difficult for the bunch of sour-grapes
racists to accept that South Africa has chosen to live as the caste of
humanity. The message from the MF is that South Africa will never be handed
over to the oppressors again. Freedom has come and it is here to stay.
[Applause.]

I agree with the President, Thabo Mbeki, who emphasised in the State of the
Nation address that it is not the exclusive responsibility of the
Government to create jobs but that all South Africans must work in
partnership. The individual is the basic building block of mankind. The
best analogy one can use to describe why all South Africans should work as
partners is that of a sinking ship with the crew arguing about how they
should save the passengers on board. If the crew continue arguing till the
salt water covers their mouths, they will all drown.

South Africa is faced with a difficult task to promote democracy based on
the principle that an equitable distribution of national resources must be
exercised among the nine provinces which differ greatly in levels of
development and wealth. A balance must be struck between the existence of
state-owned and private enterprises. The dominance of private enterprise
may have certain implications for popular access to economic power.
Firstly, it reduces the capacity of instruments like the Constitution or
the Government to provide economic access to all South Africans. Secondly,
it tends to encourage unequal levels of economic power.

The Government has the responsibility to pursue economic policies which
must maximise economic growth and economic opportunities. Fortunately,
South Africa is moving in this direction. Just recently, the Preferential
Procurement Policy Framework Bill was voted in. During the apartheid regime
many poor breadwinners were not privileged to buy a second loaf of bread
for their families. However, for many, this situation has changed. In the
new South Africa, the promotion of micro and small businesses by the NGOs
has given the very same breadwinners an opportunity to enjoy a second meal
or a second loaf of bread a day.

The Government can serve as a catalyst for growth and development in South
Africa through strategic investment in resources both nationally and
internationally. The achievement of access to economic power is a long
process and not a single event. The progress of the economy is subject to
the fluctuation of the market. The economy is not immune to setbacks.

The future belongs to the youth. It is a responsibility of the adult
members of society to assist the youth to meet the diverse challenges in
South Africa. The most crucial issue facing the youth is the lack of access
to education and training opportunities. The Government, in association
with other stakeholders such as industries, must focus on the creation of
jobs-cum-learning opportunities for the out-of-school, unemployed youth.

Job satisfaction is the key element in the life of any productive
individual. Property crime ranks highest of all crime committed in South
Africa. Therefore, in order to control and reduce property crime, a co-
ordinated strategy to improve job satisfaction - possibly connected to a
national training strategy - must be negotiated by employers, labour and
the state. This will encourage long-term productivity in South Africa.

Priority must be given to self-employment. The unemployed must be informed
about opportunities in these areas through entrepreneurs, the media,
universities, technikons and other training and educational departments.
Basic business skills must be included in the training and education
curricula. Unrealistic expectations about job opportunities and relief that
state policies can offer to the unemployed must be eliminated. The nature
of the labour market and the limitation of government policy are essential
issues that must be integrated in education curricula.

The leaders of today are building South Africa for the leaders of tomorrow,
who are the youth. The question is: Will the youth live to enjoy the fruits
of democracy? Sixty eight per cent of the youth who are economically active
are infected with HIV/Aids. One of the major reasons for the wild spread of
Aids amongst our youth is the practice of bad sexual habits. Millions of
rands have been invested in the HIV/Aids campaign. This money could have
been redirected and utilised to meet the needs of the poor. There are many
youth who display a do-not-care attitude towards safe sex and Aids. The
bottom line is that money is wasted and the Government, the economy and the
society at large is victimised by Aids. My message to the youth is: Do not
murder others and yourself with Aids. South Africa needs you.

For the past century the minority Indian culture and language have been
preserved and promoted through our own tenacious efforts of self-help
programmes. One of the underlying principles of democracy is to promote and
develop the language and culture of the minority. The South African film
and television industries must give urgent attention to the fair and
uniform promotion of the Indian language and culture. Our language and
culture are not receiving an equitable coverage by SABC1, 2, 3, e-tv and M-
Net. All we get is two hours of Eastern Mosaic every Sunday on SABC1. [Time
expired.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Deputy President,
hon members, comrades, this debate should be an occasion for serious
engagement between parties in this House and the Government to identify
critical issues for attention and the challenges we face to deal with these
issues. This is not to suggest that sobriety and seriousness should be
confused with boredom which is not what we saw in the substantial and
important contribution made by the leader of the New NP yesterday.

However, the Leader of the Opposition's contribution to the debate served
only to reinforce his rather unfortunate habit of failing to rise to the
occasion. Given the opportunity to ring true or ring hollow, he will
unfailingly choose the latter, in an infantile and populist point-scoring,
waste-of-time exercise. Regrettably the Leader of the Opposition has
deflected me from delivering my originally prepared speech, but reply to
him one must.

Of course, hollow vessels make the loudest noise, and yesterday the hon
Leader of the Opposition was beating himself like a drum. ``Boom, boom,''
said the hon Leader of the Opposition. ``If I were a President, I would
know exactly what to do to eliminate crime. Sack the Commissioner of
Police.''

``Boom, Boom.'' [Laughter.] ``If I were President, I would solve
unemployment in a jiffy. How? By abolishing the Public Service, of course.
Serve them right!''

``Boom, Boom.'' [Laughter.] ``If I were President, racism would instantly
disappear. No problem. I would just stop speaking about it. Then nobody
would get offended, especially me.''

``Boom, Boom.'' [Laughter.] ``If I were President, I would sort out
education. Easy. Trash the teachers' unions. Scrap the curriculum. Scrap
teacher redeployment - that is what he said actually - and leave the
teachers exactly as we found them in 1994, just like old times.''
[Interjections.]

However, more seriously, Mr Leon's vile libel against the ANC, that we
``raised the banner of liberation before education'' is both inaccurate and
nonsensical. This was neither a slogan of the ANC - remember it was banned
- nor adopted by the UDF, but rather an overwhelming response from the mass
of the people, when the ANC was banned in this country, when the most
vicious repression against students and teachers was perpetrated by the
security apparatus of the apartheid state. It was then that the organs of
the mass democratic movement rallied for education against both the
vigilantes and the police.

It is peculiarly offensive when a senior member of the DP tries to score
moral points against the anti-apartheid movement, while he was deeply
sequestered in Kirsney College. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Indeed, the stench
of hypocrisy is nauseating. He thinks that his cupcake approach to
education, his own party's prissy political interference now, can be
equated with our political stance under apartheid, with our refusal to
participate in a system that by design set out to teach blacks only what
was needed in order to mow suburban lawns or wash suburban cars.

The slogan embodied a rejection of Bantu education. Presumably the hon
member thinks that our people ought to have sat there and learned what
Verwoerd had to teach. [Interjections.] It is a sad day for a party reduced
to these tactics, a party that once stood proud with people like Helen
Suzman and Colin Eglin, who now see their party becoming a party of Lucas-
Mangope-style politics. [Laughter.] [Applause.] [Interjections.]
Incidentally, had Mr Leon himself been better served by his researchers and
speechwriters his speech might have contained fewer factual errors and
distortions. [Interjections.]

To take another example of Mr Leon's inaccuracy: In his voyeuristic outing
among the country's poor, Mr Leon claims to have found ``growing despair''
as counterpost to the President's optimism about development. If so, it is
his own presence that created it. Which hon member can in truth deny the
despair that rises in the corridors around here when Mr Leon slouches
towards us. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

I say that if there was any despair in those places that Mr Leon ... I will
not call this unparliamentary language, but he uses an odious word against
me. If there was any despair in those places Mr Leon visited it was he who
introduced it. Pollsters who travel the country tell us, as in one recent
much publicised poll, that more than 90% of our people are hopeful and are
of the view that the country and the Government are on the right track. So,
despair, if it exists, travels in Mr Leon's wake. [Interjections.]

In any case, championing the cause of the poor and the oppressed is
something that the DP seems to be soft on, judging by the strains being put
on the DP-New-NP alliance in the Western Cape by the DP's apparent refusal
to commit themselves to the province's poverty alleviation programme.
[Interjections.]

By far the most appalling distortion in Mr Leon's speech is the statement
that Dr Van Zyl Slabbert recently suggested ``that the President will
become more politically authoritarian as he tries to become more
economically liberal''.

He gives a totally distorted impression of what Dr Slabbert actually said.
In remarks to a theological seminar, Dr Slabbert offered a nuanced
description to highlight the moral dilemmas of trade-offs that confront
policy-makers. [Interjections.] For Mr Leon to remove all Dr Slabbert's
nuances and to reduce his seminar discussion to a crude prediction that the
President ``will become more politically authoritarian'' is simply
fraudulent. [Interjections.] When he heard last night of Mr Leon's false
quotation, Dr Slabbert specifically and simply responded that it was
``chocolate-box politics''. [Laughter.] So be it. [Applause.]
Mr Leon may have benefited from paying more attention in his own
mathematics classes, because then he would not have made the mischievous
and malicious suggestion that only 3 000 black candidates received
matriculation exemptions in mathematics and science last year. Since our
... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order!

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: The hon the Minister,
in referring to the Leader of the Opposition, said that he had made a false
quotation. That is unparliamentary and I ask you to get him to withdraw it.

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, I withdraw that and I say that it was a
mendacious statement. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Mr Leon might have benefited
...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon Minister.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: He lacks courage.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, the word ``mendacious'' is also
unparliamentary. [Interjections.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister ...

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, I withdraw that. Then it is a terminological
inexactitude. [Interjections.] That is parliamentary. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, can you let me say something? With
regards to whatever unparliamentary language the hon the Minister might
have used, I will look at the Hansard and I will come back with the ruling.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Now he has become the black man's Churchill.

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, Mr Leon might have benefited from paying more
attention in his own mathematics classes ... [Interjections.] ... because
then he would not have made this statement that only 3 000 black candidates
received matriculation exemption in mathematics and science last year.

Since our results, for the first time in our history, were not published by
race, and since many black students now go to previously white schools, it
would be interesting to know how he arrived at his ridiculous conclusion.
Perhaps he applied the ``pencil test'' to all of the 63 700 students who
obtained exemptions. [Interjections.] It defies logic and I will deal with
this kind of chop logic outside of this House. [Laughter.]

Part of the hon member's so-called plan of action is ``to turn education
around'', to put the children first and the unions last. What staggering
rubbish this is, what monumentally ignorant claptrap. The education sector
has three national teachers' unions and the Ministry of Education has
excellent relations with all three. Under the National Schools Act, I am
obliged to consult with them. Far from condemning them to oblivion, like
the hon Mr Leon would like to do, my Ministry regards the organised
teaching profession as an invaluable ally in the task of educational
reconstruction.

We therefore have a plan of action. It is a good one, not because I say so,
but because it has merits. At the launch of the programme of implementation
for Tirisano three weeks ago, all the political representatives, the MECs,
committed themselves to this implementation programme. Therefore we should
stop playing silly-billy with education. [Interjections.] We should really
stop playing silly-billy. We should, in fact, build on the consensus we
have established over the past six months, a genuine consensus, across
party lines, for the reconstruction of the education system.

Then we are lectured about the construction of our state and the hon Mr
Leon selectively refers to Amartya Sen to substantiate his points. If the
hon Mr Leon has read Mr Sen's books carefully, he would understand that Mr
Sen asserts that equality is an absolute prerequisite for development and
that the model he espouses, is one of a developmental state. He refers at
length to the injustices people have to face through what he calls ``un-
freedom''. The lack of economic and social rights, in the context of
political freedom, is something the hon Mr Leon conveniently chooses to
ignore.

For all this sophistication, the absolute free-market notion of the
deserving poor, the shallow idea that wealth follows merit, is little more
than mysticism, a new religion, and one that wilfully disregards the plain
facts of our existence here on Africa's southern tip. Often it is force and
violence, not talent - more gunship than entrepreneurship - that has
brought wealth. In our country it has been military and policing muscle,
not merit, that explains why blacks are poor and whites are not. Perhaps
this is what they mean by that awful phrase ``muscular liberalism'' that
haunts our politics, even today. [Interjections.]

Above all, the absolute free-marketeers, and there are many of them, are
therefore frauds. They pretend that they are guided, and that the country
should be guided, by an invisible hand, yet they have grown rich through
the iron fist. They never really tried to read Adam Smith, whose views they
claim to champion. Adam Smith wanted the real invisible hand of development
and growth. As we address apartheid's legacy, we confront a textbook
challenge to enlist the state in its proper quest, the protection of the
integrity of our wealth creation processes. Here efficiency and equity
coincide.

In the end we need a compassionate state which must entrench injustice and
real equality rather than one which seems to favour what is premised on
charity and patronage and characterised by a law-and-order obsession which
is bloodied and red, both in tooth and in claw. [Applause.]
UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Somlomo, mandimkhumbuze uMnu Tony Leon ukuba
inkani ayigotywa ngenkani. Uxam ukholwa ngamantintinti. Mabazazi ukuba
bangooxam, bekhokelwe ngomnye uxam. [Kwahlekwa.] Ooxam ke banento
yokuphaxulana. UMongameli xa esithi masinike ingcombolo ngentetho yakhe
bayakhala aba xam, ze kuthi naxa uMongameli ethetha ngoko abona kufuneka
kwenziwe kweli lizwe, baphinde bakhale aba xam. [Kwahlekwa.]

Ithi ke incwadi emlomo ubomvu, eyaziwayo ngamakhwenkwe kaDyani namaRhabe:
``Musani ukulahla iiperile zenu ezihagwini.'' Ke ngoko uMongameli
makangazikhathazi ngabo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Speaker, I would like to remind the hon Mr
Tony Leon that arrogance is not cured with arrogance. The arrogant usually
land themselves in trouble. They should know that they are arrogant with a
leader that is also arrogant. [Laughter.] It is not uncommon to see the
arrogant leading one another astray. When the hon President asks us to
comment on his speech they complain, and when the hon President speaks
about what he feels should be done in this country this arrogant group
still complains. [Laughter.]
The Bible says: ``Do not cast pearls before swine.'' Therefore the hon
President should not bother himself with them. [Applause.]]

I must concur with the hon the President that at no other point in time
have we ever been as well placed as we are today to take decisive steps
forward. This statement holds true within the labour market as it does to
the broader challenges we face as a nation. We have come from a labour
market environment characterised by a low rate in the creation of
productive employment, widespread instability and conflict, a grossly
inefficient utilisation of labour due to discriminatory practices, low
skills levels and low investment in skills development, and, of course, the
denial of fair labour standards for the majority of workers. These
apartheid-inspired features of our labour market militated against economic
growth, employment creation, productivity and investment.

In the past few years we have made tremendous strides to address this
legacy and to create the necessary conditions for labour market efficiency.
We have done so under invidious international and local circumstances. Our
entry back into the international economy took place at the same time as
the inevitable spread of globalisation. As a result, many enterprises and
sectors previously shielded from global competition have undertaken
significant restructuring in order to remain competitive.

Today we are on track to create a labour market environment conducive to
sustained growth and development, as well as increased efficiency,
productivity and employment. Furthermore, we are making remarkable progress
in translating into action our commitment to achieve a balance between
improving the efficiency of the labour market and the protection and
security of workers.

What is the basis for this confidence? Allow me to enlighten members. The
implementation of the Jobs Summit agreements involving a wide range of
Government agencies is proceeding apace, spurred by growing partnerships
between Government and the private sector in initiatives such as the
Business Trust Tourism Learnership Project, which will benefit 15 000
unemployed people and current employees and will help the tourism sector
realise its enormous potential for growth and job-creation.

Partnership with the private sector has also helped accelerate delivery in
the continued implementation of the social plan, including projects such as
the SA Breweries' Project Noah and the training of employment services
practitioners.

We are on course with the determined implementation of the Skills
Development Act and the Skills Development Levies Act, and we are confident
that the skills revolution that will be unleashed as a result, will help
attract investment, make our country more competitive and thrust our
economy onto a new growth path.

In November last year I announced a dispensation for small business in the
form of a ministerial determination, which is both employment friendly and
protects employees' rights. My department will continue to interact with
small business leaders to identify any other residual obstacles that retard
the growth of small business and the survival of NGOs.

Through the Employment Equity Act my department has and will continue to
make giant strides in addressing racial divisions, inequalities and
prejudices in the workplace. This year up to 100 000 employers will be
reporting on the progress they have made in achieving employment equity and
reducing discrimination in the workplace, as well as outlining their plans
and targets for the future. Members will notice that I take no notice of
what the leader of the DP said. We want employment equity plans from the
employers. He must assist this Government address the legacies of the past,
and stop barking here.

Finally, I am confident that the results of the legislative review, which I
have undertaken and which the President referred to, will effectively
address the issue of the impact of our legislative instruments on
investment and job creation. Allow me to report to hon members on this
process.

During the course of 1999 we embarked on an extensive consultation process
with key stakeholders, including organised labour, business and the
community constituency at Nedlac. What was the fundamental message that
emerged from these consultations? Was there a call for a complete overhaul
of the legislative framework? Was the outcome that the labour market should
be completely deregulated, leading to chaos, allowed to prevail? The answer
is `No'. That is what some opposition parties called for, as well as some
commentators who have never spent a day in a factory. That is not what the
men and women who represent the working people and employers of this
country told me.

They told me that the policy fundamentals of our laws were sound. They
welcomed the changes that had occurred since 1994. They were particularly
excited by the skills development legislation. They further told me that
they appreciated the approach taken by the Department of Labour. It was
open and showed commitment to serious dialogue and negotiation with the
social partners. This was the message from business, labour and the
community constituency. They also warned me about the problems and emerging
features of the labour market. Labour was concerned about the ongoing
casualisation of labour that was leading to a decline in labour standards.
They expressed alarm at the rate of job losses.

Business warned about the pressures they were facing as we re-entered the
world economy. They spoke of negative perceptions amongst some foreign
investors and the need to demonstrate the manner in which our legislative
framework enhanced business efficiency and productivity. In Government we
have also unpacked the issue of negative perceptions, drawing from local
and international research and the practical experiences of the Department
of Labour and other labour market institutions in the implementation of the
legislation.

There has been much debate about these amendments that we are about to
introduce. Allow me from the outset to dispel any false notions, firstly,
which see the amendments as a cure for all the ills of the economy, and,
secondly, that we are about to undo the policy and the legislative
framework that we have introduced since 1994 to transform the labour
market.

Abo bacinga ukuba siya kuze sibuyele emva kwixesha lengcinezelo baya kudana
babeyinko, basale bebambe ongezantsi, bemanzi toxo kukudana kuba asisayi
kuze sibuyele kundalashe. [Those who think that we will ever go back to the
days of oppression do not know how much disappointment is in store for
them; they will be so dumbstruck that they will not know what is going on
around them, because we shall never look back.]

We are not about to embark on a wholesale deregulation of the labour
market. Increasingly, international experience has shown us that labour
markets characterised by deregulation are unstable, unpredictable and do
not necessarily attract foreign investment. Instead, we wish to make
adjustments and refinements to specific aspects of two labour laws, the
Labour Relations Act and the Basic Conditions of Employment Act. Together
with the Department of Justice we are going to introduce amendments to a
few provisions of the Insolvency Act. Unfortunately, because of time, I
will not dwell more on that. [Applause.]

Mnr J DURAND: Mevrou die Speaker, mnr die President, mnr die
Adjunkpresident, agb lede, ons het die sitting op 4 Februarie met groot
afwagting genader, intens bewus dat die toespraak van ons President die
rigting sal aandui wat die land moet volg na vooruitgang, voorspoed en
vrede vir almal. Ons land het getoon dat ons leiers het wat onder moeilike
omstandighede die veranderings kon aanbring wat ons op die pad na vrede
geplaas het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr J DURAND: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Mr Deputy President, hon
members, we approached the sitting on 4 February with great anticipation,
intensely aware that our President's speech would indicate the direction
which the country must move in to achieve progress, prosperity and peace
for all. Our country has shown that we have leaders who, under difficult
conditions, could effect the changes which placed us on the road to peace.]

Crime and unemployment are the terrible twins that terrorise our people.
Once again we need leaders with integrity and guts to make the right
decisions.

I want to deal with unemployment. Unemployment is estimated to be more than
30%. The figure for unemployment amongst Africans is estimated to be as
high as 54%. This is an indictment against all of us in this Chamber. South
Africans from all walks of life have sent us here to create a better life
for all - to make South Africa work.

When I wished our President well in the IEC centre in Pretoria, he remarked
that we must make it happen. I want to tell him that the New NP wants to
make it happen for all South Africans. We have pledged to assist and advise
the Government in the national interest, also on job creation. These are
our proposals.

Only a growing economy creates jobs. We need smaller and more efficient
government. Big government means big taxes. No government has ever taxed a
country to prosperity. In 1996 in Bloemfontein, the ANC accepted
privatisation as its policy. We have to privatise with more vigour and
speed, as it will bring down Government's expenditure and make funds
available for education, health and crime prevention. We need a more
flexible labour market where individuals cam compete for jobs on the basis
of merit, ability and hard work.

There are many South Africans, white and black, who are not members of the
ANC, but who are skilled and educated. We have to utilise their expertise.
We need a skilled and competitive labour force. We have to amend the
Employment Equity Act and revise the other labour legislation. I am glad
the Minister has referred to some aspects of this. We have to end the
distortion of the playing field by the introduction of quotas and other
forms of racial discrimination. Affirmative action is necessary, but let it
be based on merit and potential, and create an environment in which our
people can develop with pride.

The President has hinted, in his address to the nation, on flexibility in
the labour market, and I quote:
  The Government will continue to give priority to the issue of job
  creation. If perceptions or realities influence the process negatively,
  these must be addressed.

Madam Speaker, it is much more than perceptions. What is Cyril Ramaphosa
saying? I quote:


  The recent procession of labour law enactments promulgated and still to
  be promulgated certainly has positive aspects. However, it also includes
  aspects that are unduly prescriptive, let alone cost burdensome. Failure
  to find an appropriate balance could well act to the detriment of job
  preservation and job creation right across the business spectrums.

Saki Macozoma is much more direct. He says:


  The cost to Transnet arising from the new labour laws will be between
  R800 million and R1 billion, money that Transnet just does not have. The
  24-hours-a-day and seven-days-a-week nature of the business is the major
  driver of extra costs.

Another comrade, Humphrey Khoza, says:


  If the regulation of the labour market is not revised, I am concerned
  that South Africa will pay a very heavy price in terms of lost jobs, with
  all of the attendant negative social consequences for aspects such as
  poverty and crime.

I can quote more. These are not captains of industry sitting in the
commanding heights of capital and protecting the interests of the minority
from their ivory towers. These are comrades deployed to make it happen. The
people have spoken; the Government must act.

I want to deal with the promotion of entrepreneurship and the development
of the small business sector. In many countries, most employment growth has
come from new and small business enterprises. If we are to create jobs, the
policy framework should reflect the needs of these businesses. With regard
to education and career-orientated training, schools and tertiary
institutions should lay more emphasis on entrepreneurship training. We must
become a nation of wealth-creators and not only of job-seekers.

Government alone cannot create jobs; it must create an environment that is
conducive to job creation. As a prerequisite, the Government must show a
commitment to the eradication of crime and poverty, and the implementation
of a sensible macroeconomic policy such as Gear. If this approach is
implemented without compromise, we can, at least, start creating the 250
000 new jobs required each year in order to maintain the current levels of
employment and start seriously to address the huge backlog in job creation.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Speaker,
Comrade President, members of the House, comrades and fellow South
Africans, we are on course. We are in the process of building a public
service whose employees are proud and should be proud of being part of this
institution.

The reconstruction, rebuilding and development of our country will depend
on the ability of this corps to move this agenda forward. We want to build
a public service that will attract and retain the best in our country, the
best graduates and professionals and those South Africans who are patriots
determined to contribute towards the development of our country. We also
want public service institutions that will lead our society in innovation
and the use of information technology to deliver services, and, of
importance, one that delivers services to the convenience of consumers.

Developing effective public service institutions is the key to the
realisation of our policy objectives. When institutions are not effective,
when the resources allocated to policy objectives fail to achieve these
objectives, when we find that priorities are set but institutions are run
with total disregard for such priorities, when we find that we pay people
but we do not have the means to hold them accountable, then we need to
address this in a real sense.

When we make statements that the lives of our people should improve, make
laws and allocate resources, but the rate of development remains below what
we expect and what is required, the message is clear: If we have to
accelerate delivery, we must focus on making state institutions effective.
As we honestly identify and discuss problems, as we face these realities in
state institutions in order to ensure that we move forward towards the
effective resolution of these problems, some forces, even in this House and
especially in this House, use this as a smokescreen for a general attack
against public servants and Government. They do not see themselves as part
of solving the problem. They do not see themselves as taking forward
solutions ... [Interjections] ... but they stand there and shout as they do
now. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Let us be very clear on this. Despite and in spite of all problems that
exist, inherited or otherwise - for those who both listen and hear -
against many odds, we should acknowledge that services are being provided
to communities every day. Even as we speak, millions of South Africans
attest to real and sustainable improvements in their lives as a result of
work done by state institutions.

We have improved management of public finances and resources like never
before. We have ensured access to services by people and communities who
had been declared once in time as the forgotten people who never received
any services. We have embedded innovations and a culture of services in
many Government institutions where previously that was foreign. We have
grasped and are utilising the potential of information technology to enable
more efficient management, and management of institutions and delivery of
services.

To the public servants we say: The community understands the enormity of
their tasks. They understand that things take time to accomplish and that
despite the well-publicised corruption, incompetence and arrogance of some,
many in the ranks of the Public Service are committed to serving the nation
to the best of their ability and regard it as their first calling. The
ordinary citizen is not painting every public servant with the same brush.
They are rather pointing out, correctly so, that for their lives to
improve, public servants have to accelerate the delivery of services that
are required to improve their daily lives.

Our communities are saying to public servants that they would like to be
treated differently in public offices than they were in the past. They
would like to feel treated as valued citizens, no matter what their class
and station in life. Above all, our communities are saying that the
problems of degradation and deprivation confronting them are pressing and
urgent. The problems must be confronted and resolved today rather than
tomorrow and next week.
We are dealing with an issue of promoting public service ethics, fighting
corruption and generally ensuring that public resources are used
responsibly by public servants and everyone else. This year, we are
accelerating our ability to deal with these public servants, some of whom
are in leadership ranks and who continue to tarnish the image of the Public
Service by engaging in acts of corruption and gross maladministration.
Through a targeted focus on key areas of risk within the Public Service,
such as procurement processes and ensuring disclosure of interests and
assets by senior officials, we are improving our co-ordinated attack
against all forms of corruption.

We know that part of the problem we face in our ability to improve quality
of services in key areas is the shortage of resources utilised for service
delivery. We are a developing country with many socioeconomic problems
before us. We are faced with the challenge of consolidating our political
transition with socioeconomic transformation and improvement, and we cannot
do this unless we are willing drastically to change the pattern of public
expenditure that we have inherited.

We will have to reorganise our staffing arrangements in some areas in order
to accelerate investment in key delivery areas, and reverse infrastructure
backlogs. Over the next two months we will unveil details of a deliberate
plan to reduce the proportion of personnel expenditure and bolster our
service delivery expenditure in many instances. This plan will entail,
amongst others, the redeployment of personnel from nonpriority areas to
priority or core areas of responsibility of Government departments.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: We
cannot listen to the hon the Minister. The Leader of the Opposition
travelled all the way across the floor to come and make a noise over here.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Proceed hon Minister.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Speaker, the
Opposition is by its very nature not intent upon listening and as a result
we have the churning out of the same problems with every input they make. I
noted that the Leader of the Opposition had crossed the floor, and I am
sure he is apologising on behalf of Business Day which had misspelt the
President's surname and did not have the courage to withdraw that
particular edition. I am sure hon Mr Leon is trying to see if he can
correct that particular issue. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

However, I do want to say that my focus, in this instance, was to say that
we have the boldness not only to identify the difficulties confronted by
Government, but we have the ability, we have the will, we are putting in
place the cadreship that will transform this country in the fullest of
senses.

We have not merely identified and flagged the problems. We are working and
we are on course in terms of ensuring that we will make it happen.
[Applause.]

Mr R K SEPTEMBER: Madam Speaker, hon President, in 1955 we adopted the
Freedom Charter, and one of its main tenets is that South Africa belongs to
all of us, black and white. Yet today, in the year 2000, the ANC still
identifies the solution of the problem along the colour line as being our
main challenge for the 21st century.

We have fought for and won the constitutional right to use our own
languages, and develop our own cultures and customs. Our nonracialism has
everything to do with creating a genuinely equal and equitable society with
our differences. We recognise the validity of the legitimate differences in
culture.

In his address, our hon President stated that ``we have never been better
placed than we are today further to push back the frontiers of racism''. To
do this, we cannot afford the sham of colour blindness. We cannot ignore
how our different communities have been positioned through historical
processes. The DP fully understands the differences in relation to access
to resources, differences in opportunity and accumulation of assets, but
they attempt to blind our people to these inequalities from their position
of privilege and advantage. They want us to believe that we all have the
same starting position - quite comfortably. They hope our people are naive
enough to believe that there is equality between the lads from Bishops High
School and the young man and the young woman from Khayelitsha.

Let me quote a DP poster or two. ``Fight for merit!'' they say. ``Fight
back!'', the Leader of the Opposition said, posing like some Roman captain.
They want us to believe that we now have an equal chance in life. They want
us to believe that there is now no difference between black and white, and
that racism is, in fact, a thing of the past. I am sorry to say this, but
this approach to racism and equal opportunities is unadulterated
balderdash, however eloquent the hon Mr Leon and his lieutenants may be,
and let us remember that they have been trained in the best possible
English. Our people are not previously disadvantaged, our people are in
fact disadvantaged to this day, and still have to struggle against racism.
[Interjections.] Bly stil nou. [Keep quiet.] [Laughter.]

Take note that we have never heard the DP ask the question as to how it is
possible for one man to be granted R10 million credit, when he is in fact
on the verge of bankruptcy, when honest people have not been able to get
enough to start a small business or to build four walls, when poverty is
our greatest scourge, when deracialisation of the economy is our greatest
challenge.
Â 
The struggle now takes on a different form. We can now use the
Constitution, one of the most advanced in the world. We can now use all the
negotiating machinery unknown yesterday, the board room, the sports arena,
the classroom, the university and of course Parliament. All of these arenas
are areas of struggle for equality. We need to spread this message far and
wide because the potential now is enormous.

We are on the verge of developing unicities, an arrangement which will
allow us to deconstruct the division of our suburbs from those of super-
privilege, as against the abject poverty of our townships, all black of
course. We can expect the DP to fight with all the skill at their disposal
to prevent the full realisation of people's power.

I shall never forget reading a DP poster which read: ``Stem met die wenspan
- Stem vir Tony Leon'' [``Vote for the winning team - ``Vote for Tony
Leon''] [Interjections.] [Applause.]

This is nonsense. Examine this. The DP is not short of mathematicians, not
at all. They understood that they could not win a nonracial South African
election. This they understood quite clearly. What they were appealing for
was a majority of the white vote, nothing else. Good old-fashioned UP-NP
politics, that is what they are going back to, nothing else, except that
today the DP attracts right-wing elements at the expense of their former
liberal support base. [Interjections.] They are so negative that they are
now the best agents for the emigration of their own constituents. Quite
ruthless in their drive for position, they even turn to Mangope. So, we see
another profile of Tammany Hall politics.

One can be grateful that we now see medical graduates responding favourably
to community service, despite the DP. The hon Mr Van Schalkwyk should hear
us when we say that the future of the Afrikaans-speaking people, be they
white or coloured, will never be solved by an opportunistic coalition with
these people. Patriotic Afrikaans-speaking people belong with us. Remaining
backward elements who are afraid of an increasing African presence in the
Western Cape need to be swept aside.

We need to call on our people to mobilise against exclusiveness in our
society; we need to harness the expertise and experience of all; we need to
call on our people to organise against all forms of discrimination.
Government at all levels, national, provincial and municipal, can
facilitate. I quote John Williams:


  We need to utilise the resourcefulness and latent potential of all
  communities.

Simply put, when we learn to release the energies of all 40 million of us,
then we will get somewhere in our society, in fact on our continent. We
have put in place a magnificent Constitution; our people now need to learn
to use it. Hear our President when he says despair is now turning to hope
and optimism. Let us build on that. [Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I had intended responding to the hon the
Minister of Education, but listening to the vapoured blah of today's speech
from the self-styled Irish leprechaun I have decided to make better use of
my time.

People ask me what is the essential difference between the ANC and the DP?
I have no difficulty in telling them that the DP stands for more jobs and
less crime, whereas the ANC delivers more crime and fewer jobs. [Applause.]
Those suffering under the scourge of criminality plaguing our country
listened in vain on Friday for heartening words from the President. South
Africans are desperately asking how the ANC Government is going to make our
homes and streets safe from criminals. Mr Mbeki had no answer, but worse
still, the cursory way in which he dealt with crime displayed a coolness
and a lack of caring that reflects badly on him and his Government.
[Interjections.]

The criminal justice system is in serious trouble at the top level. We have
a Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development who was found to have
deliberately lied to the public. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! You can take your seat. The order is
granted.

Mr G Q M DOIGDE: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary to
refer to the hon the Minister of Education as an Irish leprechaun?
[Laughter]

Mr D H M GIBSON: I withdraw! [Laughter.] We have a Minister of Correctional
Services who has just come through a particularly messy disposal of his
commissioner, and we seem not to have heard the end of that story yet. We
have a commissioner of police, hand-picked for the job, who has behaved
towards his own officers in an unprofessional and unacceptable way, calling
into question his suitability for the position. Worse still, we have a
Minister of Safety and Security who has shown scant regard for the
integrity of our Constitution.

Minister Tshwete started off very well. I want to give him full credit for
the fact that he raced around the country making the right noises, and for
reassuring our policemen and policewomen that the Government really cares
about them. Full marks for that - I think he did a wonderful job in the
beginning. [Applause.] But the initial goodwill that he built up has not
lasted long. He is now making two crucial mistakes. And the first of those
is that he is running around promising or threatening to depart from the
constitutional values that the rest of the Government assure us they hold
dear. The second is that he is consistently overpromising and
underdelivering to the public.

I want to tell the hon the Minister that he can only fib to the public so
many times before they start believing that he is a fibber. If he sets
himself all sorts of target dates which are unattainable, he is, in fact,
setting himself and the SAPS up for failure. Evita Bezuidenhout summed it
up very neatly last Friday night when he said: ``Steve, skattie, this is
not a soccer match.'' [Laughter.]
I intend embarking on a programme of visiting police stations throughout
the country and talking to our policemen. We have got some of the very best
South Africans in the SAPS. I am going to do my level best to fight for
them and help see that they are properly rewarded for good work. There are
some bad policemen and we have got to get rid of those as soon as possible.
In my capacity as the new opposition chief spokesperson on safety and
security, I am going to be the friend of the SAPS, whether those members
like it or not. [Interjections.] This does not mean that I am not going to
be critical where it is necessary. What it does mean is that I am ambitious
for the SAPS, and I want it to be transformed into a disciplined and highly
motivated service capable of performing the important tasks entrusted to it
in terms of our Constitution.

Just as our democracy needs to be underpinned by an effective criminal
justice system ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, please take a seat.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Chairperson, on a point of order:
Is it parliamentary for the hon member to waste our time by simply
repeating his master's nonsense? [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order, hon
Deputy Minister.

Mr D H M GIBSON: That hon Deputy Minister is in an unpleasant position of
having to repeat his mistress' nonsense. [Laughter.] [Applause.] Just as
our democracy needs to be underpinned by an effective criminal justice
system, it also needs a functioning multiparty system if it is to be a
democracy. There is no such thing as a democracy without a critical
opposition.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it
parliamentary to make the insinuations that the hon member is making about
another hon member, by using an ambiguous word like mistress? [Laughter.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, the hon the Minister of Foreign Affairs is
more than big enough to look after herself. She does not need Minister
Buthelezi to do it for her! The continued existence of our democracy
depends ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member Gibson, a question has
been put to the Chair whether what you said is in order. It is not out of
order, hon Minister.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, thank you for your reassurance. For the
reasons I have stated, a core part of the DP's mission is to build a
bigger, more effective, multiracial alternative to the ANC. That is why the
DP is committed to co-operation with other opposition parties.
[Interjections.] But I want to make it clear that we are only prepared to
co-operate with parties that believe in the necessity of a critical
opposition and a clear alternative. The DP will not co-operate with weak
parties because this will quite simply weaken the opposition.

Some opposition parties seem to prefer to hoist the white flag of political
surrender in the face of a powerful ANC. Others seem to change their minds
almost daily, sitting in the opposition benches, but voting with the ANC on
Bill after Bill that will damage our country. But we want a stronger
alternative in South Africa, one that can and does stand up to the ANC. We
do not want the type of opposition that apologises for its existence and
has a ``jammer-dat-ek-leef'' approach. We also do not need the sort of
opposition which hoists the white flag of surrender one day and runs up the
skull and crossbones the next. We know these people, those who prefer the
morality of power rather than the power of morality. The Pik Bothas and the
Chris Fismers have never met a government they did not like. [Laughter.]
They are the job-seekers, the carpetbaggers. We despise them, the
electorate despises them and I suspect that the ANC also despises them.
[Interjections.]

Working with other opposition parties is a step-by-step process. One does
not get married after the first date, and the really meaningful opportunity
to co-operate with other parties, apart from here in Parliament where we
are co-operating very well with our colleagues, is in the municipal
elections. And we are prepared to explore co-operation with any other
opposition party which, firstly, commits itself to being a vigorous
opposition to the ANC; secondly, commits itself to keeping the ANC out of
power and is not simply using co-operation as an opportunity to be re-
elected to city and town councils and then go into arrangements with the
ANC; thirdly, is prepared to maximise the opposition impact in the election
by avoiding a competition with other opposition parties in areas where such
competition would benefit the ANC and, finally, rejects race as a departure
point in their political outlook and programme.

The DP has already concluded an agreement with the UCDP. There are more
such agreements to come and we look forward to them. We are very pleased
about our agreement with the UCDP. [Interjections.] The ANC hates it. They
hate it, because it is an agreement between the DP and a black political
party. I want to tell this House that we refuse to be ``hokked'' into a
racial stereotype, and even if they do not like it, the ANC must become
used to a DP which can work together with and resonate with ever larger
numbers of black South Africans. [Interjections.] As we have repeatedly
made clear, our agreement with the UCDP does not signal the merging of our
parties. Each party retains its separate identity, but where we can, we
will co-operate in the municipal elections to defeat the ANC.
[Interjections.]

The ANC is shouting and screaming and carrying on. The senior members of
the Muslim Judicial Council this afternoon are joining the DP.
[Interjections.] The ANC should put that in their pipe and smoke it! I want
to stress again that the DP, in opposing the ANC so strenuously, does so
precisely because this is what South African democracy needs and demands.
It was out of our deep sense of loyalty to our country and our firm
commitment to making South Africa better that we are determined to build an
opposition alternative to the ANC, an alternative which can become the
government. [Interjections.]

Mr F BHENGU: Hon Chair, I seek your wisdom on whether it is parliamentary
for the hon member to define any political party as a ``black political
party''. If so, how do they see themselves? [Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: I am perfectly happy to answer that. Would you like to
reply, Chairperson, or shall I?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: You may reply.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Thank you, Chairperson. I have finished my speech and now
let us carry on with questions. [Laughter.] Any others? I will take the
lot! [Interjections.] I think it is fair to say that the UCDP is a black
political party. At the moment most of the members, certainly all of the
public representatives, happen to be black South Africans. [Interjections.]
That does not mean they did not have votes from some other South Africans.
I think one could say that it is largely a black political party.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member. Order! Order!

Mr D H M GIBSON: I am finding it very difficult to reply to the question.
They are shouting so much, Chairperson. As far as the DP is concerned, it
is a nonracial party or a multiracial party. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order, hon member. I regret your time
for speaking has expired. [Applause.]

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary
for the Chief Whip of the Opposition to use unparliamentary language? He
did it twice in his speech by calling the hon Minister Steve Tshwete a
fibber. [Interjections.] What example is he setting for his own ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member Gibson, I am sure you are
aware that that is unparliamentary. Could you withdraw it, please?

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I withdraw it with pleasure. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Mr Chairperson, hon President of the
Republic, hon Deputy President and hon members, in his opening address to
Parliament last week, the President referred to the speeding up of the
restructuring of state assets to increase investment and further modernise
the South African economy.

I want to add that the programme for the restructuring of state assets is
governed by a combination of factors. Principally, our restructuring
programme is aimed at transforming state-owned enterprises into national
assets that contribute to our objectives of economic growth and
development, infrastructure investment, improved service delivery, job
creation and enhanced competitiveness. Therefore, the programme of our ANC-
led Government goes far beyond improving performance and competitiveness to
make these entities institutions that all South Africans can be proud of.

We are particularly committed to ensuring that restructuring must build on
our efforts of the past five years to deracialise the South African economy
by creating opportunities for ownership and participation by the previously
disadvantaged. We are reviewing all these experiences with a view to
further reinforcing black economic empowerment. It is imperative, however,
that the many opportunities that are unlocked in the process of
restructuring be put to the service of empowering the historically
disadvantaged.

The ANC will be more vigilant in ensuring that initiatives such as employee
share-ownership programmes and the national empowerment fund are fully
implemented, as they are very important vehicles for carrying the fruits of
restructuring to the historically disadvantaged people. In pursuing the
objective of creating wider ownership in the South African economy,
restructuring provides an opportunity for widely dispersed ownership and
redistribution of wealth, as well as boosting the SME sector, sustaining
affirmative action and facilitating black empowerment. The ANC, therefore,
has committed itself to creating these entry points into the mainstream
economy for the emerging sector, as this is fundamental to the sustainable
development our economy and the prosperity of our people as a whole.

Our experience in the last five years in raising nearly R8 billion in
domestic and foreign direct investment from the proceeds of restructuring
over the past few years makes us confident that, as a central feature of
the ANC's microeconomic policy, restructuring of state assets will again
attract substantial interest from domestic and foreign investors. The
return from these investments will contribute significantly to reducing our
national debt and freeing valuable resources that could be redirected
towards our socioeconomic development priority.

Our ANC-led Government has focused its energies and attention on the major
areas of energy, transport, defence-related industry and
telecommunications. The reasons for these concentrations are very simple.
The powerlines, the railways, the roads and sea networks between the ports,
cities and remote areas combine with the invisible impulses and waves of
the Internet and the telecommunications that are the veins and arteries
that provide our wellbeing, the lifeblood of our modern existence. The
defence industries themselves absorb considerable degrees of high
technology and industrial capacity that often sits at the cutting edge of
modern strategic engineering research. Thus, Eskom, Transnet, Denel and
Telkom are at the centre of our attention. Taken together, these
enterprises comprise the bulk of turnover, employment and investment by the
state. They also impact directly on the economy itself and in the provision
of services that make people either happy or grumpy almost on an hourly
basis.

But they are also entities that have their own particular problems and
whose financial position often acts as a drain on the scarce resources that
we have. They perform strategic roles in the context where the state still
has an important role to play in the direction of development priorities.
The approach has therefore been to distinguish between what is core and
noncore and to apply a range of options towards attaining our objective of
enhanced service delivery.

We are also very mindful of the challenging implications of restructuring
as we unlock embedded value in state-owned enterprises. The Department of
Public Enterprises will continue to facilitate the interaction between
management and labour to ensure that any restructuring is pursued within
the context of a social plan that will explore alternative avenues for all
affected employees. The plight of affected employees is a mutual concern of
the ANC-alliance partners and all South Africans. We will, through the
appropriate forums, agree on processes and strive for durable solutions.

Through pursuing an accelerated agenda, the ANC has geared the country
towards improving efficiency and competitiveness in the broader economy,
attracting direct foreign investments. We are currently, as a rule,
formalising a reworked protocol on corporate governance that outlines
clearly the relationships that exist between the shareholder, the boards of
directors and the management. At the heart of all these lies the need for
enhanced performance, greater accountability to the shareholder and
improved contribution to the national fiscus.

The ANC, whilst vigorously pursuing a programme of enhanced service
delivery and excellence in governance for the state-owned enterprises,
realises that we have to pursue other creative options involving
public/private partnerships that involve a spectrum of nongovernmental
organisations in an attempt to renew relationships in the service delivery
of all of Government. We are also going to increase our infusion of new
capital into the African continent so that we can be able to play a role in
this African renaissance.

Concerns have been raised about the existence of assets and resources at
local level that are owned by some of the state-owned enterprises. Our ANC-
led Government is committed to ensuring that these resources contribute
effectively to local economic development so that we can be able to improve
the lives of our people. Together with state-owned enterprises, we will be
able to involve local councils and communities such as Kilbarchan in
Newcastle to pilot some of these principles.

In conclusion, the ANC has supported a robust programme in support of
regional peace and security by developing economic partnership,
particularly in the areas of transport and energy, with countries in the
Southern African region and on the African continent as a whole. These
smart partnerships that Eskom, Transnet and other state-owned enterprises
are building in the countries of Africa will be able to ensure that we
realise the objectives of the African century. This indeed will not only
give flesh to the vision of the African renaissance but will also
meaningfully contribute to the development of the continent and to the
alleviation of widespread poverty that afflicts our people.

With those words I would like to thank hon members for their attention.
[Applause.]

Ms L M T XINGWANA: Mr Chairperson, Mr President, Deputy President, hon
Ministers and hon members, first of all, I would like to congratulate Mr
Msomi for confusing the biggest lawyer in the DP. I would further recommend
that the hon President should appoint Mr Msomi to the Judicial Commission.
[Laughter.]

Towards the end of November 1999, I had the opportunity to attend the All-
Africa Women's Conference in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, with Professor Harriet
Ngubane. In this conference, we were given the opportunity to present a
report on how far the South African Government has moved towards
implementing the platform of action of Beijing in the past five years, in
this regard, since the Beijing conference in 1995. The report was highly
applauded and South Africa was regarded as a leader in addressing gender
inequalities and affirming women in Africa. [Applause.]

This is, of course, as a result of the commitment of the ANC-led Government
and the ANC leadership, to the empowerment and emancipation of women. As
women, we salute our late President, Oliver Tambo, who spearheaded these
programmes when he was still the president of the ANC. The international
community, NGOs and delegations from various African countries in that
conference did not believe that South Africa has already achieved 30%
representation of women in Parliament, and that 40% of our Deputy Ministers
and Ministers are women.

Delegations also noted that women are holding key portfolios such as
Foreign Affairs, Minerals and Energy, Health, Public Works and so on, and
the chairpersonship of key portfolio committees such as Defence, Finance,
Intelligence, Environmental Affairs, Housing and so on. In addition, the
presiding officers in our two Houses of Parliament and the Deputy Speaker
as well as our ambassadors in some of our most strategic countries, such as
the United Kingdom, USA, France, Switzerland, Malaysia, India, Venezuela,
Botswana and Mozambique, are women.
It was also noted that gender and racial imbalances are being addressed
within the judiciary and in the Reserve Bank. Already, we have an African
woman judge in the highest court of the land, the Constitutional Court. I
would like to emphasise that these women are not just there as tokens, but
they have proved their salt. [Applause.]

The ANC Government has moved beyond affirming women in leadership. It has
delivered to ordinary women and, in particular, to women in the rural
areas. I will not cite the examples that we all know, that the women
themselves have recognised and attested to when they delivered an
overwhelming majority vote to the ANC on 2 June 1999. In this regard, I
will simply quote our past President, Mr Nelson Mandela, when he said:


  Although the ANC hoped to achieve more since the last election, it has
  made an impressive start. Not a single government in 346 years, since Jan
  van Riebeek landed in the Cape, has done a tenth of what the ANC has
  done. [Applause.] Since 1994, we have begun to build a united,
  democratic, nonracial, nonsexist South African nation.

Today we have the Commission on Gender Equality, the Office on the Status
of Women, the Disability Office and the National Youth Commission in the
President's Office as a result of the broad consultation by President Thabo
Mbeki, who is a member of ANC Women's League ... [Applause] ... and
consulted with the ANC Women's League and the broader women's organisations
when he was still Deputy President. We salute President Thabo Mbeki for his
dedication and commitment to fundamental transformation and the improvement
of the lives of South African women, particularly women in the rural areas.
However, we would like him to always remember that he is a member of the
ANC Women's League and that the ANC Women's League is a priority.

We also commend our Government for making new opportunities for women and
the poor through institutions such as Ntsika and Khula, which enable women
to start their own businesses and create jobs. We salute our Government for
some of the most progressive laws passed in the past five years, including
the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act, the Domestic Violence Act, the
legislation pertaining to the harmonisation of customary laws act and the
Maintenance Act, which are some of the key pieces of legislation which have
gone a long way towards improving the quality of life of women. The Open
Democracy Bill, the Administrative Justice Bill and the Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill have, through
Parliament, substantiated women's rights already entrenched in our
Constitution.

Challenges still facing our Government include the lack of transformation
in the Public Service. In the private sector, the boards of directors are
still pale and grey. The banks are still inaccessible to the poor and to
our women. The same applies to the police and the judiciary. We need to
speed up transformation in these sectors in order for our Government to
accelerate delivery.

I would also like to make an urgent request regarding rural women and local
government.

Ezilalini kuthiwa izibonda ezingoomama azifuneki. Bathi ootata asizange
sibekho isibonda esingumama, abanakuphathwa ngabafazi. [In the rural areas
it is said that females cannot be made heads of villages. Men say no female
has ever been a head of a village; they cannot have a female as their
head.]

I would like to ask the President to take up this concern when he meets
amakhosi and the khoshis and to remind them. ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]
Â 
Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, hon President and all other members of the
Women's League, hon members ... [Laughter] ... there are many positive
aspects in the President's speech. On the whole the President gave the
impression of being hands-on with practical issues in South Africa. Clearly
the time of symbolism and ideology-driven government has given way to
practical day-to-day business, and that should be appreciated.

The practical and pragmatic approach of the President is proved by the fact
that, at times, his speech sounded more like a budget speech than a state
of the nation address. We are grateful for the positive economic
expectations, and I sincerely hope that they are realistic and achievable.

Of course, thumbs up for the proposed revision of the labour Acts,
especially for the growing realisation of the importance of a free and
growing economy, and the acknowledgement that policies undermining this
should come under scrutiny. In the second place - I direct this to the
President and Dr Zuma - I want comment on the quotation from the racist e-
mail message. Yes, there are still instances of racism and hate speech
based thereupon, but I can honestly assure members today that a lot of
progress has been made. Believe me, personally I very seldom hear these
types of remarks any more, and when they occur, a sincere reprimand is time
and again received in a positive way. Apart from the selectiveness of the
example, I am sure that psychologically a positive approach in this regard
will also have more positive results.

In the third place I want to devote the main part of my reply to the fact
that a matter of crucial importance was not even mentioned by the
President. Yes, of course, I am referring to the all-important issue of
minority rights, the rights of religious, language and cultural communities
as stated in section 185 of the Constitution. Not a word was said about
this. What about the office in the President's department that he promised
in his previous speech? There was not even a hint of an answer to the well-
meant public request for a charter for minority rights, bringing South
Africa in line with many other countries, and not a word was said about the
report of a statutory body, the Volkstaatraad, handed to the Government
nearly a year ago.

Hierdie stilswye kon nog afgemaak word as 'n ongelukkige oorsig, 'n ligte
``mistykie'', maar uitsprake deur agb lede van die ANC in hierdie debat
dwing my om met erns te vra: waarheen is die ANC op pad met
minderheidsregte in Suid-Afrika? Hier verwys ek in die eerste plek na die
toespraak van die agb Pierre Gerber gister in hierdie Huis. Gestroop van al
die interessante toebehoorsels oor sopbene in die pastorie, 'n bosduif vir
aandete en vroue wat nie halfpad swanger kan raak nie, kan die oproep van
mnr Gerber namens die ANC tot Afrikaners gerig, saamgevat word onder die
titel van 'n gediggie ```Come into my parlour,' said the spider to the
fly.'' [Gelag.] Ek haal aan: ``Vir die Afrikaner om by opposisiepolitiek
betrokke te raak, is soos om 'n Avbob-begrafnispolis uit te neem.''

Na Afrikaner-opposisieleiers word verwys as kamikaze-politici,
selfaangewyste spreekbuise, net soos die honderde finansiÃ«le adviseurs wat
nie een 'n miljoenÃªr is nie. Kan ek maar in diÃ© verband vir mnr Gerber sÃª
ek kan nie 'n eier lÃª nie, maar ek kan ruik as hy vrot is. Na Afrikaners
buite die ANC is verwys as deelsaaiers en binne die ANC is daar ruimte vir
Afrikanerdenke, -vrese en -ideale.
Hierdie siening, hierdie Kallie-en-Piksindroom, is deurspek van die
volgende absurditeite: eerstens, as 'n mens die minderheid se belange wil
bevorder, moet jy die meerderheid versterk; tweedens, ``if you cannot beat
them, join them''; derdens, ``one country, one nation'' beteken in ANC-taal
``one nation, one party, en vierdens word die ANC gevra om nou asseblief
die stryders vir die Afrikaner en ander volke se taal, die waardering van
sy geskiedenis, die handhawing van sy waardes, die kaart en transport van
sy toekoms te word, want hy was mos mooi soet, hy het selfs vir hulle
gestem!

Die Afrikaners vra nie ex gratia-gunsies vir goeie gedrag nie. Hy vra nie
voorregte nie. Hy vra internasionaal erkende regte, verwoord in talle
internasionale resolusies, byvoorbeeld die KVS1-Europa, Kopenhagen 1990,
Helsinki 1992, VN-resolusies 92 en 94 en die Raad van Europa se Konvensie
vir die Beskerming van Minderhede in 1995, en waarvan daar ook spore in die
African Charter is wat deur hierdie Parlement bekragtig is. Les bes het ons
ook die sogenaamde ``unsigned agreement'' tussen die ANC en die Afrikaner
Volksfront in 1993, en die Accord on Afrikaner Self-determination tussen
die VF, die ANC en die destydse regering, waarvan daar tot op hede nog
dadels gekom het.
SÃª mnr Gerber nog: ``'Come into my parlour,' said the spider to the fly''?
Ek wil hom antwoord met 'n ander gediggie uit my kinderjare. Dit gaan so:


  Neef Jakkals nooi vir gansie:
  ``Kom eet vanaand by my
  Daar is heerlike kossies en uintjies uit die vlei!''
  ``Nee dankie,'' sÃª die gansie, ``al staan jy op jou kop,
  As ek vanaand by jou kom eet,
  Vreet jy my sekerlik op!''

[Gelag.] Hierdie ingebrekebly van die ANC, asook uitsprake van
Kabinetsministers in hierdie Huis, kom veel eerder neer op die handhawing
van 'n uitgediende teorie dat die minderheidsregte deur gewone individuele
regte gewaarborg gaan word. Kyk maar wat sÃª die bekende politieke filosoof
van Kanada, Will Kimlika, hieroor. Dis mos logies, die deel kan nie opgaan
in die geheel nie. 'n Mens kan tog nie sakkie-sakkie op die ritme van 'n
toyi-toyi nie. 'n Mens kan tog nie uit politieke korrektheid dieselfde voel
oor Piet Retief, Dingaan en Rhodes nie, en nou praat ek van Cecil en nie
van Jonty nie. 'n Multikulturele meerderheid kan tog nie dieselfde ywer en
sensitiwiteit aan die dag lÃª vir jou kultuur, jou geskiedenis en jou taal,
wat terloops dalk uit die howe gaan verdwyn nie. Die oplossing is dit:
verleen die reg aan minderhede tot eie strukture op statutÃªre vlak sodat hy
sy aansprake kan verwoord, en verseker so positiewe deelname, veiligheid en
stabiliteit. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ja, positief.

Agb prof Ben Turok het gister die gansies wat lugtig is vir jakkals van
negatiwiteit beskuldig. Ek vra: is ek negatief as ek vir Afrikaner-
jongmense sÃª: ``BÃªre daardie paspoort, jou toekoms lÃª in hierdie land''? Is
ek negatief as ek vir tienduisende Afrikaners wat buite die demokratiese
proses gestaan het, gesÃª het: ``Kom neem deel. Gee my jou mandaat om jou
aspirasies in die hoogste raadsale van die land te gaan verwoord''? As ons,
ook in die jaar 2000, nog steeds met oorgawe sing: ``Ons vir jou Suid-
Afrika'', is ons negatief net omdat ons nie daarby voeg ``Viva ANC!'' nie?

Ons wag in spanning op die President se antwoord. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[This silence could still be passed off as an unfortunate oversight, a
minor mistake, but statements by hon members of the ANC in this debate
force me to ask seriously: Where is the ANC going with minority rights in
South Africa? Here I am referring firstly to the speech of the hon Pierre
Gerber yesterday in this House. Stripped of all the interesting adjuncts
about soup bones in the manse, a rock-pigeon for supper and women who could
not fall halfway pregnant, the appeal of Mr Gerber, addressed to Afrikaners
on behalf of the ANC, can be summarised under the title of a poem, ``'Come
into my parlour,' said the spider to the fly.'' [Laughter.] I quote: ``For
the Afrikaner to become involved in opposition politics is like taking out
an Avbob funeral policy.''

Afrikaner opposition leaders are referred to as kamikaze politicians, self-
appointed mouthpieces, just like the hundreds of financial advisors, not
one of whom is a millionaire. May I, in this regard, say to Mr Gerber that
I am not able to lay an egg, but I can smell when it is rotten. Afrikaners
outside the ANC were referred to as share-croppers, and within the ANC
there is room for Afrikaner ideas, fears and ideals.

This view, this Kallie-and-Pik-syndrome, is interspersed with the following
absurdities: Firstly, if one wants to promote the interests of the
minority, one should strengthen the majority; secondly, ``if you cannot
beat them, join them''; thirdly, ``one country, one nation'' means, in the
language of the ANC, ``one nation, one party'', and fourthly, the ANC is
being asked, please, to champion the language of the Afrikaner and other
peoples, the appreciation of their history, the upholding of their values,
the title deeds of their future, because, after all, they behaved so well
and even voted for them!

The Afrikaners are not asking for ex gratia favours for good behaviour.
They are not asking for privileges. They are asking for internationally
recognised rights, expressed in many international resolutions, for example
the KVS1-Europe, Copenhagen 1990, Helsinki 1992, UN Resolutions 92 and 94
and the Council of Europe's Convention for the Protection of Minorities in
1995, clear indications of which are also to be found in the African
Charter, which has been ratified by this Parliament. Last, but not least,
we also have the so-called unsigned agreement between the ANC and the
Afrikaner Volksfront in 1993, and the Accord on Afrikaner Self-
determination between the FF, the ANC and the then government, of which
absolutely nothing has come yet.

Does Mr Gerber still say: ``'Come into my parlour,' said the spider to the
fly''? My response to him is contained in another little poem from my
childhood. It reads as follows:


  Neef Jakkals nooi vir gansie:
  ``Kom eet vanaand by my.
  Daar is heerlike kossies en uintjies uit die vlei!''
  ``Nee dankie,'' sÃª die gansie, ``al staan jy op jou kop,
  As ek vanaand by jou kom eet,
  Vreet jy my sekerlik op!''

[Laughter.] This failure of the ANC, as well as statements by Cabinet
Ministers in this House, far rather amount to upholding an obsolete theory
that minority rights will be guaranteed by ordinary individual rights.
Consider what the well-known political philosopher from Canada, Will
Kimlika, has said about this. Surely it is logical that a part cannot blend
into the whole. Surely one cannot ``sakkie-sakkie'' to the rhythm of a toyi-
toyi. Surely one cannot, for the sake of political correctness, feel the
same about Piet Retief, Dingaan and Rhodes, and here I am speaking about
Cecil and not Jonty. Surely a multicultural majority cannot show the same
dedication and sensitivity in respect of one's culture, one's history and
one's language, which, by the way, may disappear from the courts. The
solution is this: Give minorities the right to their own structures at
statutory level to enable them to stake their claims, and thus ensure
positive participation, safety and stability. [Interjections.] Yes,
positive.

Yesterday the hon Prof Ben Turok accused the geese who are wary of the fox
of negativity. I ask: Am I negative when I say to the Afrikaner youth:
``Put away that passport, your future lies in this country''? Am I
negative, when I say to thousands of Afrikaners who were excluded from the
democratic process: ``Come and participate. Give me your mandate to go and
express your aspirations in the highest chambers of the country?'' If we,
even in the year 2000, still sing from our hearts: ``Oh, South Africa, dear
land'', are we negative just because we do not add ``Viva ANC!'' to that?

We are waiting in suspense for the President's reply.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Mr Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President,
Ministers, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to say to the hon
the President that his address to the nation was, for most South Africans,
underpinned by a passion for social justice. I gleaned from his remarks
that the fundamental test of all things, whether the market system, trade
unions, taxes, exchange controls or alliances, is how far they benefit the
poorest of the poor.

I hear the hon the President's call for the spiritual unity of humanity. I
hear his call for a community of spirit with the inhabitants of the
squatter camps and the destitute in the rural areas, not only in South
Africa, but on the entire continent. An address replete with such
spirituality compels me to read, again and again, Dialogue 64, in which
Jesus Christ says to Catherine of Siena:


  You cannot give the kind of love I ask you. This is why I have put you
  among your neighbours: so that you can do for them, what you cannot do
  for me, that is, love them without any concern for thanks and without
  looking for any profit for yourself. And, whatever you do for them I will
  consider done for me.

My remarks this afternoon will focus on the failure of the developed world
to rise to the challenge of transformation and reconstruction. I will use
the word ``developed'' interchangeably, to mean the developed Western world
and our own developed, essentially white, population.
All South African blacks shared a common historical experience of Western
colonial rule which induced a common reaction relating to several
international issues. Economic development, social progress and political
emancipation became the overwhelming aspiration of all colonised peoples.
Everybody in this House, the opposition parties included, agreed that
apartheid was the dirtiest symbol of our deepest degradation of both black
and white people.

In spite of obstructions, sensitive and warm-hearted men and women in the
developed world did come to help. However, can the apologists deny that
resources from this part of the world contributed to the development of the
developed world? Can they deny that the labour of the developing world
subsidised the labour of the developed world? Can the protagonists of the
unbridled free-market system deny that wages for blacks in the South
African mines, which were 72 cents per day in 1910, had fallen to 50 cents
in value per day in 1975?

All the grandstanding of the DP, which, indeed, is an extension and
representative of the developed world, in regard to its refrain on squatter
camps and the growing despair among the poor, is less than cheap. However,
I must, indeed, be presumptuous to expect any better from the DP, whose
leaders pretend to be the unyielding opponents of political
authoritarianism, but still want to enter into deals with the right-wingers
of the dead NP and even with Lucas Mangope to boot.

I, too, with Brecht, would like to warn South Africans against the
resurgence of rightists - in his words: ``the bitch is in heat again'', if
not the fox - in South Africa. [Interjections.] And, true to itself, with
its self-righteous indignation, it has the shameless gall to reflect on the
ANC-Cosatu-SACP alliance, which is an alliance born in struggle to resist
racism, and with an unbridled passion for democracy, justice and the
creation of a compassionate society for all South Africans.

The picture of the developed world is of one that lacks the will to be
engaged in the transformation of countries like ours. Instead, it is like
the DP, which chases ambulances with dead bodies in order to catch votes.
The developed world, by commission and/or omission, lends itself to strife
and instability. Instead of chasing ambulances, has the DP organised
ventilators and blood for accident victims?
A similar question can be asked of those who proclaimed constructive
engagement while arming, aiding and abetting Savimbi. How many schools,
clinics and hospitals did they build in order to help Angola? None.
Instead, Savimbi's soldiers destroyed these and more, and these soldiers
were assisted by South Africans whom the DP saluted as ``our boys''. Ask
Colin Eglin.

Mozambique could have been the granary of sub-Saharan Africa. Instead, it
became one of the poorest countries in the world. Does the DP recall white
South Africa's role in this? What was the nature of engagement by the
developed world in respect of the DRC? Did it help construct it? No, it did
not. Instead, through the Tshombes and white-controlled Union Meniere, it
destabilised it, and through the Mobutus, it plundered it and is still the
custodian and keeper of Mobutu's wealth.

Has the DP ever pronounced on these vulgarities in which many so-called
reputable South Africans have had a hand? The continent is replete with
such examples. I am not in any way ignoring the other subjective reasons
for the current plight of the continent, but I am convinced that the
developed countries, including the DP, are cobelligerents against democracy
and reconstruction and - I refer this to Mr Ellis - by deduction, are
against the African renaissance, of which the fundamental guiding principle
is social justice and the recognition of a common humanity for all in
Africa. The developed world, especially those in the EU ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Mr Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President
and hon members, I think I should start off by apologising to the House.
Earlier on I made the fatal error of phoning the office of the hon Patricia
de Lille and indicating that I would be taking part in the debate this
afternoon. Now I notice that the member has disappeared. [Laughter.] I hope
that I am not responsible for that because of that call. [Interjections.]

Yesterday a senior member of this House and the leader of the IFP, Dr
Buthelezi, made a plea that the time had come that we raise the level of
debate in the House. I think that that is a timely call, because the issues
we are dealing with here are, indeed, very serious issues. I think it is
important that each time a member of the House comes to take the podium she
or he must begin to understand that she or he is performing a sacred duty.
In his address to the nation on Friday, the hon the President said:


  The Government pledges its full support to both Nelson Mandela and Sir
  Ketumile Masire of Botswana as they work with the governments and people
  of Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo to bring peace and
  democracy to these sister African countries.

The core business of the National Defence Force is the defence and
protection of the Republic. The National Defence Force is poised and ready
to effectively discharge this obligation. We proceed from the premise that
defence is both cheaper and easier if our country is surrounded by a sea of
peace and stability. Therefore, rather than undermine the Lusaka Peace
Agreement or any initiative intended to create peace in our region, we are
in fact the main sponsors of every step that is being taken in our region
to create peace and stability.

With regard to the resolution of the DRC process, we are in fact the main
sponsors of that process. It is therefore completely untrue and dangerous
in the extreme to allege that those of us who are grappling with the
intricacies of the DRC are taking sides in the matter, such as was done
yesterday by the hon member Bantu Holomisa who unfortunately is not here to
benefit from some of the wisdom that we will be sharing here.

In the case of the DRC, South Africa supports one thing and one thing alone
- the democratisation of the DRC. That is what we support. We have not
entered the military fray in the DRC precisely because we regard the
problem of that country as a political issue requiring a political
solution. The question in the DRC is: Who must govern the country? That
question needs to be answered not on the battlefield but in the voting
stations. The leaders of the various factions in that country must enter
into a national dialogue, agree on an election date and allow the people of
the DRC to choose who should govern it.

If we were to take any step that seeks to strengthen one of the groups or
factions, or the other, we would have forfeited our role in promoting
democratisation in the DRC, the continent as a whole and the world. So the
drive by South Africa, the efforts of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
other related departments that are working with her, is to make sure that
the DRC ultimately arrives at a point of this election.

I should of course have had an opportunity to say to the hon member who
spoke so loudly yesterday in this House that part of the reason why he was
expelled from the ANC is that kind of behaviour where one does not go and
get the facts and then talk on the facts. [Laughter.] [Applause.] He must
not create fictitious facts and argue on them.

With regard to this issue, I wish to draw members' attention to the fact
that since June 1998, no weapons were supplied by South Africa to any one
of the belligerents in the DRC, none whatsoever. At the time of the
outbreak of hostilities in the DRC, we had orders for weaponry from a
number of countries in the region. We moved immediately to freeze all the
orders and that situation remains to this day.

On 25 August last year - I think the hon member who was speaking here
yesterday was still too new as a leader of a party in the House - the hon
Colin Eglin posed a question to the President asking whether we had been
supplying weapons over the previous two years or so to any of the
belligerents in the DRC. The reply to that question was given by the hon
Minister of Education in his capacity as chairperson of the National
Conventional Arms Control Committee. It was a written reply that was given
to this House. I thought that if the hon member Bantu Holomisa had
acquainted himself with the content of that reply at the time, he would be
in possession of the information. Because, when members ask questions here,
they do not ask those questions just for themselves, and when we supply
answers, we supply them for the benefit of every member of the House. I
think he would have benefited if he had looked at that reply, because the
reply given to that question indicated what and how much weaponry had been
supplied to what country.

That was before the hostilities broke out. Therefore, it is not impossible
that some of the weaponry bought much earlier could have been used by some
of the people there. But to then say, if one saw a piece of artillery or
something anywhere, that this Government has taken a position to supply
weapons, in other words, to fuel the conflict there, is a most
irresponsible thing to do. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Mr Chairperson, His Excellency the President, Deputy
President, hon Ministers and colleagues, I notice that the DP is trickling
back after it has gone into an impromptu caucus ... [Laughter] ... now that
for once they have been found with their political knickers twisted.
[Laughter.]

There are fundamental imbalances in our country which undermine the fabric
of our society and threaten to destroy our prospects for a successful,
prosperous and stable future. We need to assess the statements made by the
President in his opening address against the details of what has been done
or has been planned to be done to redress these imbalances.

Our country cannot survive with the present imbalance between rural and
urban areas, between rich and poor, between the employed and the
unemployed, between the law-abiding and the lawless. The issue of rural
development, employment generation, upliftment of the poorest of the poor,
and the promotion of a culture of law, order and social discipline can and
should become part of the unified equation.

These issues belong together and should be addressed through a unified
strategy. Unfortunately, the law, policies and programmes that we have set
in place to address these imbalances have proved to be insufficient, if not
at times counterproductive. These inadequacies have been the product of
erroneous perspectives being applied in formulating policies to tackle the
problems.

Often an urban perspective has been applied when dealing with rural
development. The perspective of the rich has been applied when dealing with
the problems of the poor. The view points of those who are employed has
governed the debate on employment generation and the needs of the
unemployed. In dealing with an almost pervasive culture of rebellion,
lawlessness and crippling social disintegration, the perspective of law
enforcement has been adopted over the standpoint of communities and their
earnest efforts to rebuild the fibre of their regulative and respectful
social way of life.

Most of all, our policies have reflected a constant, all-pervasive and,
unfortunately, increasingly top-down perspective. Our policies have sought
uniformity and aimed at strengthening the top layers of decision-making in
the hands of power. We need a revolution in the way we approach these
problems. We must begin adopting a bottom-up perspective which starts from
the needs, aspirations and ways of life of the people whose problems we
intend to solve. We must substitute the perspective of Government with the
viewpoint of the people.

Our Government must focus its priority attention on the reconstruction of
our communities. We need a unified, community-based strategy which tackles
the problems of crime, the spread of Aids, underdevelopment and the lack of
training from within the communities. We need to put our communities to
work on their own development within a framework of social discipline,
enthusiasm and renewed motivation for the struggle ahead.

Within this context, it is very damaging that the policies and the
legislation we have adopted will have the practical effect of undermining
the role, powers and functions of traditional leadership. This phenomenon
will increase the process of social disintegration and the breakdown of our
communities, without providing an alternative clear model which can bring
about a different form of community cohesiveness.

If we wish to bring about a genuine and credible African renaissance, we
must enable our communities to express themselves and become the engines of
their own transformation and development. We must strengthen, rather than
undermine, the existing blocks of our society. In this context, the thorny
issue of the demarcation of boundaries for municipal areas assumes an
important connotation over and above its actual legal significance.

It might be true that, considered in itself, boundary demarcation is not
responsible for the many pressures put on communities across South Africa.
However, it is the proverbial last straw which breaks the camel's back and
makes it real and tangible to the people that our Government is heavy-
handed and functions from the top down.

Demarcation of municipal boundaries and the entire establishment of local
government ... [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Mr President, Chairperson, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, in 1994 the ANC, which is a mass-based organisation whose base
membership is nestled in the heart and soul of the poor and marginalised,
entered government and faced the challenge of addressing problems around
poverty, and eradicating inequalities entrenched by years of injustice and
oppression that had direct links to the levels of crime.

Powerlessness, isolation, vulnerability and alienation are common threads
uniting the different strands of poverty, getting up in the morning and not
knowing what to do - Ke tla tsea eng ka beya? Ndiza kuthini? [What can I
do? What can I do?] - failing health, underemployment, exploitation,
walking long distances to draw water and fetch wood, and having to support
grandchildren with old age pensions - these are but the tip of the iceberg
of the social problems we inherited.

Where are the country's poor? They are unevenly spread throughout the
country's nine provinces and they form a total of 70% of our rural
dwellers, while 30% are in the urban areas in both formal and informal
settlements. Poverty is a way of life for many in our country.

Racism compounded the problem by adding to social maladies such as
overcrowding, poor infrastructure, illiteracy, limited access to goods and
services and poor health facilities. Poverty has cut across the urban-rural
divide and left a trail of oases of plenty amidst desperation and want,
splitting our country into different fragments, pushing the chasm even
wider - e arotse bana ba mpa [it is discriminating] - a society that was at
odds with, and dismembered from, the ruling party. This created a huge
chasm: them and us.

Despite the inroads we have made, we still see the DP's Tony Leon and
Seremane firmly trapped in the past and clinging to the old divide.
``Sizonibona'', a quaint word used to depict the DP's touristy forays into
the townships to see how the other half lives, perpetuates the them-and-us
syndrome, invades people's lives and turns living spaces into zoos. Talking
from the lofty heights of a tour bus and making pronouncements after paying
fleeting visits to informal settlements is nothing but a cheap gimmick.
Whither is the DP going? They are lost, they have to come back and be South
Africans.

It took the hon Mr Tony Leon a latter-day's voyage to discover, only last
month in January, the conditions in which we, as blacks, grew up.
[Interjections.] The majority of our people grew up in those conditions
which the hon Mr Leon visits whenever he puts petrol into his tour bus.
[Applause.] The hon member indulges in name-calling and that sort of
behaviour is very unbecoming in any person who wants to be taken seriously
as Leader of the Opposition.

We could have stood transfixed by the mammoth task facing the country or,
like the DP, chattered all the time, but we got stuck in and introduced
social programmes that targeted the most vulnerable members of our society,
namely the women and their children and the disabled. I am proud to
announce that we have made a significant impact and we have markedly
improved the quality of life of our people. This has turned our society
around and finally reconnected it with the Government of the day. We have
the masses of our people at the centre of all our activities, and this is a
nation which works for a better life.

While we acknowledge that incidences of crime occur in most neighbourhoods
right across the country, the poor suffer most as evidenced by the high
levels of sexual, alcohol and child abuse leading to fractured and unstable
families. We have instituted legal and social programmes that focus on
problems around domestic violence, sexual offences, landlessness, gender
and racial inequities. The National Crime Prevention Strategy has yielded
positive results through the partnership built with communities. These
communities are now actively involved in the maintenance of safety and
security in their neighbourhoods.

The foundation for a better life for all our people was laid in the first
five years of governance, with funds supporting social programmes such as
housing projects for the disabled, increased social grants, as well as
improved infrastructure where there was none. We can now boast of an open
government that is in tune with the people.

Access to clean water, sanitation and electricity, things some of us take
for granted, have freed the country's poor from the necessary albeit time-
consuming tasks of gathering wood and drawing water at far-flung areas at
great risk to the family's health. Over three million people have received
access to electricity and water, reducing the level of carbon monoxide
substantially. The policies formulated and implemented by this Government
have not only radically turned people's lives around for the better, but
have begun to chart the road leading to us creating a caring society while
still steadily removing the iron grip of poverty.

With the dawn of the African century still in its infancy, we can proudly
celebrate the gains made. The country's poor now enjoy free health care
services afforded to children and pregnant and nursing mothers.
Tuberculosis, commonly known as the poor man's disease, is now under
control, and so is the incidence of cervical cancer among the poor. While
we are still faced with the scourge of our time, HIV/Aids, we have managed
to set in place systems and mechanisms to prevent and control infectious
diseases.

The ability to read and write is most certainly a very important aspect
that will help deepen our democracy and enable people to take charge of
their lives and participate in the mainstream economy. The introduction of
free and compulsory education, early childhood development, adult basic
education and lifelong learning has restored the people's human dignity.
More importantly though, it has gone a long way towards reducing inequities
and making a significant impact on literacy, strengthening and entrenching
democratic governance.

Nomfanelo Duba, a middle-aged farmworker and mother of two, used to glance
at her children's books without comprehending. She proceeded by drawing a
spider in the margins as a substitute for a signature, signifying that she
had supervised her offspring's homework. She was disempowered from
participating, as well as giving guidance and support towards her
children's passage through education. She has now become a part of an ever-
growing core of adult learners. Today she reads her children's homework
with critical and avid interest, shaping and nurturing their critical and
analytic skills. Another example of a Government firmly hooked up and
deeply connected with the people.

In the area of welfare, the country's poor are now beneficiaries of welfare
programmes like the old age pensions and grants for children and persons
with disabilities. These are aimed at relieving poverty and providing
support in the form of a safety net to the most vulnerable people in the
country. The Minister for Welfare and Population Development launched a
comprehensive programme called ``Towards a Caring Nation: Addressing the
Needs of the Poor''. This programme will intervene in critical areas and
alleviate the levels of poverty, as well as pull in people who are on the
bounds of despair.

The community water and sanitation programme has seen our people actively
involved in the delivery of social services and improving the quality of
life of our society. We are now implementing an integrated approach to the
delivery of social services. Ordinary people are actively participating in
the delivery of social services. We formed real partnerships with the
people and we now have a nation at work for a better life for all our
people.

In order to accelerate delivery, Government has introduced the poverty
relief fund as an instrument to ensure that the poorest receive immediate
attention. This Government provides an intervention mechanism that gets to
the core of the problem. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr E SALOOJEE: Mr Chairperson and hon President, our new Constitution is
quite unique in that its antipoverty focus establishes rights of people to
adequate water, land, health care and social security.

Despite these fundamental rights, poverty and inequalities still
characterises the lives and existence of millions of South Africans. The
history of this country has resulted in living conditions of abject poverty
for the poor based on racism, sexism and geographic banishment to rural
areas. The systematic process of degradation and impoverishment of the
people of this country has resulted in massive levels and depth of poverty
that is still evident. Lack of infrastructure and unemployment in the rural
areas severely constrain poor people from developing their capacity for
economic advancement. Survival remains the current reality of the poorest
of the poor, and what we want to say is that this is where we are coming
from.

Mr Leon and some of his supporters tried to dramatise their visit to the
rural areas recently, as if they have discovered them only now. Our
Government and our people - even in the process of our fight for liberation
- are part of that community. In his speech, the President has highlighted
the need to extricate poor people from the conditions of poverty and the
violations of the human dignity that the poor in the country continue to
suffer.

The Government has made great strides in alleviating the levels of poverty
in this country through its policies, legislation and focus on increased
economic growth. However, it must be acknowledged that the historical
conditions that gave rise to poverty, unemployment and racial
discrimination were so entrenched that, even five years after political and
social transformation, we are still undoing the social and economic
consequences of this legacy.

Essentially the rationale for transformation recognises that these huge
inequalities continues to exist and urgently need to be reversed. The
essence of our Government's antipoverty policy has always been based on the
recognition of the value and dignity of all persons, and more especially
those who are the most vulnerable in our communities. I am speaking here
about the poor, the unemployed, the elderly, single mothers, children and
the disabled. This Government has always indicated its commitment to these
vulnerable people and through its actions in government has demonstrated
its concern for and identification with people who are in these conditions.

An essential component of this commitment, as the previous speaker said, is
social security. Close to 90% of the welfare budget is allocated to social
security. Approximately 7 out of every 100 South Africans are in receipt of
government assistance and the department pays grants to 2,9Â million
households.

I am singling out social security. We know, and it is undeniable, that we
are making advances with the growth of our economy. With it, one hopes that
there will be a dramatic increase in opportunities for work. But while that
is occurring, it is essential that we ensure that our people are able to
survive in dignity. That is why I am singling out social security. In fact,
if one looks at the figures, even if one compares it percentage-wise with
the developed countries of our world, one will find that we have possibly
one of the best social security systems that a country could enjoy.

But we are not saying that our people, the poor, must be condemned to rely
on that forever. A better time will come, we are certain, especially if one
looks at the kind of progress that has been made. The DP does not even want
to recognise the advances that have been made.

An HON MEMBER: They are rich!

Mr E SALOOJEE: But until such time, and as we advance towards greater
prosperity, we will reform the social security system in such a way that
the expenses are reduced and it is targeted at those who require it
desperately.
These social grants are the source of household security for millions of
South Africans who were marginalised through racial discrimination. These
grants contribute to poverty alleviation and introduce resources into the
poor communities. They provide a crucial form of income for a large number
of vulnerable families. The long-term vision of this Government is for
people and communities in urban and rural areas to become self-reliant,
have sustained economic activity and enjoy a good quality of life. In the
words of our President: ``They must be proud to be South Africans.''

We are therefore committed to reducing the extent and depth of the poverty
experienced by so many. Part of the Government's strategy to ensure self-
reliant communities is through integrated programmes that aim to reduce
poverty. Whether these are in the form of social security, job creation
through public works programmes or other means, it must be acknowledged
that the very poor need a lifeline to enable them at least to mobilise
resources at their disposal to escape deep poverty. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mnr F J VAN DEVENTER: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gaan Afrikaans praat om
sodoende vir die agb President ook dankie te sÃª vir sy positiewe houding
teenoor die handhawing van ons taal in hierdie Parlement en daar buite. Ons
bedank hom daarvoor.

AGB LEDE: Hoor, hoor!

Mnr F J VAN DEVENTER: Voor ek by die President se toespraak kom, wil ek net
baie vinnig verwys na die opgewonde toespraak van die agb lid mnr Gibson
oor opposisie-samewerking. Ek gaan nie veel meer daaroor sÃª nie, behalwe
dat as hy televisie kyk, sal hy sien daar is 'n advertensie waarin 'n man
met 'n tassie in sy hand stap, en dan kom daar 'n voÃ«ltjie so oor hom
gevlieg en dan blerts die voÃ«ltjie hom so op sy baadjie. Dan drink diÃ© man
sy Red Bull en dan vlieg hy bokant die voÃ«ltjie verby. Gelukkig was mnr
Gibson se tyd om voordat hy sy broek kon loskry! [Gelag.]

Daar is baie dinge wat die President gesÃª het wat 'n mens kan kritiseer,
net soos daar baie dinge is wat 'n mens kan kritiseer omdat hy dit niÃ© gesÃª
het nie. Ek wil egter aan die President sÃª dankie dat hy, wat die
ontwikkeling van Suid-Afrika vorentoe betref, dit ten minste duidelik
uitgestippel het dat ekonomiese groei, gebaseer op die gesonde beginsels
van 'n vryemarkstelsel, ingebed is in sy toekomsvisie vir Suid-Afrika.

Daar is geen manier hoe ons die armoede wat in ons land heers, kan
hokslaan, hoe ons daardie groei kan kry en hoe ons investering kan kry as
ons nie die vertroue by mense daar buite skep om hierdie land te gebruik en
te ontwikkel soos wat hy verdien nie. Ek verstaan die hele bekommernis oor
armoede, en ek het net soveel simpatie met armoede as wat enige lid in
hierdie Parlement van watter party ook al het.

Ons moet egter baie versigtig wees wanneer ons praat oor die bestryding van
armoede dat ons nie verwagtings skep en beloftes maak in 'n tyd wanneer ons
ekonomie in 'n opwaartse swaai is, wat ons nie kan volhou wanneer die
noodwendige afswaai van die ekonomie weer aanbreek nie. Dan lewer ons
hierdie land uit en dan bind ons hierdie land vas aan 'n stelsel van
sosialisme wat baie sterker ekonomieÃ« as diÃ© van Suid-Afrika al op hulle
knieÃ« gedwing het. Dan praat ons van korttermyn-oplossings vir 'n probleem
wat nie met korttermyn-oplossings opgelos kan word nie.

Ek wil verwys na een of twee sake wat my regtig hinder, en ek doen dit met
groot piÃ«teit. Die eerste hiervan is dat wanneer daar gepraat word van
rassisme en beskuldigings gemaak word oor rassisme, dan is daar altyd 'n
subtiele ondertoon of 'n blatante verwysing dat rassisme eintlik maar
beoefen word deur die witmense van Suid-Afrika. Ek wil werklik die
President in belang van nasiebou en in belang van vertroue vra dat ons van
hierdie soort beskuldiging, wat niks anders is as 'n poging om politieke
steun op grond van die verlede te probeer werf en te behou nie, sal afstap,
want dit is so waar as wat ons vandag hier staan en sit dat rassisme nie 'n
wit of 'n swart of 'n bruin groep ken nie.

In al hierdie groepe is daar mense wat hulself en hulle standpunte probeer
regverdig deur beledigend op te tree teenoor mense van ander groepe. Ons
het 'n verantwoordelikheid in hierdie Parlement, en veral hulle wat in die
Regering sit, om hierdie soort tendens hok te slaan en uit die weg te ruim,
anders gaan ons Suid-Afrika vernietig.

Die tweede saak waarna ek wil verwys, is die hele kwessie van armoede. Dit
word aan dieselfde beginsel onderwerp, naamlik dat as daar gepraat word van
armoede, dan word almal in twee kampe ingedeel; die ryk wittes en die arm
swartmense. Sedert 1975, toe ongeveer 2% van die 10% rykste mense in Suid-
Afrika uit swart huishoudings gekom het, het die gaping vernou, en in 1996
het 22% van die rykste huishoudings in Suid-Afrika uit swart geledere
gekom.

Die gaping tussen ryk en arm word groter, maar daardie tendens bestaan nie
alleen tussen ryk wit en arm swart nie; dit bestaan ook tussen ryk swart en
arm swart, en ryk wit en arm wit. Dit is 'n globale en 'n nasionale
probleem waarmee ons worstel. As ons aanhoudend groepe in hokke plaas van
wie ryk en wie arm is, gaan ons nooit die simpatie kry om hierdie netelige
probleem op te los nie.

Die derde saak is die kwessie van die opkoms van 'n regse mag. Ek deel die
President se vrese daaroor, maar weer eens moet ons nie die persepsie laat
dat daardie regse mag kan opstaan bloot uit wit geledere nie. Ek het 'n
vermoede hy gaan uit ander geledere opstaan, en ons moet daarop bedag wees
sodat ons nie mense in kampe jaag wat meebring dat ons, wanneer ons daardie
geveg moet voer, verdeeld is nie.

Daar is egter ook 'n ander groot gevaar, en dit is dat daar ook in die
geledere van die georganiseerde arbeid, die werkers en die werkloses, magte
aan die werk is wat probeer om beloofde voorspoed te bring deur die
verdeling van rykdom. Dit gaan Suid-Afrika vernietig. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Mr Chairperson, I am going to speak in Afrikaans,
thus enabling me also to thank the hon the President for his positive
attitude with regard to the upholding of our language in this Parliament
and outside. We thank him for that.

HON MEMBERS: Hear,hear!

Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Before I come to the President's speech, I would just
like to refer very briefly to the agitated speech of the hon member Mr
Gibson with regard to co-operation between opposition parties. I am not
going to say much more about this, except that if he watches television, he
will see an advertisement in which a man is walking along carrying a
briefcase in his hand, and then a little bird flies over him and soils his
jacket. This man then drinks his Red Bull and flies above the little bird.
Fortunately Mr Gibson's time had expired before he could unzip his
trousers! [Laughter.]

There are a lot of things that the President said that one could criticise,
just as there are a lot of things one could criticise because he did not
say them. However, I would like to thank the President for at least
outlining very clearly, with regard to the future development of South
Africa, that economic growth, based on the sound principles of a free
market system, is deeply embedded in his future vision for South Africa.

There is no way in which we can contain the poverty which is prevalent in
our country, in which we can achieve that growth and in which we can manage
to get investments, if we do not create confidence amongst the people out
there, to use this country and to develop it as it deserves. I understand
all the concerns about poverty, and I have just as much sympathy with
regard to poverty as any member in this Parliament of whichever party has.

However, we must be very careful when we talk about the combating of
poverty not to create expectations and make promises at a time when our
economy is experiencing an upswing, which we will not be able to sustain
when there is an inevitable downswing in the economy. Then we are placing
this country at the mercy of and committing it to a system of socialism
which has already forced far stronger economies than that of South Africa
to their knees. Then we are talking about short-term solutions for a
problem which cannot be solved with short-term solutions.

I would like to refer to one or two issues which are really worrying me,
and I do so with great piety. The first of these is that when racism is
discussed and accusations are made about racism, it is always subtly
suggested or blatantly stated that racism is actually practised by the
whites of South Africa. I really want to ask the President, in the interest
of nation-building and confidence, that we stop making this type of
accusation, which is nothing but an attempt to drum up and retain political
support on the strength of what happened in the past, because it is an
incontrovertible fact that racism is not confined to a white or a black or
a coloured group.

In all these groups there are people who try to justify themselves and
their positions by behaving insultingly towards people of other groups. We
have a responsibility in this Parliament, and especially those persons who
are in Government, to crack down on and eliminate this type of tendency,
otherwise we are going to destroy South Africa.

The second matter I want to refer to, is the whole issue of poverty. This
is being subjected to the same principle, namely that when poverty is
mentioned, everybody is divided into two groups; the wealthy whites and the
poor blacks. Since 1975, when approximately 2% of the wealthiest 10% of
people came from black households, the gap has narrowed, and in 1996 22% of
the wealthiest households in South Africa were black.

The gap between wealthy and poor is widening, but this tendency does not
only exist between wealthy whites and poor blacks; it also exists between
wealthy blacks and poor blacks, as well as wealthy whites and poor whites.
This problem we are grappling with, is a global and a national one. If we
constantly compartmentalise groups as regards to who is wealthy and who is
poor, we will never build up the sympathy to solve this thorny problem.

The third matter is the issue of the emergence of a right-wing force. I
share the President's fears in this regard, but, once again, we must not
create the impression that that right-wing force will only come from the
ranks of the whites. I have a suspicion it will develop from other ranks,
and we must be mindful of that, so that we do not compartmentalise people,
which will lead to our being divided, when we have to fight that battle.

However, there is also another grave danger, namely that in the ranks of
organised labour, workers and the unemployed, there are forces at work
which are trying to bring about the prosperity that has been promised by
way of the division of wealth. This will destroy South Africa. [Applause.]]

Mnr D A A OLIFANT: Mnr die Voorsitter en agb President, ek wil nie graag
reageer op mnr Van Deventer se toespraak nie, maar ek wil net vir mnr Van
Schalkwyk sÃª dit is duidelik dat daar 'n groot breuk en baie krake is in
die koalisie in die Wes-Kaap. Die premier het gesÃª die koalisie werk. Die
arrogansie wat mnr Gibson hier getoon het, tesame met die opmerking wat mnr
Van Deventer gemaak het, is 'n duidelike teken dat dit niÃ© werk nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Ek wil al die ander partye wat graag samewerking met die
DP wil hÃª, waarsku dat hulle 'n fatale fout gaan maak. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr D A A OLIFANT: Mr Chairperson and hon President, I do not wish to react
to Mr Van Deventer's speech, but I would just like to tell Mr Van Schalkwyk
that it is clear that there is a big split and many cracks in the coalition
in the Western Cape. The Premier said that the coalition is working. The
arrogance which Mr Gibson displayed here, together with the remark which Mr
Van Deventer made, is a clear sign that it is not working. [Interjections.]
I want to warn all the other parties who would like to have co-operation
with the DP that they are going to make a fatal mistake. [Interjections.]]

In his state of the nation address, the President informed South Africans
about how Government planned to intervene in the process of encouraging
economic growth and development. He mentioned, among other things, the
establishment of a Local Economic Development Fund. This fund was
established in August 1999, in the words of the President -


  to support municipalities as they work to meet their mandate of
  stimulating economic development at the local level.
We see this fund as a response to the ongoing and over-reported crisis
experienced by local government. Local government has always been
characterised by a lack of capacity, especially financial resources, hence
its ineffectiveness and inefficiency.

Let me remind the people of this country that the problem at local
government was deliberately entrenched by apartheid. It was at local level
that apartheid was most viciously implemented and it is at local level that
its effective eradication will be measured. The fund will assist the local
government sphere to execute its constitutional mandate to promote the
social and economic development of its communities.

The White Paper on Local Government that was produced in 1998 further
mandates the local state to use a developmental Batho Pele [people first]
approach in implementing its social and economic development programme. It
is a local sphere of government that delivers services to the people on
behalf of the entire system of government, but this is made difficult by
lack of resources, as I mentioned earlier.

The principle of co-operative governance as per section 154(1) of the
Constitution stipulates:


  ... national ... and provincial governments ... must support and
  strengthen the capacity of municipalities to manage their own affairs, to
  exercise their powers and to perform their functions.

By establishing the Local Economic Development Fund, the national
Government has not only implemented the provisions of the section, but also
adhered to the policy commitments that our President has reiterated in all
his addresses as head of state.

I want to emphasise and remind the country that the Local Economic
Development Fund and other initiatives that the President referred to in
his state of the nation address are policy commitments that flow directly
from the broad policies of the ANC on transformation. The Local Economic
Development Fund is meant to support locally inspired efforts to increase
growth and employment and develop markets. The most important
characteristic of local economic development is when local people take the
initiative and form partnerships with the private sector, Government and
NGOs to improve their social and economic conditions, leading to a strong
and sustainable national economy.

The R42 million allocated to the LED Fund has been divided among the nine
provinces, with priority being given to the poorest provinces like the
Eastern Cape, Northern Province and Kwazulu-Natal, which each got R6
million while the others were allocated R3 million each. The Western Cape,
I need to mention, was allocated an additional R3 million because of the
effect that the tornado of last year had on one of the municipalities.

The 47 projects which have been approved nationally will create about 13
523 long-term jobs. The KwaZulu-Natal Mooi River project is worth
mentioning. About 800 people have been retrenched due to the closure of a
major textile factory. The LEDF is supporting a major initiative by the
local people and other stakeholders to assess the feasibility of
establishing an urban inland port as part of the regeneration of the
KwaZulu-Natal midlands.

While the total application for projects received is about R780Â million,
which of course far exceeds the R242 million allocation, no project will be
rejected. All will be referred to the other departments that will take this
programme forward. Therefore a strong call has to be sent to the opposition
parties to refrain from baseless criticisms and to start facilitating the
implementation of the LEDF in their respective constituencies. The LEDF
adds to a long list of initiatives taken by Government in executing its
constitutional commitment to social and economic transformation.

We have all witnessed how Government positively responded to the recent
disasters that were happening around the country, such as the tornadoes and
the veld fires in the Western Cape, the hurricanes in the Eastern Cape and
floods in KwaZulu-Natal. On behalf of the ANC, we would also like to take
this opportunity to express our deepest condolences to the families that
have lost loved ones and valuable possessions in the flooded areas of the
Northern Province, Mpumalanga and Gauteng over the past four days. We want
to assure those communities that, again, Government will intervene
decisively and come forward with assistance as it has done in the past.

However, it is strange that, again, we notice a deadly silence from the
opposition benches on the latest disaster. Is it because it is only the
poor people and the shack dwellers that have been affected?
[Interjections.] We do not hear those hon members when these schemes come
into effect. Furthermore, we are grateful for what Government is doing
about uplifting the lives of people in the Eastern Cape with its economic
development programme, for example the Coega project, and the latest
initiative by the private sector, for example Volkswagen, which has
successfully won a R5 billion contract for the export of locally
manufactured vehicles.

However, we want to condemn the irresponsible actions of workers in the
Volkswagen plant who went on an illegal strike and almost caused VW to lose
that valuable contract. We praise the Numsa national leadership, the hon
John Gomomo, and the Minister of Trade and Industry, Mr Alec Erwin, as well
as the VW management, who decisively intervened to bring sanity to the
situation. We want to appeal to the management of Volkswagen not to
withdraw this contract, but to continue discussions with Numsa to find an
amicable solution to the problem. We particularly make this appeal because
we are aware that there are disruptive elements in the plant whose aim is
to remove some of the Numsa shop stewards who share management's vision of
a strong economy. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Ministers and members, in
my reply to the presidential speech, there are five issues that I would
like to address. The first one is the reference in the President's speech
to racism. Then, of course, there is the issue of unintended consequences
of national legislation. Then there is the issue of local government, which
the hon the President mentioned. Another issue is the recapitalisation
project for the taxi industry, and then I want to conclude with a few
remarks on the issue of poverty relief.

Now, when we examine the hon the President's speech, we must just start off
by saying that the speech was indeed a very positive speech. It was well
received nationally, as well as internationally, and yes, we want to say to
the hon the President that his Government has indeed succeeded as far as
the macroeconomic framework, interest rates and inflation are concerned.

But when I look at the hon the President's reference to racism, and
especially to the crude example of the Internet message I cannot understand
why this man should have been immortalised in the President's speech. That
is because this is such a crude example, and we know that racism in South
Africa is much more subtle than that.

It is easy to deal with crude racism because what we can do here in
Parliament is just pass legislation and therefore deal with it in that
manner. Structural racism, the racism that we had in our society before
this new Government, we can deal with. The issue that we cannot easily deal
with is the issue of the mind and the heart - that is, racism in the heart
and in the mind. [Interjections.] How does one deal with that? That is the
issue that we have to struggle with.

The example quoted by the President is an example of a man living in the
past. In order to reflect a more balanced view on racial attitudes, I would
also like to quote a story that I read in the Sunday newspapers about a
white man who adopted a 10 year old black orphan girl and raised her as his
own daughter. Both of them had to make many adjustments, he had to sit with
this girl and understand where she was coming from, that she was from the
township and had nothing - no family, no mother. Both her parents had died
and she had no family. He had to wrestle with this person, and, for 8 to 10
years, they actually lived together as father and daughter. Today this
daughter does not want to have any other father than this man. And
similarly, this man does not want to have any other daughter than this
girl. So we have this positive example of how two persons with completely
diverse backgrounds have actually been able, in a country such as South
Africa, to understand one another and to deal with the issue of racism.

As far as racism is concerned, we thank God that structural racism has, in
a sense, been dealt with correctly, and it is now the subtle nuances that
we must deal with. With regard to unintended consequences of legislation
passed by this House, the President mentioned in his speech that certain
labour laws will have to be amended in order to deal with these
consequences. Likewise, we believe that the Promotion of Equality and
Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act will also have certain unintended
consequences which we will have to deal with.

As far as local government elections are concerned, there are some tensions
with regard to demarcations, particularly when we refer to the role of
traditional leaders, and we think that these must be dealt with. There are
many good examples of good traditional leaders who love to serve their
people, and it is therefore imperative that we attempt to find a model that
will deal with this.

Ms D P S JANA: Madam Speaker, His Excellency President Mbeki and hon
members, with the skill of a surgeon, President Mbeki, in his state of the
nation address, cut away the dross from the essence of the issue still at
the epicentre of African politics - that is, race. This new form of racism,
unlike before, now proclaims that race has ceased to matter, that equality
and justice have been realised in our new democratic South Africa. The
proponents of this new form of racism are those who deny that the past was
what it was and refuse to see the legacy of the past in the present.

Race will continue to be an issue in our country for as long as access to
amenities such as employment, housing, education, which are necessary for a
fulfilling life, are determined by race; for as long as wellbeing is
dependent on race; for as long as a strong knot binds together privilege
and poverty into what Dr Odara Hoppers describes as ``a single dance of
death;'' and, ultimately, for as long as our society is not completely
transformed to a point where there no longer exists a causal connection
between identity and life chances.

We congratulate our Comrade President on succeeding in maintaining the
national focus on transformation, in the face of vigorous and sustained
attempts to subvert it. Without transformation and its corollary,
corrective action, South African society will continue to be marked by the
stain of apartheid and colonial domination. Until this stain is totally
removed from our society, it will not be possible to claim that democracy
has been fully realised in South Africa.

We recently passed three extremely important Bills: The Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill, the Promotion of
Administrative Justice Bill and the Promotion of Access to Information
Bill. These laws underpin the principal values of democracy. The party that
calls itself the DP voted against all these Bills. Is this resistance or
what?

We welcome the President's call to act with greater vigour to achieve
fundamental transformation in our country. Therefore, there has to be
collective intervention by the state to deracialise its structures. Unless
that process of transformation has occurred, democratisation in South
Africa will remain incomplete.

What does deracialisation mean? It means, essentially, that white citizens
will no longer be allowed privileged access to the positions of power,
wealth, prestige and authority. It does not mean that blacks will replace
whites as the privileged group. It means that no national group will be
privileged in that way. This is not new. This position has been
historically endorsed by President Mbeki and the ANC.

We are proud to be South Africans, precisely because of our achievements
towards transformation. For example, despite the misrepresentation by the
hon Mr Gibson and the mess we inherited, there has been considerable
success towards transformation in the administration of justice, such as
bringing it in line with the Constitution, restoring its legitimacy in the
eyes of the people, representivity, specific service delivery, specialised
courts, victim empowerment, specialised training, court management and
equity. All these have contributed towards improving our criminal justice
system and it must confirm that crime remains among the top priorities of
our Government.

In conclusion, and this is my interpretation of our President's message -
transformation inscribes a new national identity which is available to all
South Africans, irrespective of our ethnic, racial or religious identities.
Whites cannot assume this identity unless they are willing to forego all
the advantages they had access to by virtue of their racial identity in the
past. This new identity provides us with a common focal point that will do
justice to the claims and interests of all South Africans. It is this sense
of South Africanness that will bring about reconciliation which is a South
African dream for the African century.

Finally, as a pointer, can someone please tell me how the racial and ethnic
markers under apartheid would have described me? I am of Indian descent. I
was married to a so-called coloured. My child is black. I studied in a
convent. Imagine the confusion about my braided hair with a pencil test!
[Laughter.] I know who I am. I am an African. [Applause.]

Miss M N MAGAZI: Madam Speaker, hon President Thabo Mbeki, hon Deputy
President Jacob Zuma, the advent of the 21st century presents our nation
with unique challenges and thus opportunities in the areas of
communication, science and technology. In order to understand and
appreciate these enormous challenges I wish to direct members' attention to
two very recent publications which, although different in content, go to
the very heart of what we as a nation are supposed to do. In his foreword
to the 1998-99 annual report of the Foundation for Research Development,
the chairperson made the following observation:


  South Africa is poised on the threshold of a critical phase in its
  development, saddled with the massive burdens of underdevelopment,
  poverty, neglect of education and ill health of the majority of its
  people. It is imperative that it harnesses resources and developments
  from science and technology for a twin purpose: Firstly, to become
  economically competitive on a global scale and, secondly, to provide
  essential services, infrastructure, effective health care and social
  development for all South Africans.

A precondition for the attainment of these twin objectives are the
existence of a technologically and scientifically advanced nation, because
such knowledge is a crucial component of long-term economic growth and
social progress. It will enable us to find creative solutions for the many
pressing social and economic problems facing us.

This raises the very important question of whether we indeed have the
scientific and technological capacity to become economically competitive on
a global scale and provide essential services, infrastructure, effective
health care and social development for all South Africans in this highly
technical era. A survey entitled ``Scientific Literacy of Select South
African Matriculants entering Tertiary Education'', published in the SA
Journal of Science at the end of 1999, found that only one in every three
students entering tertiary institutions has a sufficient grasp of science
to cope with life in the new era. According to the researchers these
results provide insight into the extent to which apartheid education
fostered scientifically illiterate students.

Given the results of this survey, one is tempted to believe that South
Africa does not possess the scientific capacity to achieve the twin
objectives referred to in the above quotation. However, I am glad to say
that this is not the case. As a nation at work we are progressively
unfolding the scientific potential of our people. The various institutions
that are responsible for the promotion of scientific disciplines have been
or is in the process of being transformed so as to create the opportunity
for the previously marginalised majority to actively participate in the
process of knowledge creation.

The transformation and realignment of the SA Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research towards the objectives of Government's social
development programmes enabled us to develop products and services in
respect of low-cost housing, job creation, water supply and transport
systems. The transformation of the SA Medical Research Council made it
possible for us to implement policies with regard to the rendering of
primary health care services, while the realignment and transformation of
the Human Sciences Research Council made it possible for us to identify the
needs and backlogs of service provision in our various committees. In
addition to this, we have a host of other scientific institutions which
have come up with local innovations that have helped solve the problems
plaguing the science industry.
Much more still needs to be done to increase the levels of scientific
knowledge among our people. Our education system should be geared towards
inculcating in our people a desire to acquire scientific knowledge. The
process of funding for historically disadvantaged institutions should be
speeded up to create capacity and encourage them to conduct scientific
research. Our secondary education system, in particular, should be changed
to make the study of the natural and physical sciences an attractive option
for students to pursue at tertiary level.

In addition, it is also important to strengthen and expand the existing
information networks of Government and to train people to use information
to solve problems. However, it is not only the task of the Government to
ensure sufficient levels scientific education. Citizens themselves must be
prepared to use the opportunities made available to them in order to
develop their own intellectual capacity. The private sector should also be
made to understand that scientific and technological investment in its
human resource will contribute to the effectiveness and productivity of
their operations.

There is a common misconception that earthshattering inventions have ever
come out of Africa. But there are many local inventions that are currently
used all over the world. Although we are, naturally, proud of these
inventions without exception, all of them had been the product of white
scientists. It is time for black scientists to take their rightful place in
the scientific world and show our inherited creativity, which has been so
brutally suppressed over centuries of colonialism and apartheid.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! The hon Mr Luyt - all the better for the waiting, you
may now deliver your speech! [Laughter.]

Dr L LUYT: Madam Speaker, hon President and hon members, as members can
see, it takes a lot to keep me away from this podium! Were it not for you,
I would be speaking all afternoon.

When I left this House last Friday I was asked what I thought of the hon
the President's address. My response was, indeed, complimentary. I said
that he touched on an important issue, which satisfied me. He referred to
racial disharmony, and perhaps put far too great emphasis on a single,
stupid and very unfortunate incident. I was impressed with his summation of
our economic future, and realised why so much time was allocated to it and
perhaps less time to the other areas. This was one area where the
performance stood out and could be measured.

The economy, no doubt, has shown remarkable resilience and that augurs well
for a buoyant future. I was pleasantly surprised to hear the President's
prediction for growth of 6,5% for the year 2000 and another 6,5% for 2001.
With this type of growth our resources will be stretched to the limit. Our
infrastructure will creak under the strain. Every single South African will
have to pull his - in legal parlance, reference to one gender includes the
other - weight. The country will need all its skills and we can ill afford
to lose any.

As a consequences, the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act may
also come loose at the seams. The country will quickly discover that there
is no substitute for experience. But a great plus is that everybody will
benefit, more so the state. I had the opportunity to watch the President's
interview on News Maker. It was then that I realised, with hindsight, that
one has to read more between the lines than on the lines. I shall follow
his example.
I have no intention of traversing the areas already covered by the hon the
Leader of the Opposition. He has now firmly established himself as a
fighter equal to the President's latest acquisition, Kallie Knoetze.
[Laughter.] Kallie, sadly, still seems to be suffering from his ignominious
dumping by Jimmy Abbott, out of the ring in the first round, at Durban some
years ago. [Laughter.] The brain remains a fragile part of the body.
[Laughter.] The hon Minister Balfour should, please, take note of that when
he considers women boxing. It is not so much the brain I am concerned about
in this instance, but other delicate and sensitive parts of the anatomy.
[Laughter.]

In a lighter vein, the hon Dr Buthelezi made sure that his criticism
sounded like praise, and his praise like adoration. What a masterful
display of realpolitik! [Laughter.] The hon Mr van Schalkwyk retains the
knack of being ambivalent, yet committed to opposition politics. The hon Mr
Gerber disarmed me and broke the back of any Afrikaner claims and took me
back to my own roots. But, apart from ``sopbene'' and ``blikbekers'', what
happened to the good old ``veldties'' - if hon members know what I mean by
that - and the multiple uses for the smooth stones, ``kleilatte'' and
``kaalgatte en die verlaagde broek''. [Laughter.]

I am certain that the Afrikaner cause was well looked after by our
parliamentary troubadour and court jester, the hon Comrade Cassie Aucamp
and the hon Gen Viljoen. The generals certainly assert themselves in this
House. It would appear that the hon Minister Steve Tshwete showed, at last,
that he could identify crooks; albeit in jest. [Laughter.] [Applause.] But
boys will be boys, and their foreign policy will remain a mess, as long as
the hon Minister Zuma ``struts the earth'', to use Prof ``Boom, boom''
Kader Asmal's famous quotation in a letter describing me unkindly, I would
say, some time back. But we have since met and he can now write from his
first hand knowledge.

The President has alluded to possible amendments to the labour laws. That
created great expectations amongst business people. However, perhaps he
will favour us with his unambiguous response as to what he had in mind. The
latest public utterances by the Minister of Labour do not seem to address
the employer's concern; rather they have created more confusion. The
President will agree that, as the saying goes: ``Silence gives consent.''

I understand the President's statement that: ``The essence of a free
government consists in an effectual control of rivalries.'' However, as
Disraeli so aptly stated: ``No government can be long secure without a
formidable opposition.''

The President has again made his intentions clear where health is
concerned. His fight against, in particular, HIV/Aids must be supported.
Our health system must not deteriorate further. The loss of so many
qualified doctors and nursing personnel is simply unacceptable. Improvement
of our health services is now of paramount importance.

Likewise, education did not take a back seat. A truism is that education
makes a people easy to lead, but difficult to drive; easy to govern, but
impossible to enslave. I personally feel comfortable with Prof ``Boom,
boom'' Asmal at the helm. [Laughter.]

When the President spoke of privatisation, Spoornet also entered the
equation. When one looks at the thousands of paid for, but idle, railway
lines, one wonders how this could have been allowed to happen. The cheapest
form of transport, which at the same time relieves the traffic burden on
our roads, has simply been put on the back burner. To put the railroad back
to work will lessen the carnage on our congested roads and create those so-
much-needed jobs and strengthen our capacity to cope with the expected
growth.

I am glad that the President also believes that South Africa should get the
2006 Soccer World Cup. After all, the same old prophets of doom and the
stories of violence that did the rounds before the 1995 Rugby World Cup,
are rearing their ugly heads once more. However, we can now compare the
1995 Rugby World Cup with the 1999 Rugby World Cup. We find no comparison.

I notice that Pik Botha already has some influence on the President's
speech-making. [Laughter.] Wait until Pik insists that the President quotes
from his poetry, short stories and fables. [Laughter.]

In conclusion, the President might have heard from all sources that he
would have to fill giant footsteps when he took over as President. He must
deliver on his undertakings and start ordering bigger shoes, by the way.
[Applause.]

Mr D A HANEKOM: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Deputy President and hon
members, I am so glad that I am speaking after Louis Luyt, not before him.

In his address, Comrade President focused not only on the achievements of
this democratic era, but also on the difficult challenges that confront us.
The economy is, indeed, doing well by any standards, democracy is firmly
entrenched, there is political stability in our country and the quality of
life has significantly improved for millions of our people. There are a
number of Government programmes targeting the poor, the homeless and the
landless. We have opened up our schools, equalised pensions and
deracialised our society in many ways. There is so much to be proud of, and
so many achievements to boast of - the houses that have been built, water
that has been provided, telephone connections, electricity, improved health
services and much more.

Yet, the hon President chose to highlight the fact that racism is still
pervasive in our country. He chose to tell us things that we do not
necessarily like to hear - things that make some of us a bit uncomfortable
in our parliamentary seats. In doing so, the hon President opened himself
up for challenge. Many have said that he is wrong, that there are countless
stories of goodwill and harmony. Some have even accused him of racism.

Indeed, there are many inspiring stories that need to be told, and they do
serve as examples of what we ought to be and what we could be doing, but to
pretend that this is the full picture of what is happening in our country
would be self-deception. It would be a useless denial of reality and the
brutal everyday experience of so many black South Africans.

Sadly, the letter from which the President quoted was not an isolated
expression of racism. It was written with the confident knowledge that many
of his colleagues share and support his views and attitudes. This is the
reality that we need to confront. We should immediately say that any
assumption that all whites think and behave in this way is clearly
offensive and damaging, and is simply not true. However, denial of the
reality of deep-rooted racial prejudice and discrimination in our society
would be an abdication of our responsibility to deal with this reality.

In dealing with racism, sexism, inequality and discrimination effectively,
we not only serve the legitimate interests of victims, but do what is
necessary to steer our country towards a better and more secure future for
all. For most South Africans, democracy has brought something good. If
nothing else, there is the restoration of pride and dignity. However, it is
also true that for many, many people, life has really not changed at all.
Imbalances in power relations remain. Racism and the abuse of women
continue. Our task now is to take action, to move from recognition of the
problem to actively combating it.

The liberation struggle for which so many great people gave their lives was
certainly not just about having, or even winning, the elections in 1994 and
again in 1999. We were fighting for equality. We were fighting for a
nonracial, nonsexist democracy. Until we achieve what so many people died
for, the fight continues. It cannot be fought by the ANC alone. We pay the
price together if we fail, and we share the prize if we win. We are in this
fight together.

An important step in our endeavour to put an end to racism, sexism and all
forms of unfair discrimination was the recent passing of the Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill by this Parliament. I
was privileged to serve on the ad hoc committee that dealt with this Bill.
Many excellent contributions were made by individuals from all parties, and
the result was a very good new law - a weapon that all South Africans will
now be able to use in this fight.

In the debate which followed in this House, many of us were astounded by
the decision of the DP to vote against this Bill. Although in hindsight it
was predictable, it was, nonetheless, disappointing. It is obvious that the
DP is still in its fight back mode. The DP seems to see it as their mission
to oppose change and to position itself as the champion of the rich, the
champion of the vested interests, however unfair they may be.

Perhaps the biggest contradiction came from the ACDP. If the ACDP is truly
guided by Christian principles, as it professes to be, it should be at the
forefront of the campaign against unfair discrimination and inequality.
Instead, it obsessively repeats its homophobic sentiments. On other issues,
too, they position themselves firmly on the extreme right of the political
spectrum in our country. Some might call it fundamentalism, but it is truly
worse than that. It is a frightening distortion and aberration of the
message and example set by Jesus Christ.

HON MEMBERS: Amen!

Mr D A HANEKOM: Jesus showed anger only at those exploiting and abusing
others. For the rest, and especially towards those who were regarded as
social outcasts at the time, He showed consistent love and compassion.
Those who voted for the ACDP in their sincere search for a party guided by
Christian values should surely think again. Jesus could never have been a
gay-basher, and certainly never treated women as inferior to men, and He
would never have supported discriminatory practices in churches that ought
to be exemplary institutions in our society.

Legislation on its own, however good it may be, can never be enough in the
continued fight against racism and sexism, and in the fight for equality.
What we need is honest recognition of the problem and the broadest possible
participation in the effort to end these injustices. It is the
responsibility of all our citizens to unite in this effort to eradicate
discrimination. Even more so, it is the duty of public representatives to
do their utmost to change attitudes, to set examples in their own
behaviour, and to do everything in their power to combat racism and sexism.

The President referred to the problem of the colour line in his January 8
statement. When we, as members of Parliament, get back to our
constituencies, it is our duty to fight against race and gender
inequalities in our areas, to inform citizens of their rights and
obligations, and to make a positive contribution in the resolution of
conflict and division in our communities. The divisions are more often than
not between races and the inequalities invariably reflect the colour line.

Of course, the eradication of poverty and systematic reduction of
inequality does require the allocation of resources. The landless poor are
being assisted in the purchase of land. The homeless are given access to
housing with the help of a subsidy. Children of even very poor parents are
able to go to school.

However, all of this costs money, and we do not have enough to do all that
needs to be done. The great irony is that it does not cost money to treat
people with respect, to show kindness, to show love. It costs nothing to
stop humiliating people with racist and sexist language. It costs very
little to share our skills and our knowledge, yet the returns are high.

Improving relations across cultural and race barriers does not place a
burden on the fiscus. Not even Trevor Manuel can stop us in these
endeavours. We need to get out there and make it happen. Let us motivate
and inspire each other. Much depends on changed attitudes and we can all
positively influence this. There is a reality out there which we all know
about, which causes so much unnecessary pain and hate and threatens our own
futures. It must change, and we need to be agents of this change, every one
of us.

Our Comrade President's address put a challenge to us all ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I regret your speaking time has expired, hon
member.

Mr D A HANEKOM: We accept the President's challenge. [Applause.]

Mr S PHOHLELA: Madam Speaker, Your Excellencies the President and Deputy
President, the ANC-led democratic Government is succeeding in its creation
of a unified nonracial local government system that is supported by a
single, equitable tax base.

We inherited the past apartheid government's racial and fragmented systems
of municipalities and councils, in most of which apparent divisions of
cities and towns along racial and ethnic grounds still exist today. There
are acute imbalances, especially in economic resources, and vital municipal
services such as housing, direct in-house water reticulation, electricity,
sanitation and sewerage systems have been denied to our people.

We as the Government have managed to achieve immeasurable strides in the
short space of five years to bring about a corrective legislative
framework, including the Local Government: Municipal Demarcation Act and
Local Government: Municipal Structures Act. The new local government
approach seeks to emphasise the importance of the link between people and
governance, promoting active participation by the public in the policy-
making process and ensuring positive accountability by councillors. It
seeks to accelerate parity in the distribution of municipal services and
redress to sound utilisation of finances as budget allocations in order to
combat the abject poverty that spurs violence, the abuse of women and
children, drug abuse, rape and theft of various kinds and proportions as
prevailing in our lives as the majority citizens of this country.

The Municipal Demarcation Act ensures the ending of the inherited buffer
zones and strips that entrenched the racial divide and polarisation rather
than integration in this country. We still experience these anomalies which
continue to promote the multiplication of squatter camps; however,
Government vehemently engaged in the delivery of houses and related
services to satisfy the needs of our communities.

The Municipal Structures Act streamlines, rationalises and downsizes the
number of councillors to ensure saving towards adequate delivery of
services rather than overbloated salary payrolls. In short, the new local
government legislation, including the Municipal Demarcation Act and
Municipal Structures Act encapsulates the ANC's vision of a better life for
all, but, as can be expected, there are forces that resist these Acts and
noble moves. We encounter people resisting the demarcation of boundaries
for municipalities from both our white and some black people in local
government business and opposition parties in Government, some of whom are
seated right in this House with us.

These resistors, clearly and convincingly, do not have at heart the
interests of the people they lead, but they are in it for selfish ends and
enrichment. These are the remains of the poverty-makers and perpetrators of
crimes and drug abuse who do not wish for equitable lifestyles of our
people, but continue to thrive on exploiting their fellow man who is black
in order to sustain the culture of ``baasskap''.

The threat that continuously remains a challenge to the smooth flow of
local government remains the struggle against racism. In order to meet the
challenge we have to go back and don the intellectual fighting gloves that
ensured our political freedom. We have vehemently to mobilise the South
African nation that seeks peace and prosperity to isolate this far-right
wing colonial and apartheid political cybernets so that neo-colonialism and
apartheid can be dealt the final blow to oblivion for its horrendous deeds.

As the African century has dawned, in our plans and preparations towards
the rebirth of this continent, the daunting challenge is of that of
eradicating abject poverty, hunger and squalor, squatter congestions and
homelessness. This we should embark upon with the vision that our sister
African countries are looking upon us to remedy this plightful situation
that was brought about by colonialism, apartheid and neo-colonialism.

These factors of endemic poverty and homelessness are the ones that spur
and spread chronic and endemic diseases, including HIV/Aids. We have to
activate in an accelerated manner to steer away from further compromise. We
should decisively bite the bullet to vehemently fight poverty, hunger and
squalor, as mainly continuing to be experienced by our black community
members in squatter camps, mostly in our rural farming areas.

In our language, Sesotho, we say: Thebe e sehelwa hodima e nngwe. [A shield
is designed from another.] We have to re-engage our people to don the black
gloves, in a patriotic manner, to improve the economic standing of this
country as a nation at work. In 1948 the hell-bent nationalist party
government, experiencing similar hardship of poverty, ungodly as it were,
managed to eradicate poverty from within their minority group. They took
firm decisions and in their hatred amd selfish way they boldly implemented
``regstellende aksie'', martial law and imposed a one-pond contribution to
what started of as a ``volkskas'', contributed by each and every employed
and working Afrikaner. So we can do it, in a Godly way.

Ho hlotswe jwalo ke Hlahlamatjholo hore motho o tla phela ka mofufutso wa
phatla ya hae. Mphe-mphe ea lapisa motho o kgonwa ke sa hae. Rona re le
setjhaba sa Afrika, tlasa puso ya ANC, re ka bontsha boikarabello bo boholo
ka ho ithehela moralo wa dilemo tse hlano ho matlafatsa matsete a
ntshetsopele ya ntlafatso ya maphelo a bafumanehi bana ba rona.

Re le basebetsi, ho tloha pusong ka kakaretso mafapheng a fapa-fapaneng ka
mekgahlelo ya tshebetso ka hare ho naha ena ya rona, re ka tsetela le ha e
le R50 ka kgwedi mosebetsi ka mong. Letlole leo le tla tlisa diphetoho tse
matla maphelong a setjhaba sena seo re se eteletseng pele re le Mmuso.
Bona boithaopo ke bona bo tla tlisang tharollo e phethahetseng ho fokotsa
sekgeo se dutseng se hola ho ya pele ka mabaka a tahlehelo ya mesebetsi e
jang setsi, mme ho lebeletswe ka phoso ho Muso ho hlahisa mesebetsi. Ke na
le tumelo ya hore borakgwebo ba baholo le bona, ka bongata bo makatsang, ba
tla kenya letsoho le toma matseteng a letlole lena. [Nako e fedile.]
[Ditlatse.] (Translation of Sotho paragraphs follows.)

[That is how God created it, that man shall live by his own efforts. We, as
the African nation under ANC rule, can show immeasurable responsibility by
starting a five-year investment development programme to improve the lives
of our poor.

As workers in the Government departments and sections in general in our
country, we can invest as little as R50 per month, per person. That fund
could make a lot of difference in the lives of the members of this nation
which we, as the Government, are leading.

This voluntary deed is what will bring about a complete solution to the
ever-increasing gap caused by the loss of jobs, as it is wrongly expected
that the Government will create jobs. I believe that hordes of big
businesses will also lend a great hand in this investment fund. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Dr S E MZIMELA: Madam Speaker, there is an old saying which goes something
like this: ``Sticks and nails will break my bones, but names will never
hurt me.''

An HON MEMBER: It should be ``sticks and stones''!

Dr S E MZIMELA: Despite the efforts on the part of our Foreign Affairs
Minister, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, to call us names, nothing can hide the
fact that the present foreign policy of this country is now based on the
doctrine of Sarafina. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] Under Sarafinaism, we
are now entering a very cold and dark winter of deception, misinformation,
disinformation and leading the country astray. [Interjections.]

Just recently, in New York, the President of the Democratic Republic of
Congo, President Kabila, told the world that this country, South Africa,
was fuelling the flames of conflict in his country, the Congo, and that,
far from being peacemakers, we were actually taking sides. He specifically
singled out our Foreign Affairs Minister and accused her of waltzing with
the rebels. I just wonder whether they waltz to the tune of Sarafina.
[Laughter.]

We have been humiliated in front of the world. We have been disgraced. We
have been exposed by President Kabila himself. [Interjections.] The ANC did
not respond to him. Why do they keep quiet? [Interjections.] We have lost
the confidence the world had in us. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Can we have some order, please!

Dr S E MZIMELA: We have lost the trust the world had in us just a few years
ago. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members!

Dr S E MZIMELA: The proof of the pudding lies in the eating. Why is there
no foreign investment coming into this country? Why do small countries such
as Greece, which has only olives, and Italy, which does nothing but eat
spaghetti, have the temerity to veto agreements that have already been
signed? It is because the world has lost respect for this country, and this
respect has been lost because of our double dealings and our double talk.
[Interjections.]

I would have been happier if the statements made by the Minister of Defence
had been made by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, because we want to hear
from her lips whether or not it is true that there are rebels who reside in
this country, and who have access to our means of communication.

We are aware of the fact that when the murderer from Ethiopia came to this
country there was denial that any official knew about his presence here. It
was said that he had only come for medical treatment ... [Interjections]
... but it came out afterwards that he had been granted a visa by the
highest authority in this country. [Interjections.] Deception must stop.
[Applause.]

Mr J N MASHIMBYE: Madam Speaker, Mr President and Deputy President, I wish
to support the statement made by the hon Tony Yengeni yesterday, and that
is that there is indeed something that we must do as soon as an opportunity
avails itself. We need to review how we conduct the business of debates of
the House and so on. I think doing so would be in accordance with what the
President said at the weekend, and that is that the quality of debate in
this country leaves a lot to be desired and that something must be done
about it. Every caucus would have to discuss even how we conduct the
business of discussing, for instance, the state of the nation address and
whether we should come and sit here for seven or nine minutes trying to do
that. However, let me not digress.

The ANC has instructed that one of the things that we must discuss on this
occasion is South Africa's role in regional and international conflict.
When the international community stood up to assist the anti-apartheid
struggle in this country we all accrued a debt to the world community. When
we passed our Constitution, which is regarded as one of the most democratic
in the world, we committed ourselves to striving for those freedoms for
every citizen of the planet.

Now that we have the means to contribute to peace and conflict resolution,
South Africa cannot turn its back on those in need. Conflict is an
unfortunate feature of our continent and it is essential that South Africa
gear itself to contributing to managing and reducing that conflict.
As far as conflict management is concerned, there are three main paths of
action to which we can be expected to contribute. The first is undoubtedly
the most important, and that is conflict prevention. Second is conflict
resolution. The third is the one we all hope to keep to the minimum, and
that is peace enforcement and peacekeeping. The past year offers multiple
examples of all these, where the international community had to step in and
play a role in areas such as East Timor, the DRC and Kosovo.

It would immoral and against the basic principles of our new democratic
order for South Africa not to contribute to such international efforts.
Obviously, we must emphasise that South Africa cannot assume the right to
decide other nations' destinies alone. In addition, one must be realistic
about the fact that South Africa does not have the resources to become
involved in attempts to resolve every conflict that emerges. We have an
obligation to our own citizens and our neighbours, and there must be a
balance between our involvement and the overall commitment of the rest of
the countries of the world.

The countries of the south cannot keep looking to the more developed and
richer countries of America and Europe and expecting them to keep stepping
in. Doing so would be abdicating the right to have some control over our
own destiny. However, it must be said that any efforts at conflict
resolution, conflict prevention or peacekeeping must be done under the
mantle of bodies such as the SADC, the OAU and the United Nations. In
addition, those bodies themselves need to be balanced so that the best
decisions emerge.

Our region needs to get its own house in order. The SADC security and
conflict resolution mechanism is not what it should be. The fact that there
are two major conflicts under way in the SADC region has much to do with
this. But at the same time, we cannot allow bickering inside the SADC
organs to undermine their intended missions.

South Africa is already playing a leading role in attempting to resolve the
simmering conflict in Burundi through the offices of our esteemed former
president Neslon Mandela. This is an attempt to ease the tensions of the
entire Great Lakes region. Already, our Government has committed itself to
sending members of the SANDF to participate in a peacekeeping mission in
the DRC, providing some progress can be achieved in the current round of
negotiations.

To some extent, it must be accepted that our first priority will be to
peacekeeping in our region. The wars in Angola affect us directly. There is
no truth whatsoever that South Africa is in any way involved in supplying
arms to Unita or any rebels because even without the moral imperative, the
national interest dictates that we work towards ending those conflicts. The
ongoing conflicts of the Congo, the Great Lakes and Angola are creating
growing numbers of refugees, destabilising regional economies and reducing
investor confidence in Africa in general. It is clearly in South Africa's
interest that these conflicts end.

As chairman of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, I am privileged to
know that members of the SANDF have for some time been preparing for
peacekeeping missions. Various international exercises and training courses
have been held here and elsewhere in the SADC region and good progress has
been reported. The experiences of Lesotho have taught us that there can
never be too little preparation and training for such missions. The members
of the SANDF who stand ready to be deployed to the Congo do so in the
knowledge that they have been extensively prepared and trained for their
mission. But even so, the Government cannot send them off on such a mission
unless we are convinced that the conditions exist for them to both make a
positive contribution and to do so with maximum regard for their own
safety.

Surely, this Government will not become party to a senseless sacrifice of
troops solely to prove a moral point. Much will depend on how the
international community and the parties to the DRC conflict come to grips
with pushing their peace process forward. The parties to the conflict there
still have some way to go in terms of proving to the world that they are
genuine in their desire for peace.

The possibility of the United Nations agreeing to Chapter 8 of the United
Nations mission, that is peace enforcement, makes it all the more essential
for the exact position of the parties to be established before SA National
Defence Force troops are committed to the fray. At the same time, there is
a great burden placed upon our other supportive arms of Government such as
foreign affairs and the SA secret service to provide the maximum backup for
our troops so that they have the essential intelligence they need to
complete their mission.

Angola waits in the wings for the peacekeeping mission as well. The most
recent history of the UN peacekeeping mission there is a sobering lesson.
Having overseen the demobilisation and reconciliation process almost to the
point of complete success, the world had to watch in dismay as the country
slipped back into what is now a countrywide war situation and one that is
spilling over into three SADC neighbours. South Africa, as part of the
international community, will have and has to work to attempt to end that
conflict before countries such as Namibia and Zambia get dragged into the
quagmire of their neighbour's war and the burden on the rest of the region
and the world to resolve those conflicts increases. Again, much of our
country's past and the need to ensure the security of our future require of
us to take a leading role in this effort.

Further afield, in such areas as Sierra Leone and Liberia, important
lessons are to be learnt. Some are positive, such as the ability of the
West African community to put together a sustainable peacekeeping mission
for those countries. Some are less uplifting such as the reputed collapse
of peace accords. The officials in our military and other relevant
Government agencies need to study the lessons learnt in theatres such as
Sierra Leone and Liberia and attempt to learn from them.

New directions on the African continent are encouraging as we stride into
the African century. It is pleasing that we observe the fact that leaders
who assume power by force are no longer welcome as members of the OAU and
they face sanctions in other forums such as the Commonwealth. That adds
further weight to the mediation and physical peacekeeping efforts. South
Africa needs to use its prestige in such forums to ensure that these new
rules are adhered to and that undemocratic rulers and movements are no
longer rewarded with state receptions and the privilege of occupying seats
in international communities. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Mr Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, Minister
Lekota is not here and I am here now. Two million people died in sub-
Saharan Africa of Aids last year. This is five times the number of Aids-
related deaths in the US since the disease was discovered nearly two
decades ago.

Government must make a clear statement on whether we can afford AZT or any
other drug that can bring relief to Aids sufferers. If AZT is so toxic, as
the Minister of Health and also the President claim, why does Government
allow AZT to be sold in this country to people who can afford it. Today I
want to show Government how distorted their costing of affordability of AZT
is.

Government is basing affordability on 4 million HIV/Aids sufferers at
R350.00 per month. This is where their calculation is wrong. And I do not
take my information from the Internet, so, what follows now is a correct
costing for the use of AZT. There are an estimated 4 million HIV/Aids
sufferers in this country. An estimated 50% of the 4 million are women;
thus, 2 million women. Only 10% of the estimated 2 million women will know
that they are HIV-positive, further reducing the number to 200 000. How
many of these 200 000 women are going to have babies? Let us postulate that
all 200 000 women choose to use AZT which will cost Government R70 million.

The use of the new drug Nevirapine is even cheaper at approximately R40,00
per short course. We need to know from Government if they can afford R70
million for AZT or R8 million for Nevirapine. Can Government afford to care
for approximately 160 to 200 HIV-positive babies that are born in South
Africa daily? We need those answers from Government, because if one gives
positive mothers the option to choose, they are certain to choose a child
that is HIV-negative. [Applause.]

Ms E GANDHI: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon
Ministers and members, for many decades race, language, culture and
religion have been used to divide us into different ethnic groups. Our
differences have been emphasised. We have been schooled to be fearful of
one another. We have been warned about the darker sides of other ethnic
groups, and schooled into believing that there is no dark side to our own
ethnic group. Cultural preservation, suspicion of others and selfishness
have been the key words to draw wedges between the groups.

On the other hand the ANC tried to unify the different groups into a
culturally and spiritually rich South African nation. It opened its doors
to all the religions, cultures and languages of the country, thereby
enriching itself with the beauty of our rich mosaic. From the ANC statement
on the moral renewal of the nation, one notes that its philosophy is based
on the belief that most people are moral. They wish to bring up their
children to be honest, with the desire to build a prosperous and peaceful
South Africa for all who live in it.

At the Ubuntu Pledge ceremony in Durban, on 7 February, the Mayor, His
Worship Obed Mlaba said:


  The most charitable gift we can share with all the people of our nation
  is enshrined in the principle of ubuntu. It symbolises being human,
  valuing the good of the community above self-interest, striving to help
  other people in the spirit of service, showing respect for others and
  being honest and trustworthy. These guiding principles have long been the
  backbone of traditional African society, and are entirely compatible with
  the spirit of the African renaissance, which is being promoted by our
  national Government. The principles spelt out here are universal and the
  guiding principle of all religions, and endorsed by people of all races
  and creeds who have a sense of responsibility towards their incompatriots
  and loyalty to their country.

We are the products of these two diverse legacies, the one of apartheid and
the other of ANC. These two varied past experiences are what we bring to
our offspring today. Those of us who were fortunate to be schooled in the
ANC philosophy can build on our rich experience, while those of us who were
schooled in the apartheid philosophy need to honestly and actively relook
at it and begin to see the destructiveness of such a philosophy.

All cultures, languages and religions promote certain universal values.
These values form the common unifying base. It is the rituals and practices
that are different, and these are based on the interpretations of the
scriptures. If we build on these values we not only develop a better world,
but also create a climate within which we can live together with the
diverse views and customs of the different peoples of our country.

Yet, in Durban recently, a road which was named Lower Bridge Road was
considered for renaming as Soofie Sahib Road, after a prominent resident of
this area. However, when the ANC councillors suggested that this road be
renamed, it was some councillors in the DP and New NP who objected to this.
This is the level of our intolerance.

Two other incidents, were reported in The Independent on Saturday. In one
incident:


  A Johannesburg couple wanted to rent a room for a night at The Wilds in
  St Lucia, but claim they were turned away because of their race.

And the other incident:


  A night out at this week's South Africa versus Zimbabwe cricket match
  turned into a nightmare for a group of fans from Chatsworth when they
  were allegedly assaulted by a group of white riot policemen for their
  vocal support of Zimbabwe.

In their editorial, The Independent on Saturday says:


  It has been 10 memorable years since the winds of change swept across
  South Africa ... It is therefore with sadness that we report today on two
  cases of racism which, regrettably, demonstrate that the legacy of
  apartheid will be with us for much longer.

They conclude by saying:
  We must also guard against adopting the easy route and leaving it up to
  the next generation to sort out our problems.

Gandhiji said:


  Tolerance gives us spiritual insight, which is as far from fanaticism as
  the North Pole is from the South. True knowledge of religion breaks down
  the barriers between faith and faith.

Culture, language and religion can be powerful tools for transformation and
can also be powerful tools for destruction. We can enjoy the beauty of
peaceful music and drama, or beautiful poetry in the various languages, or
we can become frenzied by the war dances, destructive music and foul
language.

We can enjoy the beautiful blend of the many cultures and languages of our
country, or we can become fanatical and look for the so-called ``pure
culture'' which smacks of a destructive superiority. We can empower
ourselves by allowing the different cultures to influence us and enrich
ourselves from this experience, or we remain in a cocoon, refusing to look
out.

So it is only with all our efforts that we will be able to achieve the
transformation that our country is crying out for. Let us pledge today that
we will help our President and the Human Rights Commission organise a
successful congress against racism and let us achieve the ideals which, I
believe, we all yearn for and the kind of society that we all want to see
in South Africa. Let it be the South African dream for all of us.

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, Mr President, hon members, just the other
day in this House a wheelchair-bound colleague described to all of us, in
graphic detail, the obstacles, the difficulties and frustrations that he
faces around Parliament. While most of us hurry around this place with
ease, people with different forms of disability struggle to do even the
most mundane of things.

We might think we understand when they explain their problems to us, but we
do not really understand. Those of us with beard have read, and women have
described, the excruciating pain that accompanies childbirth, but only the
women that have given birth know what that pain is like. The rest of us,
especially those of us who are not even equipped to give birth, can only
think we understand.

The black experience in this country has been one of living at the
receiving end of naked and unbridled racism. In its institutionalised form,
it condemned blacks to the margins of society in all spheres of life such
as religion, education, health care, housing, land occupation and so forth.
On the social level, it entailed all kinds of daily insults, beatings and
even murder for no reason other than that we were black.

The kind of unprovoked insults that were quoted by the hon the President at
this podium last Friday, constitute the daily experiences of many black
people on farms, in the army and police service, in factories and on the
roads. Those who are not black cannot even begin to understand what it is
like to live under such circumstances, not only for one day, but for all of
one's life. [Interjections.]

It is indeed proper and fitting that the highest office in the land, that
of the hon the President, should engage in active programmes to eradicate
racism in our country. The proposed conference against racism should be
seen in that light. We hope it will be inclusive without being amorphous
and ridiculous. The conference, however, is the easy part. The more
difficult and arduous task is to attend to the dialectic between poverty
and racism. The fact that, in our country, poor is equated with blackness
and comfort with whiteness, feeds and reinforces attitudes and racial
stereotypes.

Does the Government not, in its attempt to uplift the poor, unwittingly
perpetuate the machinations of racist settler and colonial rule? Does the
fact that in certain areas, certain types of houses are built for blacks
only not reinforce the entrenched perception that there are things that are
just for blacks, that once one has such a settlement the schools or clinic
one provides there are for blacks only, even if there is no law that says
so, and that, when one provides water, electricity, telephones and so on in
such an area, one is providing those things for blacks? Are we perhaps
destined to follow the path of our neighbours where Katatura in Windhoek,
Chitungwiza, Mbare and Mufakose in Harare were African settlements under
colonialism, but continue to be African 10 or 20 years after liberation?
Several decades down the line, are Khayelitsha, Umlazi, Soweto, Cofimvaba,
Nzhelele, or Moletjie going to be African? If so, what will this mean to
our quest to build an integrated and antiracist society?

Are we content with the present one-way street of social integration where
the more affluent blacks stay anywhere, but there is no movement in the
opposite direction? Also, are we content to travel down this road of
development on which we are at the moment? If so, is it a highway without
off-ramps? Can we not branch off? Can we not do things differently? I want
to ask the hon the President whether some of these questions keep him awake
at night, at least once in a blue moon? Do Government Ministers integrate
aspects of these questions in their plans and activities?

Some of us were encouraged by the announcement that plans exist to embark
on an integrated rural development strategy. We hope it will, in time,
evolve into a full Ministry, quite separate from Agriculture and Land
Affairs, because the people in the rural areas have been the poorer cousins
of their urban counterparts for a very long time. Lack of development and
facilities has seen many rural people trekking to the cities with hopes for
a better life, only to end up in the squalor of plastic ``mikhukhu'' or
some derelict and uninhabitable building in an inner city.
There is a perception among many that, despite the provisions in the
Constitution, the present Government has very little respect for
traditional leadership, and that the Government behaves in a manner that
seeks to weaken that leadership. The tensions around the local government
demarcation process only serves to strengthen that perception and
suspicion. One hopes that the assurance given by the President about the
status of traditional leadership will help.

The rural development strategy that we are talking about will not be helped
by such tensions and suspicions. That development will have to rely on the
experiences, culture, structures, energies and the enthusiasm of the rural
population as a whole for it to succeed.

If there are notions that the urban elites and intellectuals are
contemptuous of the rural people and their traditions, and that these urban
elites are trying to impose development and modernity on them, then those
notions must be killed and destroyed. That is necessary to allow the people
in the rural areas to own the rural development strategy and to power it
forward.

Traditional leadership will not die by decree, declaration or attitude. It
will be modified and adapted by development and social progress.
[Applause.]

Mr M S MANIE: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President and hon
members, even though the problems we face as South Africans are enormous
and complex, it is unfortunate that the DP has made up its mind that it
will be part of our problems and not part of the solutions, as we can hear.
[Interjections.]

The reason why the DP has always been very dismissive about poverty and
redressing the legacies of past discrimination is because they have never
been at the receiving end of it. Because affirmative action and black
empowerment are seen as threats to their cosy and privileged lifestyles,
they will do whatever they can to frustrate and obstruct its
implementation.

It is interesting to note that the advocates against corruption have now
been caught with their hands in the cookie jar. The obsession of the DP to
get their membership figures boosted has led them to increase their
membership with people who have addresses in cemeteries. It now also
appears that the self-righteous finger-pointing DP are themselves involved
in corruption around fundraising within its own party. The latest bed
partner of the DP is none other that Mr Lucas Mangope. The DP has clearly
become the new home of the lunatic right political dinosaurs and fossils.

In the Western Cape the NP actually entered into an alliance with the DP,
of all parties. By giving the DP some of the key portfolios in the Western
Cape, the NP appears to be determined to accelerate their own demise. How
can Mr Van Schalkwyk sing the praises of Mrs Helen Zille here in
Parliament? Can he not see who stole the NP voters from them? I just want
to say to the NP that if they do not wake up soon, they will die in their
sleep. [Laughter.]

At committee level the DP and NP actively participate in the deliberations
and even persuade us to accept some of their amendments, only for them to
vote against it here in the House. Perhaps in future we should adopt an
approach of no amendments or compromises until we are certain that they
will support the Bill when it is tabled in this House. [Interjections.]

Although we are committed to policies which are aimed at creating an
environment for economic growth and development on the one hand, we are
equally committed to alleviating poverty and correcting past imbalances on
the other. The challenge we face as South Africans is to create the right
balance between the two. It is not a question of the one or the other, it
is both.

Liberals have blind faith that the market will solve the inequalities
created by the previous policies. They also believe that no Government
intervention is required to achieve this. To me, this sounds like the law
of the jungle, which believes that only the fittest and the strongest must
survive. I am very sorry, but I can never agree with these policies. I
believe that anyone with a scrap of conscience should be working tirelessly
to help us eradicate the huge backlog that still exists.

The miracle of South Africa was not that we had a bloodless revolution ...
[Interjections.] You make it difficult for me, hey! [Laughter.] The miracle
of South Africa was not that we had a bloodless revolution, it was the
generosity and lack of bitterness amongst the previously oppressed people.
That was the miracle of South Africa. [Applause.]
We are told that we must stop harping on the past, but the DP and the NP
must also face reality. They must surely be aware of what attitudes, jokes
and statements are still doing the rounds. Racism and discrimination are
still very much alive and are still major problems.

We do not solve problems by running away from them. If the DP claims not to
be against transformation, why is it then that they have voted against all
legislation that was aimed at transformation? [Interjections.] Both the DP
and the NP voted against workers, yet they expect workers to vote for them
when it comes to elections. People might be poor, but they are not stupid.

Most of our essential policy instruments are in place. That is why I was
very surprised when the UDM member said in a previous debate that we should
adopt the UDM's policies. As far as I know, the only policies the UDM has
are Sanlam insurance policies. [Laughter.]

We are in a phase where the bulk of our energies must be channelled towards
giving effect to our slogan: From Policy to Implementation. In this regard
the Portfolio Committee on Labour will be monitoring very closely the
legislation that falls within its jurisdiction, especially the Employment
Equity Act and the Skills Development Act.

Another priority the Portfolio Committee on Labour has set itself is to
jointly, along with the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, host the
conference on job creation later this year. In order to prevent it from
being a talk shop only, we will carefully define the outputs and format.

Finally, I wish to make an appeal to all of us here, as well as outside
this House, to actively assist in preventing the spread of doom and
pessimism. In certain quarters people only focus on criticising,
complaining and moaning. We should all commit ourselves to redirecting that
same energy and time to search for possible solutions and spread messages
of hope and optimism. [Applause.]

Mrs J CHALMERS: Madam Speaker, hon President and members of this House, I
feel very privileged to be speaking in this debate today, and especially
fortunate to be speaking on a subject about which I feel so passionately.

South Africa is a unique country in many ways. Historically, it has come
through a trial by fire in a manner that has gained for our Government and
all its people, the admiration and respect of the rest of the world. But it
is also unique because of the extraordinary combination of factors that go
to make up its very being.

Some countries have wonderful natural scenery while others have rare and
special flora and fauna. Some are visited for their superb climates, yet
others for their interesting and colourful indigenous cultures. But I know
of no country where all these special qualities combine to provide its
citizens and those visiting our land with wide-ranging, enriching
experiences that are possible in this land of South Africa.

Travel is big business. Over the next ten years the World Travel and
Tourism Council estimates that the global $4,5 trillion industry will grow
to $10 trillion. The challenge is how to enable South Africa to benefit
from this growth.

The fastest growing sector of the travel industry at this time is
ecotourism or ecotravel, currently grossing in excess of an estimated $350
billion a year. It goes by many names - adventure travel, environment
travel, cross-cultural exchange, language study and others.
As an example of the growth potential in this field, I would like to
mention here the Addo Elephant Park in the Eastern Cape, which our
Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism visited last
weekend, to be briefed by National Parks and others on the ongoing
extension of the park. It was a memorable experience, and we learned that
although only a small portion of the park is in full tourist mode, 105 000
tourists visited it last year, generating an income of R9,3 million. The
little tourist shop in the park had a turnover of R2,6 million. The park
employs 130 local people and a further 35 people work as contractors.

Over the past eight years, the number of bed-and-breakfast facilities in
the vicinity of the park has grown from one to 18. If National Parks can
access the required funds to develop Addo to its full potential, primarily
to purchase more land so that its ecosystem can function as it should,
which would include bringing in predators to make it a Big Five park, the
financial and growth benefit to the cash-strapped Eastern Cape would be
enormous.

Ecotourism is a very special industry. At the entrance of the Lake Manyara
National Park in Tanzania is a sign greeting visitors with a simple
message: ``Let no one say, and say it to your shame, that all was beauty
until you came.'' It is unique in that, properly managed, it is very
profitable, but it also fosters people's appreciation of the natural riches
that surround them, riches that they may have come to take for granted and,
indeed, to neglect.

For far too long, Africa has been pillaged of its natural resources,
artifacts and treasures. The pillaging has destroyed its environment and
its culture. It is more than time that we - and here the tourism industry
can play a major role - take seriously the need to ensure that our cultural
and natural wealth is preserved for future generations.

South Africa has nine provinces, each of which has a unique and fascinating
character. Agritourism, in other parts of the world, is recognised as an
important sector of the tourism industry. Our own wine routes in the
Western Cape compare very favourably with those in Europe, but we have only
scratched the surface of the potential here. What about tourists in the
sugar-growing regions of KwaZulu-Natal and the citrus and rose-growing
areas of the Eastern Cape? I wonder if anyone here has watched witblits
being made. Maybe Mr Hanekom has.

The White Paper on Tourism proposed that the tourist industry be seen as a
service industry, and the Tourism Amendment Bill currently before our
portfolio committee takes that forward with its proposals for regulating
the tourguide industry. Clearly, there is enormous potential for
communities possessing local knowledge to become equipped and trained to
run small tour ventures in their own areas.

As the world shrinks in travel terms, the worldwide interest in indigenous
cultures is growing at a phenomenal rate. Tourists want to experience and
enjoy these cultures. Here, again, our provinces have so much to be proud
of and to display, whether it be beadwork, weaving and spinning fine
fabrics, pottery, artwork or basket-making. I dream of a bead factory
situated in the old Transkei, making high-quality beads for local crafters
to buy in bulk, where skills can be learned and where finished goods can be
sold at a fair price to visiting tourists. There is a huge market for
quality beadwork, but, at present, what happens is that buyers come in to
buy up the produce over which women have worked long and lovingly for days
and weeks for a mere pittance and sell it at a huge profit. This is
unacceptable.

The President has reaffirmed the Government's commitment to the programme
for integrated and sustainable rural development, and I know that the
Premier of the Eastern Cape is dedicated to it also. If these rural skills
are to be preserved and transformed into viable commercial entities, a
serious investment must be made in the resource base for this to happen.
One had only to look around Parliament last Friday to see how creative,
colourful and stunningly beautiful are the fabrics and fashions of Africa.
They are the outward symbol of an enormously rich culture, but for many
years that richness and variety was suppressed, abused and rendered
impoverished by a sterile and selfish regime.

Now is the time, as an integral part of the African renaissance, for the
treasurehouse that is our indigenous culture to re-emerge, for the
inherited knowledge lying like seeds of wonderful plants within the
collective memory of our communities to get the chance to grow and flower.
It has great value, not only for ourselves and the rest of the world, but,
also, let us never forget, that it is the future heritage of our children.
[Applause.]

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Deputy President, fellow
colleagues, the president of the IFP - I refer to the hon Dr M G Buthelezi
- yesterday in his address to this House said, and I quote:


  We need one another for as long as our contributions are rendered in a
  spirit of goodwill, and ... tolerance ...

What the leader of the IFP was saying to this House was that the old
political doctrine of an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, is no
longer relevant in this new South Africa of ours. This message however was
not seeking of the meek and the weak, pleading for recognition or security.
Oh no! I want to remind this House and I reiterate that the IFP will not
compromise on its principles of, particularly, the call for a federal
government in this country.

HON MEMBERS: Oh please!

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Please and please until you die - we will ask for it. The
pursuit of unity should result in a discovery of all our leaders and that
which makes African people one people, one nation.

Whereas the IFP welcomes the President's address to the nation we must,
however, point out some aspects of the speech which we believe create a
false impression to those who read it. Let me point out and remind the
President that there were many organisations in this country, and that
there were many people who did not go into exile, and that there were many
people who sacrificed their lives in this country - it was not only those
who went into exile or were unbanned.

The IFP is pleased that the President has at last heeded long-standing
concerns expressed by the IFP about some aspects of the present labour
legislation which had very negative consequences, particularly in respect
of the creation of jobs and investments. [Interjections.] It is also our
considered opinion that the present labour legislation, as it now stands,
may probably be in conflict with the Promotion of Equality and Prevention
of Unfair Discrimination Bill passed by this House recently. I think we
must look at that.

Therefore, the IFP wishes to propose the following in this regard: That in
order to stimulate job creation, small and medium-sized businesses should
be exempted from some of the requirements of the Basic Conditions of
Employment Act as well as some aspects of the Labour Relations Act.
[Interjections.] Those members do not know what they are talking about; I
know what I am talking about. [Laughter.] Another request to the President
is that the administration of all present labour laws should be transferred
to and controlled by the provincial administrations. [Interjections.]

We demand ... [Interjections.] Yes, we demand that this Cabinet should now
spell out loudly and very clearly as to where this Government stands on the
question of privatisation. [Interjections.] Yes, I mean the privatisation
of the billions of rands' worth of state enterprises and assets.
[Interjections.] We can no longer afford to politicise this issue if we are
serious about creating jobs. [Interjections.] This step will certainly
reduce the Government's borrowing and enable us to maintain interest rates,
which will, in turn, create millions of jobs over a period of time.
[Interjections.] This is our appeal to them. [Interjections.]

The IFP was also greatly taken aback by the complete silence on the matter
of the unemployed people of this country. [Interjections.] Whilst more and
more people are losing jobs daily, whilst the number of unemployed is
reaching alarming proportions, whilst it is getting more and more difficult
for our young people leaving schools and colleges to find jobs, what do we
see? We are silent, silent, silent about this issue. [Interjections.]

The Government must - as a matter of urgency - allocate funds and resources
to address the needs of the victims of unemployment. The time is now and
not tomorrow, for tomorrow may be too late. [Interjections.] The other day,
for the information of the peanut gallery over there, I read a poem by a
young lad in Grade 5. In this poem he said:


  Koze kube nini sihlupheka
  Obaba nomama babehlushwa amaBhunu
  Manje sesihlushwa abantu bethu

  [How long will we experience hardship
  Our fathers and mothers were exploited by the Boers
  Now we are exploited by our own people]
He went on to say:


  Sengafelwa ubaba noma
  Inhliziyo yami ithi:
  Nto! Nto! Nto! Nto!

  [I have lost my father and my mother
  My heart says:
  Nto! Nto! Nto! Nto!]

Mrs F MAHOMED: In the name of God, Most Gracious, Most Merciful. Madam
Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, friends and colleagues, I
wish to just say a few words to hon member Middleton. That hon member
should change his name, because his very name implies some kind of balance,
which I did not observe in his speech at all. [Laughter.] I must say that
the false impression which the hon member might have gained from the hon
President's speech is a misapprehension on his part, because he did not
understand the speech at all.

Our initiatives for SMMEs are very well in place, if that hon member does
not already know that by now. The ethos of demanding shows his own
disempowerment and that of his organisation, so they should please go back
home and empower themselves. Employment is high on our agenda, and I could
go on and on, but I have more important things to relate to this House.

The hon the President's exemplary and charismatic leadership has
effectively energised many of us to commit ourselves towards achieving
economic liberation and collective self-reliance in the Southern African
region. Although our tested endurance of centuries of colonialism,
oppression and exploitation has destroyed our people's productive energy in
economic activity, I am happy to say that we have survived and have made
inroads into the regional and global economies. I also want to prove that
the previous regime was wrong when it thought that investment and trade
were privileges only for the white minority. Many efforts were made
irreparably to harm large numbers of our people, which has left them
homeless, rootless and perhaps even worthless, thus impoverishing the stock
of human capital. However, again I am proud to say, we survived.

Furthermore, the architects of apartheid continued their repressive and
covert operations into their neighbouring countries, which resulted in the
destabilisation of the entire Southern African region. In the Commonwealth
report of 1989 entitled Apartheid Terrorism this destabilisation during the
1980s is described as having reached holocaust proportions. Again I say
with confidence that we survived the ruthless strategies which only left us
stronger than ever before.

Just imagine the mammoth task the ANC-led Government was left with. A
scenario riddled with inequities and oppression further burdened with
spatial disparities. Luckily, our leaders are excellent negotiators and
human beings who have dynamic skills in socioeconomic restructuring.

The priority accorded to economic integration among the member states of
the SA Development Community is reflected in the growth of activity in this
area. Negotiations have progressed, for members' information, in many
areas, such as the renegotiation of the SA Customs Union; negotiations to
conclude the SADC Free Trade Area; the implementation of Spatial
Development Initiatives projects; and also the establishment of structures
for the collective monitoring of customs control. Many initiatives have
been undertaken but I cannot deal with all of them in this particular
speech.

I need to allude to the fact that regional integration is not just about
trade flows, but rather it is about a new paradigm shift for
industrialisation, as we know that the major stumbling block is the lack of
industrial capacity within the SADC region. Our challenge is to energise
our region and to make the continent's voice heard in the capitals of world
markets. Our country is indeed capable of leading co-operation efforts in
Africa, as we do occupy a unique location by being in the continent's
southern triangle which separates, or joins, the two large oceans, that is
the Atlantic and the Indian Oceans.

Trade with SADC countries has increased dramatically during the last few
years. SADC imports have increased from R611 million to R2,2 billion. The
increase of South Africa's exports to the region was even more dramatic,
from R3,5 billion in 1990 to R15,6 billion in 1998.

I wish to echo the sentiments of our hon President with regard to the
African renaissance. SADC is viewed as the region with great potential to
spearhead the new African renaissance. This renaissance is about renewal
and regeneration; it is about creating space for people to express their
God-given potential. It embraces tolerance and mutual support, and aims to
harness collective energies of member states to achieve a common vision.

The Southern African region is serious about its intentions to be poised to
develop into a deregulated and competitive global region. It needs to
enhance overall competitiveness, it needs to promote increased use of
technology and it also needs to introduce more investor-friendly
promotions. We also need to have an increased strategic alliance and joint
ventures with world-class companies, and to realise that we have to place
some importance on job training for private companies.

At present many spatial development initiatives are being promoted.
However, it should be noted that the SDIs involving Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are currently on hold due to the war
situation in those areas. A further challenge posed by trade integration is
that we should look at our investment policy in order to attract foreign
direct investment.

Sometimes the secularist perspective of human wellbeing is misleading, as
it seems to advocate that wellbeing can be insured if certain material
goals are realised. The holistic approach recognises the goals which
include the elimination of poverty, the fulfilment of the basic material
needs of all individuals and availing everyone of an opportunity to earn an
honest living and to enjoy the equitable distribution of income and wealth.
I have heard many a wise person saying that wealth should flow equitably,
as blood flows through one's body. Obviously this body should be healthy.
Figuratively, imagine how many diseased bodies infected our economy in the
past and caused bottlenecks and inhibitions, which led to monopolies and
conglomerates.

We are proud to announce that nothing will deter our ANC-led Government to
enhance the image of South Africa as the gateway to Africa. It is an
attractive investment destination and indeed we have done very well. We
have become a global player, for members' information, whether one likes it
or not. I want to say to Mr Mzimela - I hope he is listening - that I
suggest that he should get life policies, because I can see the alarm bells
ringing for his organ. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, Mr President, the Leader of the Opposition
said in this debate yesterday that the speech of the President last Friday
contained some very fine and worthwhile statements, and indeed it did. But
the hon the Leader of the Opposition went on to say that what was lacking
was a plan of action to sustain those sentiments. Despite the attempts of
the ANC speakers, speaking in this debate over the past two days, we have
yet again the dreadful feeling at the end of this debate that this
Government takes one step forward on important issues such as labour,
education and fighting crime, and two or three back, proving yet again that
the ANC is simply self-congratulatory on minor issues and evasive on major
issues. [Interjections.]

Now the DP asks again: Can we please have some clarity from Government? We
need to know the Government's plan of action on important matters. Please
stop sounding convincing and clear-cut on important matters, in exactly the
same way that Mr Piet Koornhof used to sound when explaining NP sports
policy in the past. But the President's problem is compounded by people
such as the hon Mr Ben Turok. He actually does more harm to South Africa's
potential for investment and the course of economic growth and employment,
than anyone in the ANC would care to imagine.

Mr Turok, of course, is witty, funny and says all the things that the ANC
love to hear. But Mr Turok's particular problem is that he talks the
language of conspiracy of Mr P W Botha, wears the clothes of Mao Tse-tung
and has an investment portfolio of a tycoon. No wonder he is confused. But
his Marxist utterances in this House and elsewhere actually do South Africa
no good at all. His own confusion should not confuse the Government.
[Interjections.]

The problem is that the President makes bold but ambiguous pronouncements
and then, in order to try to keep the ANC/Cosatu/SACP alliance roadshow
from derailing, his Ministers, such as the hon Mr ``Boom Boom'' Kader Asmal
- or perhaps we should refer to him as ``Chirp Chirp'' Asmal, I am not sure
- and members of his party go out and give totally mixed messages.

The ANC Government must know that it cannot have its cake and eat it.
Performance is the name of the game. Now the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party made an interesting but very misleading speech yesterday. During the
course of it he raised the issue of the President's appearance - or lack of
it - in Parliament. He stated that the DP has never insisted that Mr
Mandela appear in Parliament when he was President and that it was,
therefore, illogical and petty that we now expect and insist that Mr Mbeki
should spend more time in the House and be more accountable to Parliament.

But Mr Yengeni was not a very important man in 1994 and, therefore, he
would not know that we were deliberately asked by the ANC not to insist on
Mr Mandela's appearance in the House because of his age. We agreed to this.
[Interjections.] But we also know - and we knew at the time - that Mr
Mandela was a very open President who was always willing to talk to the
people through the media. We knew what he was thinking. We knew what he
stood for. [Interjections.] Mr Mbeki, on the other hand, is a very close
and secretive President; closed to public scrutiny. We do not yet know him,
we do not know what he is thinking, but that is only part of the issue.
[Interjections.]

I want Mr Yengeni to listen very carefully indeed. Section 91(1) of the
Constitution reads:


  The Cabinet consists of the President, as head of the Cabinet, a Deputy
  President and Ministers.

Section 92(2) says:


  Members of the Cabinet are accountable collectively and individually to
  Parliament for the exercise of their owers and the performance of their
  functions.

Mr Yengeni should, quite frankly, know that the President is not excused on
the basis that he is not a member of Parliament.

But, furthermore, section 92(3) reads:


  Members of the Cabinet must -


  (a) act in accordance with the Constitution; and

  (b) provide Parliament with full and regular reports concerning matters
       under their control.

Again, the President is not excused. I ask Mr Yengeni, is that not
interesting?

The DP believes that it is a constitutional requirement that the President
comes to Parliament regularly and tells the members of this House and the
NCOP what he is doing; and we believe that he should also be willing to
answer questions. So I want to say to the hon the President that we really
look forward to seeing him in this House again. We look forward to his full
participation. I want to thank him very much indeed. [Applause.]

Mr A J FEINSTEIN: Madam Speaker, hon President and Deputy President, let me
begin by saying that it is an enormous honour to speak at the close of this
extremely important debate.

I always knew that the hon Mike Ellis was in the funeral business, which he
is. [Laughter.] I never realised that it extended to exhumations, which the
DP clearly does in Gauteng, nor did I realise that his business also
extended into the region of fantasy, as was shown here today. He talks
about the problem of this Government taking one step forward and two or
three backwards. My only suggestion is that the DP as a whole needs to get
new glasses. [Laughter.]

Their present spectacles quite clearly can only see backwards. They are so
myopic that they cannot even see the extraordinary unfolding of our new
democratic nation. This is absolutely nowhere as clear as it is in the
statement the hon Ellis made about the hon Chief Whip. The hon Ellis
suggested that in 1994 the hon Tony Yengeni was not a very important man.
Possibly in the funeral business in KwaZulu-Natal, he was not. But if one
asks the people of Gugulethu, of Langa, of Nyanga, of Crossroads, of
Khayelitsha ... [Interjections] ... people who, quite clearly from the DP's
response, are of absolutely no importance or consequence to them, then the
hon Ellis would find out that for many, many years Mr Yengeni has been and
remains an extraordinarily important man in the building of our new nation.
[Applause.]

South Africa, under the leadership of the ANC, is poised for takeoff. The
President has issued a clarion call for us all to fasten our seatbelts and
prepare for a journey that will at times be turbulent, but that will
ultimately take us to our destination of a prosperous, humane and safe
society. It is accepted wisdom, both here and abroad, if not to the hon
Middleton, that the ANC Government has brought this economy to the cusp of
a sustainable new growth path that will over time deliver sustainable jobs,
which is the key to the upliftment of the quality of life of all our
people. To us in the ANC this is no minor achievement.

The Reuters survey from which the President quoted, had a best scenario
forecast of not only 6,5% growth for 2000-2001, but also a lowest core
inflation rate of 5,8% and 5,2% respectively, and interest rates of 13% for
both years - even the least bullish forecasts made for extremely
encouraging reading. Clearly the South African business community shares
this bullish outlook, as witnessed by the fact that business confidence in
December and January hit its highest levels since the inception of the
confidence index in 1985. On announcing these record levels, the executive
director of Sacob stated that ``President Mbeki's speech had reinforced the
present trend of confidence''.

I can tell Mr Mzimela that international players, too, are confident of our
economic future, with financial giants such as HSBC and Templeton
earmarking South Africa as one of their top emerging markets for the year
ahead. Moody's rating agency ... [Interjections.] R80 billion since the
inception of democracy is pretty good investment to my mind.

Moody's rating agency confirmed these bullish sentiments in raising the
outlook for South Africa from stable to positive. In so doing, the agency
praised Government's willingness to mould its education and labour policies
to maximise skills development and employment growth. It is a great pity
that the DP's spectacles did not enable them to read that. [Interjections.]

The bold steps announced by the President in his address give greater
conviction to the sense that under his leadership, this economy is
inextricably being transformed into a competitive, dynamic player that will
hold its own in the merciless international economy for the purpose of
meeting the needs of all our people in a sustainable manner.

Let me, for a moment, raise the issue of the behaviour of the hon Leader of
the Opposition. It has been said most recently by a biographer of a less
than successful British politician that, to be a successful politician, one
must learn not to take criticism personally. If this esteemed academic is
correct, the hon the Leader of the Opposition's sojourn in his present seat
will be brief. Simply observe his eruptions of aggressive, red faced and
spitting anger whenever he or his party is criticised. Listen to the
absolute nonsense he talks when anybody attempts to engage in meaningful
debate at this podium. [Interjections.] Is this the behaviour we expect
from a leader of the official opposition? His younger predecessor, at
least, clearly felt that a sense of gravitas and maturity was more
important.

The hon the Leader of the Opposition, in attempting to find some way of
undermining Government economic performance, claimed that Government policy
had led to diminishing household income amongst the poorest. What he did
not say was that the study he drew on for his information only dealt with
information up to early 1996 and said in its opening paragraph


  Since the Government's Gear policy was only introduced in 1996, its
  success in bringing about a more equitable distribution of income cannot
  yet be evaluated.

Sadly, the DP's spectacles did not enable him to read that part of the
report. Let us remember that despite the obfuscatory opportunism of the DP
- about which more will come later - which should not deflect from the
reality that was made clear by Minister Erwin yesterday, the achievement of
our objectives will not be easy - whether dealing with Aids, crime or jobs.
Let us remember that the key to prosperity lies in ever-improving
productivity, which, as has been noted in this debate, requires business,
labour and the Government to jointly accept responsibility for increased
and higher quality capital investment, a commitment to massive improvement
in education and training, and a joint commitment to the national interest
ahead of sectoral or individual interests.

We must all accept the responsibility of doing what is best for South
Africa. This includes taking up the empowerment challenge, not just at the
commanding heights of the economy, but even more critically at the level of
small and medium businesses. The national interest requires us to place
affirmative action at centre stage in order to ensure the total
deracialisation of our economy and society, for it is only when all South
Africans have equal access to prosperity - based on merit and not inhibited
by a historical racial straitjacket - that we will achieve true liberation
in this, our beloved country.

The hon the Leader of the Opposition took umbrage at the prominence given
to race in the President's address. He did, in a few glib phrases, in his
characteristically belligerent and insulting manner, denigrate the struggle
for freedom of millions of South Africans while in the same breath claiming
concern for the poorest in our society. Even one of the leaders of the DP's
coalition partner in the Western Cape said on the radio this morning that
the DP had no interest in the poor.

The hon Gibson, in one of his many meaningless sound bites, attempted to
differentiate between the ANC and the DP. Thank goodness - if he thought
there were no differences, we would be worried indeed. The differences are
apparent in everything we do. Where we follow an economic policy that is
prudent for a clear social purpose, the DP invokes, mantra-like, year after
year, their call for an increase in VAT - a regressive move that would make
life more miserable for the poorest of the poor.

Where the DP make brief, media-saturated visits to impoverished areas, the
vast majority of ANC members and elected representatives live their whole
lives in these areas. [Applause.] Where we strive to roll back the
obstacles created by our history, the DP systematically opposes any and all
equality legislation. While we, in the ANC, proudly pronounce our deep
commitment to, and inextricable linkage with, the African continent, the DP
regularly denigrates the region and the continent.

We agree with Mr Gibson that he does not need to apologise for his party's
existence; just for his party's policies and his patronising, denigrating
tone! His own supporters are, at least, now discovering what we have known
all along - that his so-called morality is nothing more than self-perceived
arrogance. It is not just the Mangopes, the serial fraudster; it is not
just the exhumations, but most importantly, in his voting record in this
House where he has consistently and continuously opposed equality
legislation - be it in health, education, the labour market or the society
as a whole. Fortunately, thanks to the sacrifices of so many, we are now
living in a democracy where he will be judged by this record. Which is why
he will continue to be rejected by the vast majority of South Africans.
[Applause.]

Clearly, the ANC and the DP continue to live in different worlds. Where the
majority of South Africans see, in the President's words, ``a land of human
hope'', the DP sees, in the words of its leader, ``nothing but despair''.
Where we see restored human dignity and a future of prosperity, peace and
unity, he sees a future of increasing inequality, polarisation and fear.
Nowhere is this better reflected than in the hon Leon's remarkable
statement yesterday that ``South Africa's blacks and whites want to work
together to build a better nation.'' For his information, in the South
Africa which we call home, millions and millions of whites and blacks, men
and women, Jews and Moslems, Christians and Hindus have been working
together, for years, to build a better nation and a better world. We look
forward to him and his party joining our quest as we follow the lead of the
President to the African mountain top, from where he, too, can glimpse the
promised land. [Applause.]

Debate suspended.

The House adjourned at 18:35.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 9 February
         2000 took a decision, in accordance with Joint Rule 216, that the
         Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions
         Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2000] (National Council of Provinces - sec
         76(2)) be fast-tracked with a view to ensuring that the Bill can
         be passed by both Houses before the end of the current financial
         year.


         In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be
         tabled in both Houses for ratification.


     (2)    Assent by die President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bill:


         (i)     Pharmacy Amendment Bill [B 51 - 99] - Act No 1 of 2000
              (assented to and signed by President on 9 February 2000).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant committees as mentioned below:


         (i)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Labour and the Select Committee on Labour and
              Public Enterprises for consideration and report, the
              committees to confer with the Joint Monitoring Committee on
              Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth
              and Disabled Persons:


              (a) International Labour Conference Convention concerning the
                  prohibition and immediate action for the elimination of
                  the worst forms of child labour adopted by the conference
                  at its eighty-seventh Session, Geneva, 17 June 1999,
                  tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
                  1996.

              (b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.


        (ii)     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee
                 on Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
                 referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
                 Constitutional Development and to the Select Committee on
                 Security and Constitutional Affairs:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 9 - Constitutional Development for 1998-99 [RP 132-99].


         (iii)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee
                 on Public Accounts for consideration and report. It is also
                 referred to the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs and
                 the Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 15 - Foreign Affairs for 1998-99 [RP 138-99].

TABLINGS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -

     (1)    Financial Statements of Vote 26 - Public Service and
         Administration for 1998-99 [RP 150-99];

     (2)    Financial Statements of Vote 30 - South African Management
         Development Institute for 1998-99 [RP 153-99].


     Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration
     and report. It is also referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
     Service and Administration and the Select Committee on Local Government
     and Administration.

2.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the State Library for 1997-
         98, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology and to the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Reports of the Board on Tariffs and Trade on the -

     (1)    Application for rebate of the duty on a certain petroleum oil
         for the manufacture of can sealing and bottle lining compounds,
         Report No 3846;

     (2)    Application for rebate of duty on certain tubes and steel pipes
         for the manufacture of electric heating resistors, Report No 3849;

     (3)    Withdrawal of rebate items 307.01 and 307.05 of Schedule 3 to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964; Report No 3851;

     (4)    Revision of the duty structure for valves of the kind used with
         rubber pneumatic tyres or inner tubes and parts thereof, Report No
         3853;

     (5)    Application for an increase in the duty on telecommunication
         apparatus, Report No 3854;

     (6)    Withdrawal of rebate of the duty on waste cotton yarn for the
         manufacture of mutton cloth; Report No 3855

     (7)    Application for a reduction in the duty on certain flat rolled
         products of iron or steel; Report No 3856;

     (8)    Application for an increase in the rate of duty on
         trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene; Report No 3857;

     (9)    Review of the anti-dumping duty on laundry drying machine,
         tumbler type, originating in/or imported from Australia: Final
         Determination; Report No 3858.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the
     Select Committee on Economic Affairs.

4.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Regulation No 1299 published in Government Gazette No 20594
         dated 29 October 1999,   Amendment of the Rules regulating the
         several Provincial and Local Divisions of the High Court of South
         Africa, made in terms of the Rules Board for Courts of Law Act,
         1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).

     (2)    Proclamation No R.166 published in Government Gazette No 20627
         dated 15 November 1999, Commencement of the Maintenance Act, 1998
         (Act No 99 of 1998).

     (3)    Government Notice No R.1421 published in Government Gazette No
         20660 dated 23 November 1999, Determination of salaries of Deputy
         Directors of Public Prosecutions and Prosecutors for the purpose
         of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act No 32 of
         1998).


     (4)    Government Notice No 1449 published in Government Gazette No
         20686 dated 30 November 1999, Determination of
         Magistrates'salaries for the purpose of the Magistrates Act, 1993
         (Act No 90 of 1993).

     (5)    Proclamation No R.127 published in Government Gazette No 20739
         dated 15 December 1999, Remuneration of Judges, made in terms of
         Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 1989 (Act
         No 88 of 1989).

     (6)    Proclamation No R.128 published in Government Gazette No 20739
         dated 15 December 1999, Remuneration of Judges, made in terms of
         Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Service Decree, 1990
         (Decree No 19 of 1990)(Transkei).

     (7)    Proclamation No R.129 published in Government Gazette No 20739
         dated 15 December 1999, Remuneration of Judges, made in terms of
         Judges' Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 1989 (Act
         No 27 of 1989)(Bophuthatswana).

     (8)    Government Notice No R.1498 published in Government Gazette No
         20714 dated 17 December 1999, Amendment of Regulations made in
         terms of Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

     (9)    Government Notice No R.1475 published in Government Gazette No
         20695 dated 10 December 1999, Amendment of the First Schedule to
         the Supreme Court Act, 1959 (Act No 59 of 1959)

     (10)Proclamation No R.133 published in Government Gazette No 20781
         dated 30 December 1999, Commencement of certain sections of the
         Magistrates' Courts Amendment Act, 1993 (Act No 120 of 1993).


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs.


     (11)Government Notice No R.1391 published in Government Gazette No
         20627 dated 15 November 1999, Regulations relating to maintenance
         made in terms of section 44 of the Maintenance Act, 1998 (Act No
         99 of 1998).


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development, the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs and the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
     Life and Status of Women.

5.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.27 published in Government Gazette No
         20796 dated 15 January 2000, Amendment of Regulations made in
         terms of section 77 of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act
         No 18 of 1998).


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.


