---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 September 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-09-14
---

THURSDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I am pleased to welcome hon members
back and to welcome them to this session of our sittings in Parliament. I
am particularly glad to see Mr Marais here. He will rouse the House once
more. Welcome to him. [Laughter.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the Council I shall move:
  That the Council -


  (1) notes with dismay the death of Mr Piet Theron, the regional court
       magistrate of Wynberg;


  (2) requests the police to try all possible means at their disposal to
       bring the perpetrators to book;


  (3) notes with pride the fair-minded nature in which Mr Theron executed
       his legal duties; and


  (4) sends its heartfelt sympathies to the bereaved family.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I should also have welcomed the
premiers who are present here today.

  PRESIDENT MBEKI'S ROLE IN THE FIGHT AGAINST POVERTY AND UNDERDEVELOPMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) recognises that the eradication of poverty remains the overriding
       priority for underdeveloped countries to ensure long-term peace and
       security as well as to achieve sustainable economic development;


  (2) acknowledges the important role played by President Thabo Mbeki at
       the World Summit for Social Development where he passionately
       championed the cause of the underdeveloped world;


  (3) supports the call by President Mbeki for the creation of a supportive
       international economic and financial environment to address the
       problems of poverty and underdevelopment and to reverse the growing
       disparities between rich and poor; and


  (4) believes that the President's efforts will significantly contribute
       towards a better understanding of the problems faced by the
       underdeveloped nations of the world.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

               REGISTRATION OF VOTERS FOR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the excellent standard of services delivered by the Independent
           Electoral Commission to all the people of South Africa in the
           previous elections and in preparation for the coming municipal
           elections;


       (b)  that the IEC is currently undertaking targeted registration in
           the voting districts affected by the redelimitation as a result
           of the new municipal and ward demarcations;


       (c)  that during the current target registration exercise, potential
           voters are being visited at home by the IEC officials to re-
           register; and


       (d)  that 15 020 IEC voting stations will open from 08:00 to 17:00 on
           the weekend of 16 and 17 September 2000 to register voters for
           the municipal elections; and


  (2) calls upon -


       (a)  all people who did not register in the place where they normally
           live and those who are not registered to re-register on the
           registration weekend of 16 and 17 September 2000; and


       (b)  all public representatives to play a prominent role in support
           of the National Programme for Voter Registration.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr L G LEVER: Madam Chair, I move:
  That the following paragraph be added to the motion:


  ``(3)    censures in a suitable manner those local governments who
          refused to register qualified voters and told them to wait for the
          IEC registration weekend.''

I believe that amounts to a shirking of the duty of such councils.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Does the hon member have any objection
to the addition of such an amendment to his motion?

Mr J L MAHLANGU: No, Chair.

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely: That the Council -


  (1) notes -


         (a)     the excellent standard of services delivered by the
              Independent Electoral Commission to all the people of South
              Africa in the previous elections and in preparation for the
              coming municipal elections;


         (b)     that the IEC is currently undertaking targeted
              registration in the voting districts affected by the
              redelimitation as a result of the new municipal and ward
              demarcations;


         (c)     that during the current target registration exercise,
              potential voters are being visited at home by the IEC
              officials to re-register; and


         (d)     that 15 020 IEC voting stations will open from 08:00 to
              17:00 on the weekend of 16 and 17 September 2000 to register
              voters for the municipal elections;


     (2)    calls upon -


         (a)     all people who did not register in the place where they
              normally live and those who are not registered to re-register
              on the registration weekend of 16 and 17 September 2000; and


         (b)     all public representatives to play a prominent role in
              support of the National Programme for Voter Registration; and


     (3)    censures in a suitable manner those local governments who
         refused to register qualified voters and told them to wait for the
         IEC registration weekend.

                  BEST WISHES TO SOUTH AFRICAN OLYMPIC TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) wishes the South African contingent of our illustrious athletes such
       as Hezekiel Sepeng, Josia Thugwane, Penny Heyns, Sarah Poewe,
       Llewellyn Herbert, Benni McCarthy, Quinton Fortune and others every
       success in the Olympic Games in Sydney this week; and


  (2) expects them all to go for gold, but should they fail to do so,
       expects our ambassadors in sport to ensure that they acquit
       themselves well in every way, both on and off the tracks.


All the best to our boys and girls at the Sydney Olympics!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   DISRESPECT TOWARDS OFFICE OF PRESIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with concern the apparent ease with which someone has
       circumvented the police security around the President by breaking
       into the official residence of President Thabo Mbeki;


  (2) further notes the distasteful, racist and libellous depiction of
       former President Nelson Mandela as an animal by somebody at the
       police headquarters in Wachthuis;


  (3) expresses its concern that there may still be certain elements hiding
       in the South African Police Service who do not accept the democratic
       changes that have occurred in the country;


  (4) believes that these undemocratic elements taint the image of the
       whole police service and those honest, hardworking and dedicated
       policemen and women who are committed to serving our people; and


  (5) therefore calls on the police management to root out those
       undemocratic elements by speeding up the transformation of the South
       African Police Service.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
                        BOMB ATTACKS IN WESTERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) met skok en afgryse kennis neem van die bom wat Dinsdagaand naby die
       Premier van die Wes-Kaap, mnr Gerald Morkel, afgegaan het, en dat dit
       slegs 'n bestiering van Bo was dat hy nie beseer of gedood is nie;


  (2) sy simpatie uitspreek teenoor die persone wat tydens die
       bomontploffing beseer is, en hulle beterskap toewens;


  (3) ook dink aan hulle families wat moet ly as gevolg van hierdie
       tragiese en afstootlike gebeurtenis;


  (4) sy kommer uitspreek oor die toenemende getal bomontploffings wat in
       die Wes-Kaap plaasvind en die Regering ernstig versoek om
       daadwerklike stappe te doen om hierdie stedelike terrorisme uit te
       roei wat die demokrasie in die provinsie in gevaar stel; en


  (5) met kommer kennis neem daarvan dat hierdie stedelike terreur moontlik
       gemik is om die demokratiese proses tydens die plaaslike
       bestuursverkiesings omver te werp en kiesers te intimideer en te
       verwar sodat hulle nie aan die verkiesingsprosesse deelneem nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with shock and horror the bomb which exploded close to the
       Premier of the Western Cape, Mr Gerald Morkel, on Tuesday evening,
       and that it was only an act of Providence that he was not injured or
       killed;


  (2) expresses its sympathy with those who were injured during the bomb
       blast, and wishes them a swift recovery;


  (3) also thinks of their families who have to suffer as a result of this
       tragic and abhorrent event;


  (4) expresses its concern at the increasing number of bomb blasts which
       have occurred in the Western Cape and urgently requests the
       Government to take decisive steps to eradicate this urban terrorism
       which is jeopardising democracy in the province; and


  (5) notes with concern that this urban terrorism is possibly aimed at
       disrupting the democratic process during the local government
       elections and intimidating and confusing voters so that they do not
       participate in the electoral processes.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

      GOOD WISHES TO MR P G QOKWENI ON HIS RETIREMENT FROM THE COUNCIL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) takes note of the retirement of its former colleague, Mr P G Qokweni,
       to take up a position in the Department of Education in the Eastern
       Cape; and


  (2) values and appreciates Mr Qokweni's contribution as a member of the
       NCOP and wishes him and his family well in the future.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

         FORMER PRESIDENT MANDELA'S ROLE IN MEDIATING BURUNDI CRISIS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Prince B Z ZULU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with appreciation the commitment by the Chief Mediator in the
           Burundi crisis, former South African President Nelson Mandela;


       (b)  Mr Mandela announced yesterday that the three Tutsi parties
           which last month refused to sign a peace accord aimed at ending
           the civil war in Burundi, have since agreed to reverse their
           decision;


       (c)  that the leaders Joseph Nzeyimana, Patrice Nsababaganwa and
           Nicephore Ndimurukundo met Mr Mandela at his home in
           Johannesburg yesterday, praising Mr Mandela for his efforts to
           bring peace in Central Africa; and


       (d)  that the parties will sign the accord without reservations in
           the Kenyan capital, Nairobi; and


  (2) calls on all peace-loving leaders and citizens of this country and
       this continent to support Mr Mandela's peace initiatives.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to that motion?
I think it is a pleasing motion indeed.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                        FOREST FIRE NEAR STUTTERHEIM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the fire which started on Wednesday last week and which
       has destroyed thousands of hectares of pine plantations near
       Stutterheim, was out of control in Kubusi forest in the Eastern Cape;


  (2) further notes that the Kubusi blaze has destroyed 11 000 hectares of
       pine plantation and is the worst since 1982;


  (3) expresses its thanks and appreciation to the Department of Water
       Affairs and Forestry and to the AV8 Aviation from East London which
       has rendered assistance with a helicopter;


  (4) recognises the invaluable contribution made by 150 firefighters who
       are working 12-hour shifts in trying to halt the blaze; and


  (5) notes that fires of this nature should in future be prevented as they
       impact badly on our environment and economy.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                  SAFE RETURN OF CALLIE AND MONIQUE STRYDOM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr J L THERON: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -
  (1) sy blydskap en dankbaarheid uitspreek oor Callie en Monique Strydom
       se veilige terugkeer na Suid-Afrika na hul gevangenskap op Jolo-
       eiland; en


  (2) ook sy dank uitspreek teenoor die Minister van Buitelandse Sake, haar
       amptenare en ander persone wat 'n rol gespeel het in hul vrylating.
  (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J L THERON: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) expresses its joy and gratitude at the safe return of Callie and
       Monique Strydom to South Africa after being held hostage on the
       island of Jolo; and


  (2) also expresses its gratitude to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, her
       officials and other persons who played a role in their release.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   REFERRAL OF GENERAL INTELLIGENCE LAW AMENDMENT BILL TO AD HOC COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Madam Chair, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the Council refers the General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill [B 36-
  2000] to an ad hoc Committee of the Council for consideration and report,
  and for that purpose establishes a committee in terms of Rule 160, the
  committee -


  (1) consists of 9 members;


  (2) to consider the bill in accordance with Chapter 10 of the Rules;


  (3) to exercise those powers in Rule 103 that may assist it in carrying
       out its task;


  (4) subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly, to confer with
       the corresponding Assembly committee and the Joint Standing Committee
       on Intelligence; and


  (5) to complete its task by not later than 5 October 2000.

Madam Chair, at the same time I move an amendment to the motion printed on
the Order Paper, for very technical reasons as follows:


  That, in paragraph (5), ``5 October 2000'' be substituted by ``12 October
  2000''.


  Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


  Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
  Constitution, namely: That the Council refers the General Intelligence
  Law Amendment Bill [B 36-2000] to an ad hoc Committee of the Council for
  consideration and report, and for that purpose establishes a committee in
  terms of Rule 160, the committee -


  (1) to consist of 9 members;


  (2) to consider the bill in accordance with Chapter 10 of the Rules;


  (3) to exercise those powers in Rule 103 that may assist it in carrying
       out its task;


  (4) subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly, to confer with
       the corresponding Assembly committee and the Joint Standing Committee
       on Intelligence; and


  (5) to complete its task by not later than 12 October 2000.

     PROVINCIAL PERSPECTIVES ON CHALLENGES REGARDING AND EFFORTS TOWARDS
                     RECONCILIATION AND NATION-BUILDING

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, hon Minister Pahad, hon premiers and MECs, and
fellow members, the debate on reconciliation and   nation-building has
occupied our minds for at least the past six years. It has matured
considerably, but because the challenges that face us are so immense, I
believe the discussion has only begun.

A key lesson which we have learned, not least after the experiences of the
rest of Africa and recently Zimbabwe, is that the discourse on nation-
building and reconciliation is inextricably linked to the delivery of
socioeconomic rights to our people. For the patriotic citizens of Phola
Park, Khayelitsha, Thohoyandou and Soweto, the eradication of racism and
the delivery of fundamental rights or the harmonious weaving together of a
divided social fabric of our society is meaningless if they do not have
jobs, food, education and health services.

Meaningful reconciliation and nation-building can only take place if the
disempowered people of our country have proper access and opportunity to
enter into the mainstream of the economic life of our country. Racism is
only eliminated if the black and white communities in areas such Pofadder,
Johannesburg and elsewhere share in the resources of those towns and in the
infrastructure and economic life.

For as long as the overwhelming majority of people in Pofadder and
Johannesburg are poor and black, and the minority rich and white, we cannot
say that we have achieved our objectives of reconciliation and nation-
building. For as long as the farming land of this country is not owned
equitably by black and white,  or the top 100 companies in South Africa
remain under the ownership of white people, or 94% of the shares on the
stock exchange are owned by white people, we cannot say that we have
achieved the objectives of reconciling our sad history and building our
nation into a single powerful unit that shares a common vision.

For as long as the schools in Soweto are less resourced than the schools of
Sandton, or the clinics in Mitchells Plain deliver less health care than
the clinic servicing the Constantia residents, or some South Africans live
in palaces while millions live in cardboard shacks, reconciliation will
remain a mere philosophical concept.

As I have said recently elsewhere, for as long as the colour of money in
this country is white, reconciliation and nation-building will remain a
philosophical icon that we shall continue to strive for. Our shameless
critics, such as the Democratic Alliance, sit on armchairs and block and
criticise every move our Government makes towards nation-building, and then
during election road shows criticise Government for not delivering. They
show no patriotism or commitment to nation-building, except having pie-in-
the-sky philosophical discussions about how racism no longer exists and how
we cannot blame everything on apartheid. But I have no doubt that our
colleagues in the National Assembly will adequately strip the partners of
the Democratic Alliance of their Gucci clothing so that they are forced to
bear the true colour that they exhibit, which is white.

No nation has ever had a will to succeed such as ours. Since 1994 our
Reconstruction and Development Programme has been mooted as the largest
single national reconstruction effort since World War II and possibly the
largest in history. The NCOP has a crucial role to play in nation-building
within this context. It is the constitutionally mandated structure to
interface with the nine provincial legislatures and their governments and
administrations. It has a constitutional interface with the hundreds of
local governments in our country.

While the general role of Parliament is policy, legislative and oversight
work, the NCOP must also engage provinces and local governments more
aggressively to forge ahead with delivery. Provinces and local governments
are the main delivery vehicles through which equality, nonracialism and
nonsexism must be achieved. They can only do this through the meaningful
delivery of socioeconomic rights to our people. This House must energise
the various spheres of government to capture the urgency that faces the
nation on these fundamental national objectives.

We must sit up and take note of the recent adverse reports that the NCOP
has received, arising from an audit of the Department of Provincial and
Local Government. The audit calls on the NCOP to increase its role in
intergovernmental relations and concentrate on tracking the delivery by
provincial and local governments. I believe the NCOP and our select
committees have matured sufficiently to begin asserting themselves in
rising to the challenges of nation-building.

The ANC strategy and tactics document adopted as far back as 1994 had the
following to say:


  Among the factors which pose the greatest threat to national unity and
  national integrity are the uneven socioeconomic developments and vast
  disparities in natural endowment in the different provinces and
  localities. These turn to engender a scramble for scarce resources and
  pose the real danger of fanning racial and ethnic tensions.

Three years later, in 1997, the strategy and tactics document again says:


     The strategic objective of the national democratic revolution is the
     creation of a united, nonracial, nonsexist and democratic society which
     can only be achieved by liberating Africans in particular, and blacks
     in general, from political and economic bondage.

The struggle for freedom will remain for as long as the legacy of apartheid
remains. The President, in his famous two-nations speech, emphasises that
our society is ridden by a perpetuation of racial, gender and spatial
disparities. Our black and poor people still live under conditions of a
grossly underdeveloped infrastructure in economic, physical, educational,
communication and other terms. Although the road is long, the NCOP squarely
bears the responsibility to shorten that road. We have made some progress
in this regard, and I am convinced that the NCOP, together with the
provinces and local governments with which it works, can achieve much more.
[Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN PROVINCE (Adv N A Ramathlodi): Chairperson, I
thought I was in safe hands, what with the Deputy Chair sitting here, but
we are struggling to get the gadget to work ... [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! [Inaudible.] Order! What you are seeing
is the poverty of Parliament, Mr Ramathlodi.

Mr M L MUSHWANA: Everything is old.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN PROVINCE (Adv N A Ramathlodi): I am going to
hold it.

Chairperson, the majority of South African adults of today carry with them
the scars of apartheid society, regardless of their race, colour or creed.

This legacy forms part of our consciousness and subconsciousness and, as
such, it is a powerful influence on how we view ourselves and the world
around us. It colours our world view, shapes our responses and conditions
our actions in such a fundamental way that some of us would not be willing
to acknowledge that publicly. May I dare to suggest that some of us would
not admit that to ourselves even in our own privacy.

In this context, one is reminded of a wise counsel that made an assessment
that the greatest part of the struggle for change is against the self. This
is the reason the debate on reconciliation and nation-building cannot be an
easy one. The Chamber will recall the recent conference on racism which
could be rated as an eloquent testimony to what one is asserting here.
However uncomfortable these initiatives and debates may be, we should not
even for a moment contemplate a retreat, because such a step would come at
a great cost to the future of our country. The time for boldness and
courage is now. No one should be guilty of postponing the future, because,
at some point, it will impose itself upon us.

In our province we are calling for a collective response to the naked and
obvious manifestations of racism, such as the painting of little girls, the
shooting of small boys in places such as Naboomspruit and so forth. In
these cases and similar ones elsewhere in the country, it would make a
profound contribution to nation-building and race relations if white
organisations were to take the lead in denouncing such atrocities.
Similarly, we have taken the lead in denouncing the brutal murders of
innocent, elderly and sometimes white farmers in the rural areas.

We have opened dialogue with bodies such as the Transvaal Agricultural
Union and the Broederbond in order to arrive at a common position in
dealing with the more common forms of racism and racialism. In these
discussions we are talking about means and ways of ensuring that black
aspirations do not necessarily have to translate into white fears. We are
arguing that, given our history, these aspirations should become the
collective national dream of black and white South Africans. The acceptance
of such a discourse would remove the tension associated with affirming the
victims of apartheid to the status of equal partners with their fellow
compatriots in all spheres of life, including the political, cultural and
economic spheres.

There can be no nation if one has the haves and have-nots living in two
compartmentalised worlds and two different countries whilst sharing common
borders, breathing the same air and sharing the same sun. Speaking for
myself and my province, we believe that the future of nonracialism could
not have been much brighter. To that end, we are engaging the churches and
institutions of learning in order to provide leadership, particularly in
raising our young, who stand a much better chance of overcoming our grim
legacy compared to the adults of today.

We are encouraging mass campaigns against specific acts of racism, such as
the Potgietersrus Laerskool saga of 1995.

In conclusion, let this NCOP reach out and make that bright future of
nonracialism happen in our lifetime. [Applause.]

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, as I have neither a Gucci suit nor a Gucci tie
or sweatshirt, I have decided, today, to put on my gumbo tie. I received
this tie with the compliments of the Mayor of New Orleans. I wonder how
many of the members know what gumbo is. Gumbo is a well-known and much
loved dish in New Orleans. New Orleans is like gumbo, it has got a little
bit of this and a little bit of that. Do members know what gumbo is like?
It takes a variety of ingredients to make good gumbo. This is what is
stated on this tie: ``Uptown, downtown; lakeside, riverside; Asian
American, Arab American; Protestant, Catholic; Muslim, Hindu'', and so it
goes on.

South Africa is like the city of New Orleans - a country of diverse people:
!ke e: /xarra //ke, which means: diverse people, unite. South African
people have at least 11 different languages, different cultures, religions,
races and ethnic groups, and people with different experiences of the past.
Can these people, from all nine different provinces, different political
views, the poor and the rich, reconcile and build a nation? I hope that
each and every one of us here today believes, like I do, that not only is
this possible, but also absolutely necessary, because, at the end of the
day, we are all South Africans.

However, for us to succeed, we will have to accept that in spite of our
diversity and different political views, we are South Africans of equal
status as citizens and, in our case, as representatives of the people. The
diversity of our people is a national asset and it should be promoted by a
spirit of mutual respect, inclusivity and participation.
We should safeguard the language, religion and cultural rights of each
individual and each community. We should all be committed to national
reconciliation and building a strong, dynamic and united multicultural
nation. Yes, the majority of South Africans experienced the denial of their
basic human rights. Today most South Africans continue to suffer an assault
on their dignity because of pervasive poverty and crime. Mindful of this,
we should all commit ourselves to the creation and maintenance of an open
society in which everyone, especially those who are most in need, is given
meaningful access to opportunity so that the frontiers of poverty can be
rolled back in a sustainable and developmental manner.

Each person in South Africa has a chance to be the very best that they can
be. Individuals, families and the communities created through free
association are the cornerstones of stable and successful societies with
legitimate hopes, aspirations and the right to pursue happiness and
fulfilment.

No democracy can flourish unless the government of the day is faced with
critical and effective opposition that is loyal to the constitutional order
and promotes the wellbeing of their country. Such a constructive opposition
is a necessary basis for the development and strengthening of democracy,
reconciliation and nation-building in our country.

An open and democratic society at all levels of society is essential for
reconciliation and nation-building. For that, an independent civil society
is the antidote to any attempt to wrap society in a smothering hegemony
which will ultimately destroy reconciliation and nation-building. As this
is the House where provincial and local government voices are heard in
South Africa's Parliament so that the attention is paid to the particular
needs of all the different geographical regions, and so that the people are
not simply represented in general but in a way in which there is respect
for the cultural, language and religious diversity and richness of our
country, we in this House should be playing a leading role in achieving
reconciliation and nation-building in our country.

Let us in this House make our new coat of arms and our motto live, because
this House is the fruit of our new Constitution and an essential part of a
new political culture of consultation of all our diverse peoples, in all
nine of our provinces. We must do this so that the rising sun in our coat
of arms - which is an emblem of brightness, splendour and the supreme
principle of the nature of energy which symbolises the promise of rebirth,
the active faculties of reflection, knowledge, good judgment and willpower,
and which is also the symbol of the source of life, of light and the
ultimate wholeness of humanity - shines over a prosperous society with open
opportunities for all, in which every person in South Africa is free,
responsible, equal before the law, secure and has the chance to improve the
quality of his or her life. That should be our vision: !ke e:/xarra //ke
[Unity in diversity]. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I think that the hon Mr Marais has some
competition. [Laughter.]

Mr P J MARAIS (Western Cape): Madam Chair, hon members, every speech here
should be an ode to our freedom and not a requiem to the denial of its
benefits. Henry W Nevinson said:


  For freedom, we know, is a thing that we have to conquer afresh for
  ourselves, every day, like love; and we are always losing freedom, just
  as we are always losing love, because, after each victory, we think we
  can now settle down and enjoy it without further struggle. The battle for
  freedom is never done, and the field never quiet.

The first duty of any government is to be true to itself and its people,
and to protect them. It means loyalty to the ideals we set out to achieve
when we were awarded the freedom of South Africa. The fundamental
principles were freedom - freedom from fear and racism - and the commitment
to nation-building and to reconstructing the imbalances of the past.

We are the beneficiaries of the new South Africa, yet we are divided by
fear, divided by our individual historical perspectives and divided by
poverty. In this regard, we will always be a divided nation as long as we
use our racial past as an excuse for current levels of mistrust. We should
use our successes in the field of education, economic growth and foreign
investment as launching pads for nation-building, and not for propagating a
further divide between ourselves and other less fortunate provinces. The
economic successes of the Western Cape should be seen as the successes of
the sons and daughters of South Africa, and applied to benefit our
immediate sister provinces, namely the Eastern and Northern Cape.

The Western Cape is not an island. It is one the most beautiful provinces
in this country, yet we are experiencing the most vicious and evil
onslaught against our democratic order in the form of naked, brutal
terrorism. It is an onslaught which hampers nation-building. It instils
fear in the honest, hard-working people of this province. This current
spate of attacks and the comments made by various senior Ministers create
barriers between people and curtail the mindshift necessary for nation-
building.

I speak here for the Muslim community of this province and I want to make
it clear: It is not the Muslim community that is planting pipe bombs and
targeting the state. The Muslim community is not the property of any
vigilante group and it will never be.

Mr M V MOOSA: Who said it was the Muslim community?

Mr P J MARAIS (Western Cape): I want to tell that hon member to stick to
Gucci shoes and suits, and to leave politics to politicians.
[Interjections.] [Laughter.] The Muslim community is as much part of our
province as our beautiful mountain. [Interjections.] They helped build and
develop this country. Just as the AWB is not representative of the
Afrikaner, and just just as the gangs in the townships are not
representative of the coloured community, neither is Pagad representative
of the Muslim community. [Interjections.]

The perpetrators of this violence are a gang of small-minded people, intent
on destroying everything our fathers and mothers have fought for. We as
leaders must respond to this challenge. Are we going to empower our
followers to be capable of independent reasoning, or let them be led by
blind mass reasoning? No system based on democratic principles like ours
can control a society not based on reason. We should allow people to
discover the truth by deliberate thought, and not by accident.

The naked truth is that we are a people with different histories, different
cultures, and different religions, sharing an indivisible geographic
landscape called South Africa. The NCOP has a unique role to play in nation-
building. Provinces need to find one another across party-political lines.
Here, one can put the people first, and the interests of political parties
in the second place. We should become captives of the hearts and minds of
our people, and not the captives of our respective party caucuses, because
as long as we are captives of our party caucuses, racism will never be
defeated, because we will argue here that it is the NP, the boere, versus
the ANC, the blacks. [Interjections.]

We have to speak for our provinces and for the people in those provinces,
and not for political party caucuses. [Interjections.] We will have to
either learn to live together in harmony, or prepare our children for a
racial war in the future. That is what we have to do. Maybe we will not see
this war, but we will be sowing the seeds for a war to come if we do not
find each other. If war is inevitable, let it be against common enemies
such as HIV/Aids, ignorance, poverty and disease, but not against one
another. [Interjections.] Once the people decide to unite against a common
enemy, they discover their common destiny.

In the Western Cape we are in a battle against poverty and ignorance.
Taking pride in what we have achieved through our poverty relief programmes
and the more than 100 successful and sustainable projects creating jobs for
more and more people can only be allowed if we can share this knowledge
with others less fortunate.

The Western Cape must not boast, and we do not boast. When we look at
provinces that have less than we do, we must thank God that we have the
resources. We must thank God that we have the NGOs and the infrastructure
to make us a success, and then use that success to help those less
fortunate. That is my vision, and I am sure that is the vision of the
Western Cape. We should be seen as just as genuine a son of South Africa as
any other province. We are not a step-child. [Interjections.]

Poverty can be eradicated if we pool our efforts and the political will is
matched with sound management of social services and human potential. One
day, when I observe a tear streaming down the white cheeks of an Annatjie
because of the look of despair and pain in the eyes of a black child, I
will know that a new nation has been born. When I see a tear running down a
black face because of misfortune that has struck a white person, I will
know that a true nation has been born.
Our Transformation 2000 programme in the Western Cape is a milestone of our
belief in the people of the Western Cape. It is an effort towards making a
fundamental shift from the outdated administrative inclination towards
management and an enabling model for our province. The resolve is clear
from the way we tackle Aids and HIV. I was the first MEC to give AZT to
pregnant mothers in the Western Cape.

We have built a nation through joining hands with the National Aids
Convention of Southern Africa and other Aids NGOs in fighting the disease
that is killing urban babies. One cannot build a nation if one does not
protect its mothers. One cannot build a nation if one does not want to save
its babies. [Interjections.] So when those hon members say, ``Let's build
the nation,'' they should first save the mothers and their babies.
[Interjections.] The fruits of our resolve ... [Interjections.] I know one
thing: Nobody sleeps when I speak. [Laughter.]

As far as I know, we are the only province enjoying the fruits of an
interministerial Aids committee. I want to encourage my brothers: Let us
focus on Aids. Whether they and I like it or not, our people are dying in
their thousands because of it. And no matter what fancy political argument
one has, and no matter how one ridicules me, one cannot ridicule away dying
black mothers.

The fruits of our resolve to administer drugs to expectant mothers are
obvious and can easily be duplicated elsewhere. We would like to share our
successes in the fight against Aids, and I offer the provinces a helping
hand, to share with them our experiences in administering AZT to pregnant
mothers. Let us engage each other. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr Z P TOLO (North West): Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Minister Pahad,
premiers and hon members, I am grateful for the opportunity to address this
august sitting on behalf of the premier of our province, the hon Popo
Molefe.

In contributing to the motion on reconciliation and nation-building, we say
that our provincial perspective in the North West is in line with the
national perspective. We reaffirm that this process of reconciliation and
nation-building, in the South African context, means bringing together,
with the purpose of building one nation, the people who were previously in
conflict with each other - people that are recovering from a history of
violent institutional racial conflict.

This process of reconciliation is at the centre of addressing our bitter
past history. We premise our address in this very important process on the
preamble to our Constitution, based on the vision of a democratic, unitary,
nonsexist and nonracial South Africa.

Undoubtedly, all our provinces have a critical role to play in addressing
the issue of reconciliation. This vision is a challenge for all of us to
address. Our policies as the Government, the legislative framework and all
developmental programmes should and must be geared towards ensuring that we
concretely realise the strategic objectives of reconciliation and nation-
building. The process can only succeed and bear fruit if it is people-
centred and driven by the same people. The people are the motive force for
the change we seek to achieve. Of course, we need very strong leadership to
guide this process within the broader strategic vision of our country.

The ANC, as an agent of change in this country, in partnership with
progressive formations, is central to the realisation of this vision.
Clearly, the social consciousness of the masses cannot be changed through
propaganda or legislation alone. This is not an attempt to underplay the
importance of this. What is equally critical is for us to put in place,
though with limited resources, developmental strategic programmes and to
open or strengthen avenues for popular participation by the people. This,
there is no doubt, will positively contribute to changing the material
conditions and, consequently, the social consciousness of our people and
allow them to be the motive force in this much-needed process of change.

There are bottlenecks of resistance to this reconciliation and nation-
building. Some of this resistance is evident in our schools and farms, some
workplaces, some Government departments such as the police, the judiciary
and some sporting associations, as well as some churches.

We still have very shocking instances of children being divided along
racial lines in our schools, dockets of white aggressors disappearing from
our police stations, some farmers in our country still refusing workers who
have worked for them over 40 years the right to be buried on their farms.
These instances are, indeed, disturbing, and are indicative of some of the
resistance that is still evident in our society.

We still experience instances of racism, chauvinism, intolerance and
cultural arrogance. All these and other negative ``isms'' threaten the
process of nation-building. Ironically, the institutions mentioned above
are expected to be agencies of nation-building and change.

Reconciliation is not the preserve or responsibility of black South
Africans only. White South Africans are South Africans. The problem of a
South Africa divided into two nations and the untransformed institutions
are a problem of all of us as South Africans. The resistance and
indifference in some quarters of South Africa need to be tackled and
addressed head-on.

The social affairs committee of the Executive Council in the North West
province is currently discussing the apathy and glaring absence of whites
at national days of commemoration in our country. Of course, our
observation is that this is a phenomenon across the country. We are asking,
for example: Why should the commemoration of the National Women's Day be an
event for black South African women only when this event impacts on and has
a great significance in the history of this country?

Yes, the ANC is not naive enough to think that change, reconciliation and
nation-building can happen overnight. The social consciousness of our
people is, indeed, an impregnable fortress. We need to provide strong
leadership and allow for people's participation. We need to form
progressive partnerships across the spectrum of our country, especially
with peace-loving South Africans. We need a stable environment, an
environment without bombings and hijackings, and we need to create an
environment of equal opportunities for our people. Only through this and,
of course, the application of law and order in South Africa, can we hope to
achieve this very, very important process of nation-building and
reconciliation.

Allow me to conclude by stating that a united and a democratic South Africa
is within reach. The future is peace. [Applause.]

Ms C BOTHA: Madam Chair, hon Minister and members, I have been thinking
that the only way I could possibly compete with some of the previous
speakers would be to do the cancan here. [Laughter.]

Die nodigheid om steeds 'n parlementêre gesprek oor rekonsiliasie en
nasiebou te voer, en om akademiese kongresse te hou en ondersoeke te loods
oor dinge wat elke man en vrou op straat verniet kan definieer en intiem
ken, noop my om te vra wat die doel hiervan is. Laat ons die voor-die-hand-
liggende feite aan die begin op die tafel lê.

Die mense van Suid Afrika het hierdie eeu ingestrompel met 'n afgryslike
meulsteen om die nek, wit én swart, gekniehalter deur 'n filosofie wat die
politiek van verdeling tot 'n fyn kuns ontwikkel het. Ons sal gelukkig wees
as ons hierdie eeu ontslae van hierdie erfenis kan uitlui. Aan die einde
van hierdie eeu, ``the African century,'' gaan ons gemeet word, nie ten
opsigte van die verlede nie, maar aan die manier waarop ons ons eietydse
probleme die hoof gebied het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The necessity of still having a parliamentary debate on reconciliation and
nation-building, and of holding academic congresses and launching
investigations into things which every man and woman in the street can
easily define and is intimately familiar with, forces me to ask what the
purpose of this is. Let us place the obvious facts on the table at the
outset.

The people of South Africa, white and black, stumbled into this century
with a horrific millstone around their necks, hampered by a philosophy
which had developed the politics of separation to a fine art. We will be
fortunate if we can ring out this century free of this heritage. At the end
of this century, the African century, we are going to be measured, not with
regard to the past, but according to the manner in which we solve the
problems of our own time.]

I categorically dispute the statement of Mr Barney Pityana, chairman of the
Human Rights Commission, that reconciliation cannot work unless racism is
dealt with. Apart from giving him a job for life, this kind of unproven
sentiment is a self-fulfilling prophecy. For a start, it denies the
validity of the work done by Bishop Tutu and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. For along with humanity's awesome capacity for evil is its
manifest desire for a shared society and its amazing capacity for
forgiveness. If one denies this one is denying us hope that we can become a
nation reconciled in a century reformed.

Kleurverskille is onveranderbaar deel van ons menswees, maar word in
hierdie konteks 'n sinnelose vertrekpunt vir debatvoering, want nasiebou
moet grootliks plaasvind ten opsigte van wat ons in gemeen het; die
allesomvattende ubuntu. Wat tel, is nie swartwees of witwees nie, maar
menswees. [Tussenwerpsels.] 'n Nasie word ook gebou op beproefde waardes,
en hiervan is een van die belangrikste sy benadering tot vroue.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Differences in colour are an unalterable part of our humanity, but in this
context become a meaningless point of departure for debating, because
nation-building must largely take place with regard to that which we have
in common; the all-embracing ubuntu. What counts is not being white or
being black, but being human. [Interjections.] A nation is also built on
proven values, and one of the most important of these is its approach to
women.]

I quote:


  Women are the hidden key to the treasures of civilisation.

Dan wil ek tog hier afdwaal om te sê dat mnr Tolo en minister Tshwete
blykbaar albei onder die indruk is dat vroue miskien net tot hulle reg kom
indien hulle na toesprake gaan luister waarin hulle miskien nie eens
belangstel nie, en waaroor hulle hul onkunde gaan bewys deur nie eens te
weet wie daar was of wel op daardie dag dinge gedoen het vir ander vroue
nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[At this point I would like to digress to say that Mr Tolo and Minister
Tshwete are apparently both under the impression that perhaps women only
come into their own if they go and listen to speeches in which they are
perhaps not even interested, and about which they are going to prove their
ignorance by not even knowing who was there or indeed did things for other
women on that day.]

As I said, women are the hidden key to the treasures of civilisation.

Hierdie waarheid is tot die ewige krediet van die stigters van ons nuwe
politiek in die Grondwet verskans, en beloof om die beste wapen in ons
nasiebou-arsenaal te word. Dan moet ons egter darem ook nie onoorkomelike
probleme in die gesig staar nie. As families ononderbroke deur vigs
vernietig word, word ons nasiebouproses nie net emosioneel nie, maar ook
reël vernietig, en dan is dit ons plig om alle middele tot ons beskikking
te gebruik om HIV/vigs te stuit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[To the eternal credit of the founders of our new politics, this truth is
entrenched in the Constitution, and promises to become the best weapon in
our nation-building arsenal. However, we must then not be faced with
insurmountable problems. If families are continuously destroyed by Aids,
our nation-building process is not only destroyed in emotional terms, but
also in real terms, and it is then our duty to use all means at our
disposal to combat HIV/Aids.]

Poverty and lack of saleable skills are universally recognised threats to
human dignity and progress, and arguably the greatest contributor in South
Africa to what our President calls a two- nation state or society, which is
contrary to the views of his predecessor President Mandela, who relished
the idea of one nation.

However, we have inexplicably failed to use billions of rands at our
disposal to begin to address these divisive issues. Why is there R300
million still sitting in the Skills Levy Fund; R850 million unspent in the
demutualisation fund; approximately R240 million in lottery money not
distributed to welfare; and a R21 million underspending in the Gauteng
integrated nutrition programme? The list goes on.

I can sympathise with overspending on a budget. I mean, most housewives
achieve this without effort. [Interjections.] But underspending to this
degree is mind-boggling and, indeed, even criminal.

Where are the people who are capable of effectively administering the
delivery process, both nationally and provincially? If we are busy creating
an underperforming employed elite for the sake of racially defined
transformation at the cost of real upliftment of the poor, this could
become as big a challenge to nation-building and reconciliation as our
recent history.
Nasiebou is nie net afhanklik van groot en dramatiese gebeure nie, en
terwyl ons Vrystaatse premier nou hier is, wil ek haar graag vra wat sou
gebeur het as ons toegelaat was om opsioneel die letters ``VS'' op ons
nommerplate in die Vrystaat te gebruik in plaas van die verpligte ``FS''?
Hierdie klein gebaartjie sou waardevolle dividende gelewer het, want min
dinge vind soveel emosionele aanklank as die erkenning van 'n mens se
moedertaal. Dit is nie net die groot en dramatiese gebare wat nasiebou
bevorder nie. Dit gebeur in die klein menslike dramas, soos die hartlike
verwelkoming deur president Mbeki van Callie en Monique Strydom of die
oorwinning van 'n nasionale sportspan.

In teenstelling daarmee het die afgryslike moord van 'n swart werker in
Sasolburg die potensiaal om alle pogings tot nasiebou te kelder - ek wil my
hiermee aansluit by premier Ramathlodi - as dit deur politici uitgebuit
word as kenmerkende gedrag van een groep in plaas daarvan dat almal dit en
al die ander weersinwekkende misdade wat ons daagliks moet verwerk
onomwonde verwerp, ongeag die kleur van die slagoffer of die misdadiger.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Nation-building is not only dependent on dramatic events, and while our
Free State Premier is here, I would like to ask her what would have
happened if we had been permitted the option of using the letters ``VS'' on
our numberplates in the Free State instead of the compulsory ``FS''? This
small gesture would have paid valuable dividends, because few things evoke
as much emotional response as the recognition of one's mother tongue. It is
not only the big and dramatic gestures which promote nation-building. It
takes place in the small human dramas, such as the sincere welcoming of
Callie and Monique Strydom by President Mbeki, or the victory of a national
sporting team.

In contrast with this the horrific murder of a black worker in Sasolburg
has the potential to destroy all attempts at nation-building - here I would
like to associate myself with Premier Ramathlodi - if it is exploited by
politicians as characteristic behaviour of one group instead of everyone
unequivocally rejecting it and all the other repugnant crimes we have to
deal with daily, irrespective of the colour of the victim or the criminal.]

Fortunately, I have faith in the ability of our people to build a winning
nation. Are we not, in the words of Prof Jakes Gerwel, a society which
serves as a singularly successful example of a country that has resolved
its potentially destructive conflicts consensually? [Applause.]

Mr P MASHATILE (Gauteng): Chairperson, hon Minister Pahad, premiers and hon
members of the House, only a few weeks ago on 29 August the Gauteng
provincial legislature held a similar discussion on this subject, in
preparation for the national conference on racism.

The discussion at the legislature focused on the following areas: race
relations in a modern democratic South Africa; the assessment of the extent
to which the vision of our Constitution is lived and experienced by South
Africans; common perspectives about how to build a nonracial, united and
reconciled society; the examination of the manifestation of racism in a
democratic society and the reason for the persistence of all forms of
racism; and, lastly, the commitment to build a new reconciled and united
society in South Africa at all levels.

Although the legislature did not seek to arrive at any resolutions through
this debate, this was the beginning of a process to pave the way forward on
the road to reconciliation in our province.

Let me say, from the onset, that I think we are fortunate in Gauteng
because a large percentage of our province is constituted by what is
characterised as a cosmopolitan society. This means that our population is
diverse and, as such, the task of reconciliation has been taken forward
slightly by this reality. But this is no cause for celebration or a
suggestion that the challenges of nation-building do not face us. We see
nation-building not only as a need to eradicate racism or build a sense of
tolerance among different cultures and formally divided racial groups, but
also as a need to eradicate all forms of inequality in the province,
including the eradication of poverty. Nation-building also means the need
to increase our efforts to transform our society.

Gauteng, as we all know, hosts many head offices of large companies in the
country. We have a big challenge of ensuring that the transformation of the
boardrooms of these institutions in order that they reflect the demography
of our country, not in a token manner but in a real sense, is also
achieved. We have to make sure that these companies are able to fully
respond to the social needs of all the people of our province.

Whilst it is important to engage in nation-building through social
development and economic transformation, we need to directly find means of
dealing with the scourge of racism in the province. Many of the people who
say that we should not continue to talk about racism because this
perpetuates racism, polarises society and ultimately takes us back to the
past, are people who certainly have not felt the impact of racism. It is
not possible literally return to the past, but we can learn from the past
by not ignoring it or pretending that it never happened, and acknowledging
that some in our society still live in the past.

Our approach is that the way to deal with racism is to talk about it, not
only for its sake, but also to confront how we can engage in ongoing
efforts to transform our country into a nonracial, nonsexist and truly
democratic society.

This also calls for us to look at the role of women in our society as part
and parcel of nation-building, because unless we deal with the role of
women and gender imbalances, we will continue to perpetuate skewed power
relations in the country.

Another challenge we face is to ensure that the citizens of our country
know about each other's social and cultural activities. This is why as
Gauteng we have declared September heritage month. We will make this an
annual programme. We believe that this will help the people of Gauteng to
unite, because it is through culture that people begin to find each other -
united in diversity.

This debate about nation-building and, in particular, the debate about
racism, should not create in the minds of some of our black people the
perception or a culture of complacency. This is because the tendency will
be to blame everything on racism. It is important that black people take
charge of and take responsibility for their own destiny. Denying that
blacks can fail on their own would be to deny them the possibility of
achieving success on their own. The result of such denials would be to
cover up the failures.

In this regard, in talking about racism in America, Dinesh D'Souza in his
book, The end of racism, says:
  If black people do not do well in tests, it is because the tests are
  biased and white society has deprived them of the necessary skills. If
  they drop out of school, they have been driven out by racism, which
  injures black self-esteem. If they have illegitimate children, this is
  because society did not provide black males with steady jobs. If they are
  convicted of a disproportionate number of violent crimes, this is because
  the police, the judges and the courts in general are racist. Those who
  have committed crimes have been pressured to do so by undeserved economic
  hardships.

This sort of thinking is dangerous, because the possibility of many black
people attributing everything, including their failures, to racism will not
get them anywhere. However, on the other hand, there is no justification
for the denial by many white South Africans of the history that we come
from, which includes the system that entrenched white supremacy through
racism.

For example, many so-called white liberals act in public as though they do
not think in racial terms in all situations, that they have outgrown racial
prejudice. They behave as though they do not want black people to fail,
but, in reality, many of them show in every competition which in their
words is not ``rigged'' - competitions for jobs or senior positions in the
private sector or in Government - that they expect black people to fail.
When it comes to criminal proceedings or charges before courts, the
tendency is, in the eyes of these many white South Africans, that black
people seem to stand publicly exonerated of the charges, but privately
convicted.

Let me therefore conclude by saying that these are indeed the challenges we
face as a nation. They affect both black and white South Africans. We must
therefore create an open environment in which to sort them out, without
accusation and counteraccusation. Eradicating racism and nation-building
require collective endeavour. [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I thank the hon member who just sat down for
the perspectives he gave us. I think he is very right about many of the
things he said. Racism is the disease, reconciliation is the cure for that
disease.

We, in the Western Cape, occupy a mountainous area with largely poor soil,
hostile seas, poor weather patterns, and which is far from world markets.
Indeed, we have few natural resources. However, we have many strengths, but
these strengths can never and will never be unlocked properly to the
benefit of all our people if we do not develop economically, or continue to
develop economically, in order to generate the wealth to meet our social
upliftment challenges. This, in turn, is dependent upon a reconciled
community living in peace and harmony.

The poor law and order situation in the Western Cape is creating suspicion
amongst communities - and my hon colleague Peter Marais, the Minister,
spoke about that - and those communities retreat from each other, the world
tourism community retreats from us, world business retreats from us, and
there is a downward spiral that, in turn, feeds upon itself. That is in
nobody's best interests, and nobody wants that.

Recently, both the Governor of the Reserve Bank and the Minister of Finance
had much to say about poor perceptions, as opposed to the South African
reality. They were almost anguishing about this - that we are different to
the rest of Africa: Why does the world not understand that, why do they not
perceive that, in spite of Zimbabwe? Well, the fact is that to some extent
they are right. But bombs going off in Cape Town are also a reality, not a
perception.

President Mandela wrote in his brilliant essay, Towards the 21st century -
I recommend it to our members who have not read it - and I just want to
quote one paragraph:


  Thus there is a need to develop a sense of orderliness in the world. To
  do so, a direct link needs to be established between responsible
  membership of the community of nations and global stability and progress.
  The converse holds that if countries want to enjoy the rights of
  community, they need to act responsibly ÿ.ÿ.ÿ. the test of South Africa's
  foreign policy will be found in the quality of its domestic politics.

I too would say to hon members that the test of reconciliation will be
found in our domestic politics. And, how do we change perceptions, because
that is the challenge? There are many things one can do. There are a few
low-cost contributions we can make. The first being we must stop making
divisive speeches on race. They are not productive. The centrifugal forces
of racism are far outweighed in South Africa by the centripetal forces of
reconciliation. For every act of racism in our country, however unhappy it
may be, there are thousands of acts of kindness and charity, and these are
taken for granted and as givens.

The more one talks reconciliation, the more reconciliation there will be.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms B N DLULANE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon premiers, the House at
large, I would like to thank our presiding officers, the Whips and all
parties represented in the NCOP for giving us an opportunity to share with
hon members our provincial perspective on reconciliation and nation-
building.

Firstly, I must mention that the Eastern Cape is a product of ten wars of
resistance, which, like the rest of the country, culminated in the struggle
for peace and democracy. The history of the Eastern Cape is that of
colonisation, followed by dispossession and then the Balkanisation of the
province, resulting in two Bantustans. In all of this the province
experienced the gruesome repression of popular resistance.

Like the rest of the country, the province also shows a dichotomy of two
worlds in one nation. In these two worlds emerged the legacy of the past.
One nation is white, relatively far better off economically, socially and
educationally, and in terms of communication and other infrastructure. It
is also a nation confined to urban areas.

The other nation, which forms the majority, lives under conditions of a
grossly underdeveloped infrastructure. The conditions for development are
virtually nonexistent as the majority live in poor rural areas and have no
access to information and modern technology.

Reconciliation through nation-building still remains the best possible
solution to the divided nation that we are in our country. The
establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was mainly to
ensure that the truth of the gross human rights violations was exposed as
the only road towards reconciliation.

However, from a politic-economic point of view, reconciliation can best be
achieved through nation-building. Accordingly we believe that the route to
reconciliation and nation-building should be determined by conditions which
include a commitment to peace, security and social development. However,
such conditions can only be realised if a concerted effort is made to
address the following concerns. First and foremost, our country is still in
many respects characteristic of the old. The glaring poverty and
inequality, landlessness, lack of access to basic services, and poor
infrastructural backup in our province leaves us with only one conclusion:
That the past has done us more bad than good.

Our province is taken and viewed as the leader in poverty figures in the
country, as indicated by the recent statistical survey. There is no other
attribute to that except the past spatial and otherwise systematically
planned underdevelopment which was perpetuated by the past ideological
inclinations of apartheid proponents. According to these very latest
statistics poverty is on the increase and this is also attributable to the
past. Perhaps had there been no apartheid debt, the government of the day
would have been able to focus resources to reconstruction and development.

In relation to landlessness, a need exists for the resolution of land
restitution and redistribution cases as speedily as possible so as to be
able to address the glaring hunger of citizens for more space affecting our
people so adversely. The fact that people live in mountainous areas where
even ploughing is quite difficult and having to obtain their subsistence
food from mieliefields that are made of dongas is still attributable to and
a beacon of the past land dispossessions that our people suffered. The
sooner this problem is addressed, the more our people will be able to feed
themselves.

Redistribution is also another phenomenon that we may not be able to
address in relation to what exactly it means for us as a nation.
Redistribution and the allocation of resources is perhaps not supposed to
confirm the status quo, particularly because the spatial underdevelopment
of the past regime ensured that some areas are hardly habitable, in which
case our allocation of resources should be able to make all areas
habitable, so that we can eliminate the picture of the past, though that
may not be the only route.

The creation of a national political identity is also necessary so that we
are able to think, work and serve as a nation. If we are able to have a
particular identity, then we can be able to agree on pressing and immediate
priorities of our country and Government in order to spend and channel
resources to poverty alleviation because it is enemy number one.

Nevertheless, we pride ourselves on being on the right track. Talking about
these issues and, indeed, finding solutions are a prerequisite for healing
our nation across the colour spectrum. In our country, and in our province
in particular, there are men and women who are up to the challenge, and
together we shall walk side by side until a truly South African nation is
achieved. There are, of course, some who are still obsessed with clinging
to their ill-begotten privileges and who are predominantly white and male.
They are exceptionally vocal and have a stake in leading media
institutions. Unfortunately, they are not doing the cause of reconciliation
and nation-building any good.

Our province is indeed humbled by the many South Africans who appreciate
the challenges ahead and are prepared to throw their lot in with others in
bringing about a nonracial, nonsexist and democratic South Africa.
[Applause.]

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr N J Mahlangu): Chairperson, hon Minister in
the President's Office, hon members, we have just emerged from the national
conference on racism, a conference, I believe, that made us better instead
of bitter. There are those who will argue that the conference only served
to open wounds that were already healing. We disagree with that assertion.
We believe that as it was the case with the truth and reconciliation
process, we need to talk about our experiences. In that way we can begin
the healing process that will truly set us on the way to genuine
reconciliation and nation-building.

As a province we are aware that it is important that we understand and take
full account of the nature and extent of racism in our province, our
country and the modern world. We are aware that we must address the
changing nature of racism and its causes and confront the complex forms of
intolerance and prejudice that exist in our province and our country today.
The recent conference emphasised what we have always believed, namely that
racism, discrimination, xenophobia and bigotry are worldwide phenomena
which are more deep-rooted and more virulent than had been supposed.

We are often reminded that we live in a great nation, and we do, but it can
be greater still. In a province like Mpumalanga which is 60% rural, most of
our people bear the brunt of dehumanisation and racism. Several people have
been attacked, maimed and killed by white farmers in Mpumalanga. We are all
familiar with the incident where a farm tenant was painted silver just
because he was black. We are all aware, I believe, about the notorious
commandos in Wakkerstroom, and I do not need to give details.

What we discovered in our quest to fight this demon was that fear lies at
the heart of racial hatred, and that is fear of difference, fear that the
economic or social position is threatened, and fear that identity could be
lost in an increasingly democratised South Africa. We concluded that if
fear is the main factor, education is the key remedy.

Through a series of meetings and workshops we have been able to take that
small but significant step of really addressing the problem. There is a
particular responsibility and duty of care on governments when it comes to
fighting racism, discrimination and intolerance. Governments and the
political community should at all times lead public opinion, not play the
race card or pander to those who claim they feel threatened by people they
regard as different.

We needed to re-evaluate what has and has not been achieved in our fight
against racism. As a province, we have met with members of the farming
community, the Afrikaner-Broederbond, several farm dwellers' associations,
organised business and labour, and other parties in the province. We met
with the Mpumalanga Agricultural Union, and we have jointly agreed that
evictions of people living on farms, farm murders and abuse of farmworkers
do not contribute to genuine reconciliation and nation-building. We all
agreed that it was wrong not to allow families to bury their dead loved
ones on the farms they had lived on since their birth. At the same time, we
pledged zero tolerance against those who attack and kill white farmers.

However, in order to emphasise that, we must fight the inhumane treatment
of farmworkers with the same zeal.
Our meetings went a long way in allowing members of the provincial
government to gain access to farms. These meetings took us to Kriel,
Secunda, Groblersdal, Hectorspruit, Malelane, Volksrust and other areas.
Some of the meetings were held in my office.

The ANC in Mpumalanga has formed a committee headed by the MEC for economic
affairs that aims to educate both the farmers and the farmworkers on the
issue of racism and human rights. We believe this education will help the
farming community. This is done in conjunction with Cosatu and other farm
tenants' associations. This committee supplements an old party committee of
members of the Mpumalanga legislature headed by an MPL, the hon Mr
Windvoël, which parliamentary committee is due to table its report after
having conducted an investigation on all the farms where we have had
dehumanisation and degradation of the human dignity of farmworkers and farm
attacks throughout the province.

Something else I want to refer to is the reluctance of black members of the
SA Police Service in rural areas to arrest white farmers accused of abusing
their workers. In our hugely successful outreach programme, we always find
time to discuss these problems with senior management in the police
service. We did this in all the areas we visit, and we can boldly say that
our meetings have made a difference.

Farmworkers in some of the areas we have visited have in recent months
marched to police stations to complain about farm evictions and ill-
treatment, something which they were afraid to do in the past. During one
such march, the Minister of Safety and Security, Steve Tshwete, joined our
MEC for agriculture, Candith Mashego, in Badplaas to receive a memorandum
from the farm dwellers and farmworkers who were complaining about the
degradation of their dignity and unlawful evictions.

The fact that farmworkers can march in protest against their inhumane
treatment on the farms is a great step towards empowering and educating
tenants about their rights. This unity between the farming community,
labour, business, political parties and other groups will give impetus to
our attempts to deal with racism.

We are challenged to work with unshakable determination all over the
province and the country to wipe out the last vestiges of racism which
knows no geographical boundaries. I am told by the provincial MEC for
safety and security that some of the dockets which were closed because it
was alleged that there was no evidence, have been reopened with a great
measure of success in the follow-ups which were made recently by the new
police force.

Overt forms of racism may have been outlawed, but discrimination persists
in multiple forms, often in subtle and systematic ways. In fact, judging
from the persistence of racist attitudes in the face of often elaborate
antidiscriminatory measures, we have to admit that actions against racism
to date have met with, at best, limited results. Our province is still
suffering from this disease and we need to double our efforts.

The task before us is to devise innovative strategies to combat racism.
That means we must not only shape laws and mechanisms for protection
against racial discrimination, but also effect a change of mind.

Let me conclude by quoting Auny San Suu Kyi who says:


  The quite essential revolution is that of spirit born of intellectual
  conviction of the need for a change in mental attitude and value. Without
  a revolution of the spirit, the forces which produce the inequities of
  the old order would continue to be operative and posing a constant threat
  to the process of reform and regeneration.

It is very important to know that it is a process to achieve nation-
building and not something one can do in one day and succeed. We are in
that process, and we think we are gradually making an impact on this demon
of racism. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Mr E M Dipico): Chairperson, hon Minister
Pahad, hon members and colleagues, it has indeed been an honour to serve in
this House and be part of the important processes of this fledgling
democracy. Today, as we once more debate these matters of importance, we do
so because we want to contribute towards the fundamental transformation of
our country, and the qualitative development of the quality of the lives of
those we represent, namely those who have elected us to serve them.
At the recently held conference on racism, it emerged that there is still a
lot of work we must do jointly to eradicate the legacy of the past in order
for us to be truly focused on the tasks ahead. The subsequent outcomes of
the conference on racism illustrate, in no uncertain terms, the challenges
we face in our quest to build a nation.

As a province, we welcome the idea to pass before the National Assembly and
this House legislation aimed at promoting equality and outlawing unfair
discrimination, hate speech and harassment, which should come into effect
next year in March. This, together with Government's efforts to launch a
concerted battle against poverty and unemployment, we believe, will go a
long way in laying the basis for the eradication of inequality and for
nation-building.

For as long as our people continue to live in abject poverty, without
dignity and hope of making it in life, the noble idea of nation-building
will continue to elude us and we could, faster than we expect, slide into
an abyss of social turmoil and descent. Ours must be the efforts which seek
to build a nation by addressing the fundamental questions of poverty and
unemployment. Most of the poor provinces must be able to give hope to their
people. They must be the areas where dignity and the seeds of a united
nation germinate. Therefore, business and the private sector, as well as
other sectors, must be proactive in these parts of the country as well and
invest in the productive sectors that we find in these areas.

I have listened attentively to my colleague Mr Pieter Marais.

Hy praat lekker soos 'n digter. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hy praat soos 'n digter
en herinner my aan iemand wat so lekker gepraat het in Suid-Afrika, soos ek
so grootword. Hy het so 'n groot baard en toe hy so op perd was, toe het hy
lekker hard geval. So hy moet pasop. Hy moenie soos 'n digter praat nie. Hy
gaan baie hard val van 'n perd af. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[He speaks in a captivating way, like a poet. [Interjections.] He speaks
like a poet, and reminds me of someone who spoke as entertainingly in South
Africa when I was growing up. He had a big beard, and while he was riding
his horse, he came an absolute cropper. He must, therefore, be careful. He
must not speak like a poet. He is going to fall very heavily from a horse.
[Interjections.]]

There is no way that all of us, as serious South Africans, more
particularly as leaders of our people, can deny that racism exists in our
country today. There is no way we can do that. All of us should be one in
saying that it does exist. If we agree, we should allow all leaders to rise
and ask how we can tackle it. How do we face our people and educate them in
order to build a united South Africa which is nonracial, nonsexist and very
democratic. That is the issue. That is the challenge to all of us.

In doing so, we expect what former President Nelson Mandela called the good
men and good women of this country to rise above petty issues, to rise
above all their party positions, and to say that they can build a nation.
It is a challenge to this leadership. If they continue to run into
communities and deny racism, they are not assisting us to build this new
South Africa. Indeed, they are trying to take us back, and that type of
approach will catch up with them. One day they will have to respond to the
nation.

We hope to succeed through our work in the province - that of taking and
opening up communication lines, and taking a radio station to the San
people, to speak in their own language, to promote their culture, to speak
about all the good and bad things about themselves, to use the click-type
of sounds continuously. That is part and parcel of building a nation to
bring back the dignity which was taken away from them. The Nama people will
also be getting a radio station deep down in Namaqualand to ensure that
they can also be part of this South Africa. We are bringing back the
Khoisan people, who are the indigenous people of our country. Indeed, on
Friday of this week we are once more trying to proceed to bring back the
dignity of our people and by giving back the land of the Griquas in the
province of the Northern Cape, and saying to Adam Kok and Waterboer that,
whatever has happened, we should try to bury the hatchet. Let us give them
back their land, because we will never have reconciliation unless we give
back to our people what was theirs. Let us not try to run away from the
truth. [Applause.]

We need to combine this. As we continue to give back land to the Khoisan
people, and to allow them to speak and express themselves in their
languages, to develop their cultures and also to be seen speaking to their
brother South Africans, I think we are about to build this South Africa.
Indeed, we thank the President of our country for having that vision of
bringing the indigenous people back to the mainstream of our country.

We have proceeded to promote the RDP of the soul by bringing all religious
groups together from around the whole province to speak to our people and
communities. That is part of the work of our cabinet meeting the people.
Every place we get to, every second week, we promote the RDP of the soul
with all religious leaders. It is the first thing to do - to talk about
morality, the moral renewal of our people, and to promote nation-building
and call upon all religious leaders, black and white, to rise and to be
able to speak to our people to promote reconciliation. That is bearing
fruit.

The people of the Richtersveld are asking why they have to reconcile when
their land, which is so fertile, was taken away from them, full of mineral
rights and diamonds, and they are standing on the periphery. They cannot
participate. That is why the land claims issue is a matter of urgency.
Mrs A M VERSVELD: And fishing rights!

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Mr M E Dipico): And fishing rights, that
hon member is correct. We know who took those rights away from them. If we
do not give them back, there will be no reconciliation. [Interjections.] We
have to ensure that our people get their land and their mineral rights
back, so that poverty can be fought and so that they can benefit from what
God gave to them. When one is in the Richtersveld one realises the poverty
levels, while God has given people wealth there.

We in the Northern Cape Legislature say that we have turned a negative into
a positive. For the last six years we as a legislature have been meeting in
the council chambers of the City Council of Kimberley. We are proud today
that the Minister has given us money to build a legislature. We are putting
that legislature in a buffer zone next to a squatter camp and saying that
all the people must go there. We are building it there and we all agreed -
the FF and the new New NP. [Laughter.] We all agreed that that is where the
legislature belongs to promote development.

Every wing of that building must represent our people of the Karoo and the
Kalahari. It must show the people in the diamond fields, and the artists
from those communities must come and put their drawings up and speak to all
of us. I think that is what we are trying to do. In doing so we hope that
it will be a small contribution to our people. As we have been continuing
to discuss with De Beers, we will bring the statue of Harry Oppenheimer to
reflect on these big holes around Kimberley, so that our people can remind
themselves of where they come from. However, we must also have the heroes
of our struggle, like Sol Plaatje, there and speak to us and to say that,
indeed, there is still work to be done.

In conclusion, as we face the local government elections before us, it is
even more important for all of us to take the message of reconciliation and
to go back and to speak like leaders, to criticise even our own friends and
our own families who are perpetuating racism. I think that will be a
contribution which we can take forward, and it will take this country
forward. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, Minister Pahad, colleagues, it is
an honour and a pleasure to be able to stand here in this honourable House
and speak on behalf of my premier, the hon L P H M Mtshali. I am going to
focus on the great progress made in the province of KwaZulu-Natal towards
reconciliation and nation-building. I am going to leave out the colour
codes in my address.

The political transition in South Africa is often described as a miracle.
If it was a miracle, KwaZulu-Natal was at the heart of that miracle. One
only has to look at where we have come from to measure the immense progress
we have made. Eight or ten years ago, KwaZulu-Natal was virtually in a
state of civil war as political violence raged across the province.
Supporters of the party that I belong to, the IFP, were pitted in an all-or-
nothing struggle with supporters of the ANC, the party which currently
dominates national Government, but is still a minority in the province of
KwaZulu-Natal.

Something like 12 000 people died in that struggle and it was absolutely
horrible. Totally innocent people were mowed down and burnt out of house
and home, and these included women and children. Both sides now look back
on it as a time of madness. In the relative tranquillity that we enjoy in
KwaZulu-Natal today, it is sometimes difficult to believe that these things
really happened.

How did we achieve this reconciliation and peace? It began with a
transition formula which required governments of national unity at both
national and provincial levels to work together. With the history of
physical conflict in KwaZulu-Natal, which had by no means ended in 1994,
and in fact intensified for a while after that first democratic election,
it is remarkable that members of the IFP and the ANC were able to sit
together in the same room, let alone in the same cabinet. Let us be frank
about it - things were wobbly. There were deep suspicions, but coalition
government produces its own chemistry. As the violence began to simmer
down, both sides came to realise how great the dividend of peace is. They
came to realise that development of the province and peace for its peoples
were of considerably greater value than untrammelled political power for a
particular party. Political maturity began to take hold. To lose an
election was not the end of the world.

One lived to fight another day and one had a share in government anyway. It
was no longer what political scientists call a zero-sum game. Of course,
much the same was happening at national level as well, where my party,
which dominated in KwaZulu-Natal, was a minority in the national Cabinet.

The government of provincial unity was forced on us by the interim
Constitution. Somehow, it worked. But by 1999 something even more
remarkable had happened. The Constitution adopted no longer required
governments of national or provincial unity, but we in KwaZulu-Natal had
already looked into the abyss. Could anyone contemplate risking a return to
the mindless violence and tragedy of the 1980s and mid-1990s? Was there not
a danger of putting the entire province to the torch? We had grown
accustomed to governing together. I am not saying that there were no
tensions; there are tensions even today. But we have learned to manage
them, and in 1999 the IFP and the ANC decided, even though the Constitution
did not force it on us, to continue coalitions at national and provincial
levels, regardless of the election outcome. That was truly remarkable.

Can anyone here today imagine what kind of nightmarish hellhole KwaZulu-
Natal would be if we had returned to the zero-sum game? Can anyone believe
that there can be peace in South Africa as a whole without peace in KwaZulu-
Natal? This generous and great-hearted gesture reflects well on both sides,
I believe. I know my hon premier, on whose behalf I speak today, would join
me in paying tribute to the wisdom and generosity of spirit on both sides
and at both levels of government, national and provincial.

I know there has been anxiety at national leadership level and on both
sides that the agreement in KwaZulu-Natal should continue to stick. The
interests of province and country have been put ahead of those of party and
individual, as somebody else indicated earlier on that we should do. It is
something seldom encountered in the world of politics, and to my mind both
sets of leadership are to be commended for their vision.

I believe that in KwaZulu-Natal the IFP and the ANC have discovered
something of immense value. We call it co-operative governance, which means
perpetual coalition, even if the dominant or minority role of the different
parties shifts. The co-operative governance we have in KwaZulu-Natal is
replicated at national level. I believe that it is a model that could be
usefully applied in various parts of Africa so that different interest
groups can share in government, instead of following the desperate winner-
takes-all system, where there are no second prizes and the opponent has to
be obliterated before it obliterates one.

Why should we bind ourselves to the Western adversarial system? As a Roman
historian said, ``Ex Africa semper aliquid novi,'' which means ``Out of
Africa, always something new.''

The peace dividend is still rolling in for us in KwaZulu-Natal. Crime
levels have dropped. Comparisons are odious, I know, but Durban today is a
far safer place than Johannesburg or Cape Town. It is not just I who am
saying this; it is what has been revealed elsewhere. [Interjections.]

The city of Durban is set to develop into a kind of Rotterdam of the
southern hemisphere, a hub port connecting the whole of Africa with Europe,
the Americas and the Far East. Significant industrial investment is being
attracted. Our tourism industry is set to expand phenomenally with the
declaration of the Greater St Lucia Wetland Park as a world heritage site.
In my own portfolio we have plans to quadruple agricultural production over
the next 20 years; to settle significant numbers of new commercial farmers
on state land; to develop agri-industry on a wider scale; and, in doing so,
to create a new economic dynamo that would energise the national economy as
well as the regional one. That is what I call nation-building.

We see no reason why we should not replicate the successes in agriculture
of countries such as India, China, Taiwan and South Korea, whose
agricultural reforms created the consumer markets that then drove
industrial development. Such developments would, of course, channel
significant amounts of earnings to communities which at present are in the
deepest poverty.

This week in our legislature, even up to today, all parties have been
contributing to five days of debate on gender issues - and earlier on
somebody spoke about that as well. Individual provincial Ministers,
including me, reported on what we have done and are doing to eliminate
unfair discrimination against women. I believe this was a first for the
country, and that we were the first legislature, let alone the National
Assembly, to have engaged in this kind of debate, which was prompted by our
women's caucus in KwaZulu-Natal. We are pleased that the Deputy Speaker of
the Northern Province was our guest yesterday. I believe that the concern
about gender issues is part of nation-building.

Just today I attended a prayer breakfast, quite early this morning, in
Durban, which was hosted by the KwaZulu-Natal Ukuthula Peace Challenge.
This is a group of religious leaders of all denominations in KwaZulu-Natal
who have got together to support the Government in its peace and
reconciliation efforts.

We in KwaZulu-Natal are firmly committed to continuing with the
reconciliation that dragged us from the edge of the abyss. I believe that
nobody in either party would contemplate a return to where we were a few
years ago. We are just as firmly committed to the nation-building that
flows naturally from reconciliation. South Africa has, to my mind, a great
and rich diversity of provinces and peoples. That is our strength, and we
will continue building out that strength. [Applause.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Chairperson, colleagues, I will try to be very germane,
since my friend here and all the other speakers before me have said almost
everything that needed to be said.

If ever there was a time in the history of this country when we needed to
be bold and have a collective political will and the fervent desire to
build our nation, in the provincial context, it is, indeed, now. Nation-
building cannot take place without peace and reconciliation, and that is
the truth. Therefore, what was once a Cinderella province, KwaZulu-Natal,
is today the fastest-growing region in this country. Whatever way one may
look at it, politically, socially, economically, educationally and
culturally, KwaZulu-Natal is winning.

The political will that exists between the two dominant black political
organisations, that is the IFP and the ANC, to govern the province jointly
or to form a coalition is testimony to the fact that our province knows the
essence of nation-building. The two organisations have very bitter
experience of fighting against each other, and that is why today they are
both committed to peace and reconciliation.

In our province, although there are, of course, racist aberrations here and
there, we do notice some racial integration, which is happening very
smoothly - to be positive. We have seen this in quite a number of areas. Of
course, on the ground there are mechanisms to actually enforce interracial
harmony.

Nation-building is a process rather than an event, and that needs to be
properly realised by all stakeholders in that particular area. My province
is one of those provinces that have done a lot to advance the whole concept
of nation-building, which, actually, goes hand in hand with patriotism and
political responsibility. This is what has made our province to succeed,
across the board. There is this love for the province which binds us
together. There is this love for the province, which is better than party-
political interests. It is a love that developed even before the 1994
political dispensation. It is this love for the province and for our
country that has actually made us see light at the end of the tunnel. Today
we can actually say that we are South Africans, that we are the children of
one kingdom - that is, KwaZulu.

For instance, we have very good projects on the ground. Right now we have
projects like the King Shaka Airport at La Mercy and the waterfront
development project. We aim to make it the biggest harbour in Africa. We
have an international convention centre where Africa meets the world. The
KZN Tourism Authority promotes tourism in KwaZulu-Natal and we have an
HIV/Aids programme aimed at involving everybody to commit himself or
herself to fight this scourge.

We believe that nation-building must not only deal with material issues; it
must also deal with attitudinal and spiritual changes. As a result we have
the following programmes to address that: the KwaZulu-Natal Peace
Initiative, which deals with healing - it is a kind of healing process; the
diversity training programmes, which teach our people that racism is a sin
against humanity; the economic black empowerment programme, which puts our
emerging black people or entrepreneurs into the economic mainstream of our
province; the ten-a-side committee, composed of both ANC and IFP members,
which addresses each and every symptom of violence which comes up in the
province. Racial integration in schools, in residential areas and in
business zones has ensured that we indeed have a bright future.

Party-political interests, therefore, are less than one's love for the
province. When one looks at the green sugar cane fields, the green
mountains, the beautiful meandering rivers, the natural darkness of
forests, the beautifully singing birds perched on tree tops, the wonderful
city of Durban with its kaleidoscope of cultural diversity and, of course,
most importantly, the Indian Ocean, one is left with nothing except a
complete and pure love for the province. That love supersedes almost
everything. It is that love that binds us.

Notwithstanding the violent conflict of the past, notwithstanding the pain
and suffering associated with killings on both sides, notwithstanding what
was perceived as a deep-seated division between the two parties which,
commentators said, could not be bridged, the leadership, with mature
dignity ... [Time expired.]

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Miss I W Direko): Chairperson, hon Minister
Pahad from the President's Office, hon members in this House this
afternoon, as a disciplined, proud and humble Free Stater, it is my duty to
humbly respond to the question put to me by Mrs Botha.

My reply to Mrs Botha is that it is precisely this insistence of one
section of South African society on its pound of flesh without any
compromise that compromises reconciliation and nation-building in this
country. [Interjections.]

I reckon this should be a give-and-take exercise which is a pivot upon
which efforts towards reconciliation and nation-building must turn.

Let me now get down to the business that I am here for this afternoon.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Gaan jy nou sommer die hele Vrystaat insluk?

DIE PREMIER VAN DIE VRYSTAAT (mej I W Direko): Toe nou, jy begin alweer.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C ACKERMANN: Are you going to swallow the entire Free State now?

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Miss I W Direko): Come on, you are teasing
me again.]

The Free State Executive Council followed the proceedings at the August
2000 conference on racism as well as the ensuing debate about
reconciliation and nation-building with much interest.

South Africa stunned the world by making a peaceful transition to democracy
through debate and mutual agreement, a transition that some call a miracle.

It is therefore not wrong to believe that if we, as a nation, put our minds
to the problem of racism in our society, we can, and will, root it out.
Racism, we must admit, is alive and well in this country. To remedy this
cancer we need to admit that it does exist.

The Free State has had its share of racist incidents, the latest of which,
hon members may recall in horror, was the incident in Sasolburg, where a
black man was tied to a bakkie and dragged to his death. That and the Tempe
massacre are still fresh in our memories, to name but two incidents.

However, we do not want to enter into a debate about racism today, but
rather give our perspective, as a province and as government of that
province, on our goals and objectives towards reconciliation and nation-
building. The Free State wants to build and reconcile through its
programmes.

Die dae van om 'n tafel sit en praat is verby. Ons wil aksie hê. [The days
of sitting round a table and discussing issues are over. We want action.]

Our mission in the Free State is therefore one of promoting economic growth
and development, because, unless there is economic growth, our problems
will continue and the crime rate will continue to rise because an empty
stomach means an empty, unreasoning mind.

Facilitating the development of infrastructure is another contributory
factor. One cannot be happy looking upon mansions when one lives in a
squatter camp.

Ek sê vir almal, hou nou op met rassisme. [I say to everyone, quit racism
right now.]

Investing in the development of all the people of the province, and
ensuring the effective and sustainable use of resources is a priority
because we believe in communication as an important means of facilitating
reconciliation.

Regular discussions between government and interest groups in the province
are held. For instance, we have regular meetings with the business sector
and the University of the Free State. Every department of the University of
the Free State is involved in developmental programmes with the various
departments of government.

In die Vrystaat het ons mos nie 'n probleem met Afrikaans nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [Gelag.] [It is a well-known fact that we have no problem
with Afrikaans in the Free State. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]]

We meet with the agricultural union and with community structures across
the board, and I mean that in both black and white areas we deal with
structures. The plight of farmworkers and the farm murders in our province,
for instance, are receiving attention through a commission of inquiry that
has been set up to investigate the matter appropriately so that we can, at
the end of the day, put a stop to allegations that are thrown backwards and
forwards.

Our project of ``Exco to the People'' takes the executive council to towns
all over the Free State. On a monthly basis we hold discussions on topics
concerning those specific communities, not a section of the community.

I mean all the communities wherever we go, black and white. This assists
government in addressing the issues concerning all the people of the
province. This type of communication surely goes a long way towards nation-
building. The Free State provincial government, through its provincial
strategic plan for the year 2000-2001, has imposed on itself certain values
and principles which, if taken seriously by all parties, will most
certainly result in people of every colour and creed joining hands in
reconciliation and nation-building.

Among these values are honesty with others and ourselves; showing integrity
through our relationship with people regardless of colour; treating one
another with respect, because one cannot demand respect, one commands by it
by the way one treats other people; creating a culture within which people
are encouraged to learn and improve their skills; and fostering teamwork
amongst all the people of the province - I mean all the people - and trust,
and those who refuse to join us we will drag along kicking and screaming.
[Interjections.] [Laughter.]

In the Free State some 66% of the population live in poverty. We believe
that alleviating and restoring dignity are imperative for reconciliation
and nation-building. I am a Motswana, and in Setswana we say: ``Ga e ile
mmotlana.''It does not matter how lowly you may be, you have pride and you
value your dignity. With a view to this we developed an antipoverty
strategy for the province with the goal of reducing poverty in the province
to 45% in the next ten years. It is a long time, but we need to have goals
to get to that point.

Based on the poverty profile of the Free State, there is a predominance of
poverty in the rural areas, and a rural development strategy was developed
to secure economic growth in rural areas and to successfully improve the
lives of rural citizens. I would just like to quote an instance in which
100 women were picked from the poorest rural areas of the Free State and
trained in brick-laying, plastering and so on. I am happy to say that all
100 women received employment after their training.

Another Free State government initiative formed to provide for the economic
growth of the province ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon premier, I regret your time has
expired.

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Miss I W Direko): I shall grudgingly thank
you, Madam Chair, for this opportunity. [Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Chair, premiers, members of the NCOP,
thank you very much for giving me this privilege to respond in a sense to
this very important debate that took place this afternoon. I am going to
apologise now before as soon as I finish speaking I am going to run.
Unfortunately I have to catch a plane because of a meeting I have already
arranged.

It seems to me that a number of common issues have arisen from this debate.
One of these is the relationship between socioeconomic development and
underdevelopment poverty and the question of nation-building and
reconciliation. It would seem to me that most, if not all of us, agree that
if we do not, in a serious way, tackle those fundamental issues confronting
us today, it will be that much more difficult for us to find reconciliation
and to give the process of nation-building the much-needed impetus it
requires.

I should say as somebody who comes from the Other House, and I will come
back to that too, that in a sense your debate is much quieter and much more
genteel than that in the Other House. I think it says more about hon
members here that it does for some of us. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: And intelligent as well.

The MINISTER: Well, I will not say that. [Laughter.] I do not want to lose
my place in that Other House.

First of all let me say that what also emerged from the discussion is that
there are a lot of things happening in the different provinces to address
this particular question. The Northern Cape has done certain things. In
Mpumalanga there are certain things being done. In the Western Cape there
are certain things being done. KwaZulu-Natal has its own very rich
experience of reconciliation. Sometimes, from a broad national point of
view, we tend to forget what is happening in the provinces. I must say that
I myself am particularly pleased to have been here, because, for the first
time, when things are put together in this comprehensive way, one gets a
better picture of what is going on in our country as a whole. I thought
that that was very useful.

However, hon members would excuse my impertinence even though, as I say, I
come from the Other House. I am not sure that following from what was said
about what is happening in the provinces, that we spelt out more concretely
the role that the NCOP can play. I am not sure that we, in a sense, managed
to bring together the rich and diverse experiences in the different
provinces in a way which would suggest what further role the NCOP could
play as an institution to promote reconciliation and nation-building.

If I may make a suggestion, it would be that perhaps following this debate,
the NCOP itself could look and see what more it could do, as an
institution. I am not talking about as representatives coming from
different provinces, because the NCOP is obviously one of our important
national institutions. I would hope that that could happen.

It would also seem to me that in a sense the question arose of the
relationship between what we call affirmative action, and reconciliation
and nation-building. Now, as a Minister, I am obviously asked on many
occasions about the policy that we have. Indeed, I have to refer them to
the Constitution, because it is actually a constitutional obligation that
all our institutions, our structures, our Public Service reflect the actual
composition of our population as well as its gender.

Now I do not know how in my lifetime we are going to create a more gender-
balanced society if we do not actually have affirmative action - conscious
affirmative action - to promote women. I do not know how we will achieve
that otherwise.

I do not know how we will achieve the question of the empowerment of women
and its relationship to nation-building, if we do not consciously follow
and pursue policies which first and foremost empower African women in the
rural areas.

When we talk about affirmative action, it seems to me that it would be
incorrect to reduce it to merely saying that there are some political
parties that are interested in promoting the notion of quotas. Nothing
could be further from the truth. In the same way it is necessary that all
our institutions should correctly reflect the composition of our
population. This surely must also apply to economic power, and I think that
came out in this debate too. Without us challenging and confronting the
question of the skewed distribution of economic power, without us taking
effective action to change the patterns of economic ownership in our
country, I think we will be creating a setback for the common consensus we
have in this place on dealing with the issue of reconciliation and nation-
building.

I was particularly pleased - members will notice that I am not mentioning
any names, very deliberately - that one of the speakers spoke about the
coat of arms. I was looking around in this room and I do not see our new
national coat of arms. I think there is something wrong, but I thought that
was a very telling contribution. How do we use this new national coat of
arms that we have to promote national unity? I think all of us need to pay
a little more attention to it, especially those of us who sit in this
national institution called Parliament.

The other element that, I thought, came out of this very important debate
was a clear signal that there was common understanding, that, in a sense it
is also the responsibility of our white compatriots to take a lead in the
struggle to create a nonracial society. Without this it will seem as if we
are still operating from two different sides, whereas indeed we should be
operating from the same side, whatever our party-political views may be.

Of course one of the speakers was a bit mischievous. Maybe my presence made
him say that he did not think that we should take party-political sides
here. We are going to take party-political sides on those issues on which
we do not have agreement, and there are many issues around which we do not
have agreement. But we do not have to take party-political sides on the
issues that can unite us, on the national issues, and the struggle against
racism is certainly one such issue.

I was also very happy to hear about the way in which premiers try to deal
with very difficult, complex questions of the relationship between farm
owners, farmers and farmworkers and made it clear that we need to deal with
all of those issues in a decisive manner.

Let me express my own thanks. I should say that I did inform my two bosses
that I would be coming here this afternoon. If I do not do what they asked
me to do I might be in difficulty, and that was, from both the President
and the Deputy President, to express their very best wishes for this debate
that members had this afternoon. I should only say that it is with great
pleasure that I will report to them what happened in this debate today.
Thank you very much again for giving me the privilege. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Thank you, Deputy Minister - Minister,
rather. You are excused. I am not demoting you in any way. [Interjections.]
Thank you very much for having been here. That was our debate, hon members,
and I think we have followed it well.

                   ELECTION OF ROTATING DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON

The Chairperson of the NCOP called for nominations.

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Miss I W Direko): Chairperson, It is my
pleasure and privilege to put forward the name of a political activist who
has contributed greatly to the democracy that we enjoy today, a man who has
turned a rural province into an urban area against all odds, a young man
who has a bright future and may, one day, end up as the President of this
country. [Interjections.] I nominate Adv N A Ramathlodi for election as
rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP in terms of section 64(3) of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr N J Mahlangu): Chairperson, I second the
proposal.

The Returning Officer reported to the Chairperson of the NCOP that the
nomination paper had been properly completed.

There being no further nominations, the Chairperson of the NCOP declared
Adv Ramathlodi duly elected as rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP in
terms of section 64(3) of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Premier Ramathlodi, on behalf of all
delegates here present, I congratulate you on having been elected as the
rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP in terms of section 64(3) of the
Constitution. I will now call upon my Deputy Chairperson to address the
House.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN PROVINCE (Adv N A Ramathlodi): I do not know
how to work this microphone, Chairperson. [Laughter.] It is always a
problem, but it seems that we are succeeding this time.

Madam Chair, it is my singular honour and privilege to accept the position
of rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP with all humility. I recognise
and I am humbled by the trust that the House has shown in me by elevating
me to this most distinguished position.

At the outset I pledge my unwavering support and loyalty to you,
Chairperson. I also undertake to perform the functions and responsibilities
associated with my new office with the outmost diligence and to the best of
my ability. I am fully aware of the awesome responsibilities accompanying
this position, given the pivotal role being played by the NCOP in the
constitutional ordering of our nascent democracy. It lends credence to the
principle of co-operative governance so fundamental to our constitutional
order.

In this forum, the poor and the weak find solace in the fact that there is
no repeat of George Orwell's Animal Farm. Here there is none more senior
that others. The happy reality is that the world we seek to create, the
society we are busy building can be found here. How wonderful it is to be
equal, both in law and in the realm of power relations. Accordingly, it is
obligatory that we ensure that the NCOP discharge its mandates in terms of
the Constitution without let or fear. Let the NCOP grow into a robust and
equal partner of the National Assembly. Only then can we claim to be
fulfilling the dictates of our Constitution, both in letter and spirit.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I now call upon the outgoing rotating
Deputy Chairperson, Premier Dipico.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Mr E M Dipico): Madam Chair, I just want
to take this opportunity to thank your office for giving me the support to
discharge my work as the outgoing rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP
and to thank the members for affording me the opportunity. I can tell hon
members that I am no longer a small boy, as they used to call me. I feel
that I rose to the position, but that I have been demoted very quickly.
[Laughter.] When I go back to the Kalahari I look forward to saying that I
was indeed afforded an opportunity and that I have learned.

I also want to take this time to congratulate my colleague Premier
Ramathlodi on this position and to urge him to lead us in order to ensure
that the NCOP once more takes its work forward, as envisaged by the
Constitution, and ensures that we can craft our work and leave an indelible
mark on our country. From the Northern Cape, I give over to Premier
Ramathlodi of the Northern Province and I wish him good luck. [Applause.]

Ms B N DLULANE: Madam Chair, the Eastern Cape supports the election of the
hon Comrade Ramathlodi as the rotating Deputy Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces. Sikunqwenelela impumelelo. [We wish you good luck].

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Miss I W Direko): Chairperson, the Free
State is foursquare behind Adv Ramathlodi. [Applause.]

Mr P MASHATILE (Gauteng): Madam Chair, on behalf of Gauteng, we wish
Premier Ramathlodi great success. We are, of course, as Gauteng, waiting
patiently for our turn. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH (KwaZulu-Natal): Madam Chair, I come here with the blessing and
mandate of the premier, who did indicate to me that if I did anything
correctly today, it should be to support the nomination of Premier
Ramathlodi, which I do with pleasure and wish to congratulate him.
[Applause.]

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr N J Mahlangu): Madam Chair, Premier
Ramathlodi is my neighbour. We congratulate him very much and promise him
our support, otherwise we would not have seconded his nomination. It would
be illogical for us to say that we will not give him the necessary support.
We are behind him. [Applause.]

Mr Z P TOLO (North West): Chairperson, on behalf of the province and our
premier, we would like to congratulate Premier Ramathlodi, and we have no
doubt that he will carry out his duties with utter diligence and
commitment. We congratulate him. [Applause.]

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Mevrou die Voorsitter, van die Suide aan die verre Noorde
ons hartlike gelukwense aan adv Ramathlodi. Dit is vir my 'n voorreg om hom
namens die Premier van die Wes-Kaap, wat sy verskoning aangebied het en nie
hier kan wees nie, baie hartlik geluk te wens en hom baie sterkte toe te
wens in hierdie baie belangrike pos wat hy gaan beklee. Ek hoop werklik ons
gaan in die premier iemand sien wat gereeld in ons Stoel kom sit, want ons
sal dit ook waardeer as hy sy gesig so af en toe in die Stoel wys.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C ACKERMANN: Madam Chairperson, from the South to the far North we
extend our heartfelt congratulations to Adv Ramathlodi. It is a privilege
for me to congratulate him on behalf of the Premier of the Western Cape,
who has tendered his apologies and cannot be here, and to wish him all the
best in this very important position which he will be filling. I truly hope
that in the premier we will have someone who will often sit in our Chair,
because we would also appreciate it if he were present in the Chair from
time to time.] [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Ek hoop so! [I hope so!]

Order! That concludes the election of the rotating Deputy Chairperson of
the National Council of Provinces, and I add my own congratulations to you,
Premier Ramathlodi. As Mr Ackermann has said, we hope that you will take up
the opportunity to preside when on one of your visits to the National
Council.

                         FAREWELL TO MS D S LE ROUX

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Before we conclude the business of the
day, it is with regret that I must announce that Ms Le Roux, the manager of
our procedural services, has resigned as manager of the procedural unit and
as a member of staff within Parliament. This is occasioned by family
circumstances that force her to leave Parliament.

We are most sorry to lose the services of Ms Le Roux, who has been part of
the formative time of the National Council of Provinces and its maturing
beyond 1999. I think that all members will be aware of the supportive and
constructive role that she has played, particularly in the area of
oversight in local government intervention matters with respect to section
139 of the Constitution.

I have benefited greatly from the support that she has provided to me as
Chairperson and to the Deputy Chairperson, as well as to committees within
the National Council of Provinces. We are most sorry to lose her services,
but we wish her well in any new endeavour that she undertakes. I have
assured her that she should not imagine that she is escaping from us,
because her skills may be called upon from time to time. We wish you all
the best, Ms Le Roux. Thank you very much for your services to the House.
[Applause.]

The Council adjourned at 16:38.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 23 JUNE 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government and to the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration. The Report of the Auditor-
         General contained in the following report is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Training Board for Local
         Government Bodies for 1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 1998-99 [RP 66-2000].
     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Works and to the Select Committee on Public Services:


         Tiro - Community Based Public Works Programme Publication, June
         2000, Volume One Number One.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and to the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises:


         Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
         Development and Labour Council for 1999-2000.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     Select Committee on Finance:


     (1)    Regulation No R.556 published in Government Gazette No 21249
         dated 31 May 2000, Treasury Regulations made in terms of section
         76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


     (2)    Regulation No R.562 published in Government Gazette No 21253
         dated 5 June 2000, Draft Regulations published for comment in
         terms of section 5 of the Preferential Procurement Policy
         Framework Act, 2000 (Act No 5 of 2000).

                            MONDAY, 17 JULY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry on 6 June 2000 submitted a
         draft of the Competition Second Amendment Bill, 2000, as well as
         the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation,
         to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs by the
         Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with
         Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 30
         June 2000 submitted a draft of the Directorate of Special
         Operations Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum explaining the
         objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs by the Speaker and the Chairperson,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (3)    The Minister of Finance on 4 July 2000 submitted a draft of the
         Finance Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum explaining the
         objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance by the Speaker and the Chairperson,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (4)    The Minister of Health on 4 July 2000 submitted a draft of the
         National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2000, as well as the
         memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health and
         the Select Committee on Social Services by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

                           THURSDAY, 20 JULY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:

    The membership of the Select Committee mentioned below has been
     changed, as follows:


     Members' and Provincial Legislative Proposals:


     ANC:
     Bhabha, M    Mpumalanga
     Kgware, D M  Northern Cape
     Maloyi, P D N     North West
     Ndzanga, R A Gauteng
     Nkuna, C     Northern Province
     Suka, L      Eastern Cape
     Thomson, B (Alt)  KwaZulu-Natal


     DP:
     Botha, C     Free State
     Lever, L G (Alt)  North West


     IFP:
     Bhengu, M J  KwaZulu-Natal


     New NP:
     Matthee, P A      KwaZulu-Natal


     UDM:
     Nyakane, R M Northern Province


     ACDP:
     Durr, K D S  Western Cape



COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
     Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons on National
     Youth Commission, dated 29 June 2000:


     The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
     Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons, having considered the
     request from the Minister in The Presidency regarding the appointment
     of Commissioners to serve on the National Youth Commission, referred to
     it, reports as follows:


     1.     Advertisements were placed in the printed and electronic media
         from 23 to 27 June 2000, and 86 nominations were received. On 28
         June the Committee shortlisted the following nominees for
         interviews:
         Cecil Charles Davids, Marion Thembi Khambule, Yoliswa Makhasi,
         Petros Nketu Matima, Ntsokolo Ishmail Mbalula, Prince Nkintsing
         Mokotedi, Langanane Lucy Catherine Mphelo, Ngwanakopi Gladys
         Ramushu, Daniel van Vuuren and Dr V Pillay.


         Dr Pillay withdrew her nomination, and the Committee included
         Vuyani Dyantyi as the next person to form part of the 10
         candidates to be interviewed.


     2.     On 29 June, the Committee spent nine hours interviewing the said
         10 candidates. The principles contained in section 4 of the
         National Youth Commission Act, 1996, (Act No. 19 of 1996), were
         duly taken into account during the entire process.


     3.     The Committee accordingly recommends, in accordance with section
         4 of the National Youth Commission Act, 1996, the following
         candidates (in order of preference) for consideration by the
         President in appointing five full-time members to the National
         Youth Commission:


         Yoliswa Makhasi, Ntsokolo Ishmail Mbalula, Daniel van Vuuren,
         Petros Nketu Matima, Ngwanakopi Gladys Ramushu, Langanane Lucy
         Catherine Mphelo and Vuyani Dyantyi.


     Report to be considered.

                           TUESDAY, 15 AUGUST 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Public Enterprises on 27 July 2000 submitted a
         draft of the Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill, 2000, as well
         as the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises by the Speaker and the Chairperson,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Minister of Education on 27 July 2000 submitted drafts of
         the Adult Basic Education and Training Bill, Education Laws
         Amendment Bill, and Higher Education Amendment Bill, 2000, as well
         as the memorandums explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The drafts have been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Education and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation
         by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance
         with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (3)    The Minister of Finance on 1 August 2000 submitted a draft of
         the Banks Amendment Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance by the Speaker and the Chairperson,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).
     (4)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy on 3 August 2000 submitted a
         draft of the Abolition of Lebowa Mineral Trust Bill, 2000, as well
         as the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in
         accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (5)    The Minister of Sport and Recreation on 8 August 2000 submitted
         a draft of the South African Boxing Bill, 2000, as well as the
         memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
         Recreation and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation by
         the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with
         Joint Rule 159(2).


     (6)    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology on 11
         August 2000 submitted drafts of the National Council for Library
         and Information Services Bill, Cultural Laws Amendment Bill and
         Cultural Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2000, as well as the
         memorandums explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         drafts have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts,
         Culture, Science and Technology and the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation by the Speaker and the Chairperson,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (7)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government on 11 August
         2000 submitted a draft of the Local Government: Municipal
         Structures Amendment Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government and the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively,
         in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 11
         August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Directorate of Special Operations Bill [B 39 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Justice
              and Constitutional Development - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 21436 of 2
              August 2000.]


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 14
         August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Finance Bill [B 40 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
              (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 21455 of 3
              August 2000.]


     (3)    The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         15 August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Competition Second Amendment Bill [B 41 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Trade and
                  Industry - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of
                  Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
                  Government Gazette No 21479 of 16 August 2000.]


         (ii)    Adult Basic Education and Training Bill [B 42 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Education - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of
                  Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
                  Government Gazette No 21461 of 7 August 2000.]


         (iii)   Developmental Welfare Governance Bill [B 43 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Welfare and Population Development - National Assembly)
                  [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
                  introduction published in Government Gazette No 21369 of
                  21 July 2000.]


         (iv)    National Council for Library and Information Services Bill
                  [B 44 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio
                  Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology -
                  National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
                  notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 21452 of 4 August 2000.]


         (v)     Cultural Laws Amendment Bill [B 45 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Arts,
                  Culture, Science and Technology - National Assembly)
                  [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
                  introduction published in Government Gazette No 21452 of
                  4 August 2000.]


         (vi)    Cultural Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 46 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Arts, Culture, Science and Technology - National
                  Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
                  of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
                  21452 of 4 August 2000.]



3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (a)     National House of Traditional Leaders Amendment Bill [B
               15B - 2000] - Act No 20 of 2000 (assented to and signed by
               President on 29 June 2000);


         (b)     Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Second Amendment
               Bill [B 23 - 2000] - Act No 21 of 2000 (assented to and
               signed by President on 29 June 2000);


        (c)      Appropriation Bill [B 7 and 7A - 2000] - Act No 23 of 2000
               (assented to and signed by President on 26 July 2000);


        (d)      Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences
               Amendment Bill [B 31B - 2000] - Act No 24 of 2000 (assented
               to and signed by President on 26 July 2000);


        (e)      Road Traffic Management Corporation Amendment Bill [B 32B
               - 2000] - Act No 25 of 2000 (assented to and signed by
               President on 26 July 2000);


        (f)      Protected Disclosures Bill [B 30B - 2000] - Act No 26 of
               2000 (assented to and signed by President on 1 August 2000);


        (g)      Local Government: Municipal Electoral Bill [B 35B - 2000]
               - Act No 27 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on
               6 July 2000);


        (h)      Identification Amendment Bill [B 33 - 2000] - Act No 28 of
               2000 (assented to and signed by President on 26 July 2000);


        (i)      Local Government: Cross-boundary Municipalities Bill [B
               37B - 2000] - Act No 29 of 2000 (assented to and signed by
               President on 30 June 2000);


        (j)      Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 38 - 2000] - Act No 30 of
               2000 (assented to and signed by President on 16 July 2000);
               and


        (k)      South African Council for Educators Bill [B 26D - 2000] -
               Act No 31 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 26
               July 2000).

                          WEDNESDAY, 23 AUGUST 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Defence on 28 July 2000 submitted a draft of the
         Conventional Arms Control Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs by the Speaker
         and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule
         159(2).


     (2)    The Minister of Public Works on 15 August 2000 submitted a draft
         of the Construction Industry Development Board Bill, 2000, as well
         as the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Public Works and the Select Committee on Public Services by the
         Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with
         Joint Rule 159(2).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         16 August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Bills of Exchange Amendment Bill [B 47 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance -
                  National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
                  notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 21316 of 23 June 2000.]


         (ii)    Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 48 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Education -
                  National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
                  notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 21461 of 7 August 2000.]


     (2)    The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         17 August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Abolition of Lebowa Mineral Trust Bill [B 49 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Minerals and Energy - National Assembly) [Explanatory
                  summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction
                  published in Government Gazette No 21420 of 28 July
                  2000.]


         (ii)    Conventional Arms Control Bill [B 50 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Defence -
                  National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
                  notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 21426 of 28 July 2000.]


         (iii)   Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B
                  51 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio
                  Committee on Provincial and Local Government - National
                  Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
                  of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
                  21475 of 11 August 2000.]


     (3)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 18
         August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Bill [B 53 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Housing - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill
                  and prior notice of its introduction published in
                  Government Gazette No 21481 of 18 August 2000.]


     (4)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Council of
         Provinces on 18 August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     National Health Laboratory Services Bill [B 52 - 2000]
                  (National Council of Provinces - sec 76) - (Select
                  Committee on Social Services - National Council of
                  Provinces) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
                  of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
                  20520 of 1 October 1999.]


     (5)    The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         22 August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     South African Weather Service Bill [B 54 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Environmental Affairs and Tourism - National Assembly)
                  [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
                  introduction published in Government Gazette No 20979 of
                  17 March 2000.]


         (ii)    Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 55 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Education -
                  National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
                  notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 21461 of 7 August 2000.]


         (iii)   Banks Amendment Bill [B 56 - 2000] (National Assembly -
                  sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National
                  Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
                  of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
                  21437 of 3 August 2000.]

3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bill:


         (a)     National Land Transport Transition Bill [B 5B - 2000] -
               Act No 22 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 17
               August 2000).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Documents, in terms of section 3(11)(a) of the Public Protector Act,
     1994 (Act No 23 of 1994), setting out the remuneration, allowances and
     other conditions of employment determined by the Public Protector for
     staff in his office.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development and to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs for consideration and report.

2.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:
     Reports of the National Archivist and the National State Herald for
     1998-99.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Agreement of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
         concerning the adoption of uniform technical prescriptions for
         wheeled vehicles, equipment and parts which can be fitted and/or
         be used on wheeled vehicles and the conditions for reciprocal
         recognition of approvals granted on the basis of these
         prescriptions [1958 Agreement], tabled in terms of section 231(2)
         of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the agreement.


     (3)    Agreement of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
         concerning the establishment of Global Technical Regulations for
         wheeled vehicles, equipment and parts which can be fitted and/or
         be used on wheeled vehicles [Global Agreement], tabled in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.
     (4)    Explanatory Memorandum to the agreement.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and to the
     Select Committee on Economic Affairs for consideration and report.

                           FRIDAY, 25 AUGUST 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Foreign Affairs on 16 August 2000 submitted a
         draft of the African Renaissance and International Co-operation
         Fund Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum explaining the objects
         of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in
         terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Select Committee on
         Economic Affairs by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively,
         in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         23 August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 57 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Public Enterprises - National Assembly) [Explanatory
                  summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction
                  published in Government Gazette No 21214 of 29 May 2000.]


         (ii)    South African Boxing Bill [B 58 - 2000] (National Assembly
                  - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation
                  - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
                  prior notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 21456 of 14 August 2000.]

3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills on 24
         August 2000:


         (i)     Directorate of Special Operations Bill [B 39 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Justice and Constitutional Development - National
                  Assembly).


         (ii)    Finance Bill [B 40 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
                  (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National Assembly).


         (iii)   Competition Second Amendment Bill [B 41 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Trade and
                  Industry - National Assembly).


         (iv)    Developmental Welfare Governance Bill [B 43 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Welfare and Population Development - National Assembly).


         (v)     National Council for Library and Information Services Bill
                  [B 44 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio
                  Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology -
                  National Assembly).


         (vi)    Cultural Laws Amendment Bill [B 45 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Arts,
                  Culture, Science and Technology - National Assembly).


         (vii)   Bills of Exchange Amendment Bill [B 47 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance -
                  National Assembly).


         (viii)  Abolition of Lebowa Mineral Trust Bill [B 49 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75)  - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Minerals and Energy - National Assembly).


         (ix)    Conventional Arms Control Bill [B 50 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Defence -
                  National Assembly).


         (x)     Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B
                  51 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio
                  Committee on Provincial and Local Government - National
                  Assembly).


         (xi)    Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Bill [B 53 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Housing - National Assembly).


         (xii)   South African Weather Service Bill [B 54 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Environmental Affairs and Tourism - National Assembly).


         (xiii)  Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 55 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Education -
                  National Assembly).


         (xiv)   Banks Amendment Bill [B 56 - 2000] (National Assembly -
                  sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National
                  Assembly).


         (xv)    Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 57 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Public Enterprises - National Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(4), classified the following Bills as section 76 Bills on 24
         August 2000:


         (i)     Adult Basic Education and Training Bill [B 42 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Education - National Assembly).


         (ii)    Cultural Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 46 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Arts, Culture, Science and Technology - National
                  Assembly).


         (iii)   Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 48 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on Education -
                  National Assembly).


         (iv)    National Health Laboratory Services Bill [B 52 - 2000]
                  (National Council of Provinces - sec 76) - (Select
                  Committee on Social Services - National Council of
                  Provinces).

4.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    On 15 August 2000 it was announced that the Adult Basic
         Education and Training Bill [B 42 - 2000] and Cultural Laws Second
         Amendment Bill [B 46 - 2000] had been introduced as sec 75 Bills.
         Those entries were not correct and should read as follows:


              Adult Basic Education and Training Bill [B 42 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 76);
              Cultural Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 46 - 2000] (National
              Assembly - sec 76).


     (2)    On 23 August 2000 it was announced that the Education Laws
         Amendment Bill [B 48 - 2000] had been introduced as a sec 75 Bill.
         That entry was not correct and should read as follows:


              Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 48 - 2000] (National Assembly
              - sec 76).

                           TUESDAY, 29 AUGUST 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 28
         July 2000 submitted a draft of the Judicial Matters Amendment
         Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum explaining the objects of
         the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in
         terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and
         the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs by the
         Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with
         Joint Rule 159(2).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Special Report of the Auditor-General on donor funding and
         remuneration of a former adviser in the Office of the Premier of
         Mpumalanga [RP 123-99].


     (2)    Report of the Public Protector on an investigation of complaints
         in connection with the Special Report of the Auditor-General on
         donor funding and remuneration of a former adviser in the Office
         of the Premier of Mpumalanga, dated 2 December 1999, and matters
         incidental thereto.

2.    The Minister of Safety and Security:


     Regulation No R.721 published in the Government Gazette No 21375 dated
     21 July 2000, Regulations for the South African Police Service made in
     terms of section 24(1)(g) of the South African Police Service Act, 1995
     (Act No 68 of 1995).

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
         and Industrial Research for 1999-2000, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 1999-2000.


     (2)    The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research's Technology
         Impact for 2000.

                          WEDNESDAY, 30 AUGUST 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Council of
         Provinces on 30 August 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Construction Industry Development Board Bill [B 59 - 2000]
                  (National Council of Provinces - sec 76) - (Select
                  Committee on Public Services - National Council of
                  Provinces) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
                  of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
                  21477 of 15 August 2000.]


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security:


     Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate for the period
     December 1999 to May 2000, submitted in terms of section 18(5)(c) of
     the Domestic Violence Act, 1998.

                          FRIDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (a)     Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2000] - Act No 6 of 2000
              (assented to and signed by President on 30 August 2000);
        (b)      Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Amendment Bill [B
              11D - 2000] - Act No 9 of 2000 (assented to and signed by
              President on 30 August 2000); and


        (c)      Road Accident Fund Commission Amendment Bill [B 12 - 2000]
              - Act No 18 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on
              30 August 2000).


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria for the
         Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
         with respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital Gains, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.
     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Double Taxation Agreement between
         the Republic of South Africa and Nigeria.


     (3)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the People's Republic of China for the
         Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
         with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
         of the Constitution, 1996.


     (4)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Double Taxation Agreement between
         the Republic of South Africa and the People's Republic of China.

                          TUESDAY, 5 SEPTEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (1)    Accounts on the National Government for 1998-1999 [RP 201-99].


     (2)    Urban Transport Fund for 1998-99 [RP 97-2000].


     (3)    Financial Statements of the National Hiking Way Fund for 1998-99
         [RP 105-2000].


     (4)    Financial Statements of the Manpower Development Authority of
         Bophuthatswana for 1998-99 [RP 106-2000].


     (5)    Group Annual Financial Statements of the SFF Association for
         1997-98 [RP 108-99].


     (6)    Financial Statements of the Milk Board for the 10 Month period
         ended 31 December 1997 and the Liquidation Account for the period
         1 January 1998 to 31 December 1999 [RP 109-2000].


     (7)    Group Annual Financial Statements of the SFF Association for
         1996-97 [RP 146-99].
     (8)    Financial Statements of the National Supplies Procurement Fund
         for 1998-99 [RP 148-2000].


     (9)    Financial Statements of the Maize Board for 1998-99 [RP 149-
         2000].


     (10)   Financial Statements of the South African Library for the Blind
         for 1998-99 [RP 151-2000].


     (11)   Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency for 1998-99
         [RP 157-2000].

2.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.276 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21016 dated 1 April 2000, Seventh Amendment of the Aliens
         Control Regulations made in terms of the Aliens Control Act, 1991
         (Act No 96 of 1991).


     (2)    Government Notice No R.249 published in the Government Gazette
         No 20988 dated 14 March 2000, Sixth Amendment of the Marriages
         Regulations, made in terms of the Marriage Act, 1961 (Act No 25 of
         1961).


     (3)    Government Notice No R.250 published in the Government Gazette
         No 20990 dated 17 March 2000, Fifth Amendment of the regulations,
         made in terms of the South African Citizenship Act, 1995 (Act No
         88 of 1995).


     (4)    Government Notice No R.251 published in the Government Gazette
         No 20991 dated 17 March 2000, Sixth Amendment of the regulations,
         made in terms of the South African Passport and Travel Documents
         Act, 1994 (Act No 4 of 1994).


     (5) Government Notice No R.275 published in the Government Gazette No
         21015 dated 1 April 2000, Third Amendment of the regulations, made
         in terms of the Identification Act, 1997 (Act No 68 of 1997).

3.    The Minister of Transport:


     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the People's Republic of China on Maritime
         Transport, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the agreement.


     (3)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Roads Agency Limited for 1998-99, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial statements for 1998-99 [RP 95-
         2000].


     (4)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail
         Commuter Corporation Limited for 1998-99, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 1998-99.


     (5)    Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
         Africa Limited for 1999-2000.


     (6)    Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
         Navigation Services Company Limited for 1999-2000.

                         WEDNESDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Audit Commission in terms of section 10(3) of the Audit
     Arrangements Act, 1992 on the Report and Financial Statements of the
     Office of the Auditor-General for 1999-2000 [RP 39-2000].


                         THURSDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Health:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Medical Research Council for
     1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 1998-99.

                          MONDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     DECISION BY THE SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE CHAIRPERSON OF
     THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES TO ESTABLISH AN AD HOC JOINT
     COMMITTEE ON GENERAL INTELLIGENCE LAW AMENDMENT BILL, 2000 [B 36-2000]
     IN TERMS OF JOINT RULE 138


     1.     The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
         National Council of Provinces acting jointly, after consultation
         with the Chief Whip of the Majority Party in the National Assembly
         and the Chief Whip of the Council have decided, in terms of Joint
         Rule 138, to establish an Ad Hoc Joint Committee on General
         Intelligence Law Amendment Bill, 2000, to consider and report, in
         accordance with Part 3 and any other relevant provisions of
         Chapter 4 of the Joint Rules, to the National Assembly and the
         National Council of Provinces on the General Intelligence Law
         Amendment Bill, No 36 of 2000.


     2.     The Committee to consist of 21 members of the National Assembly
         and 9 members of the National Council of Provinces.


     3.     The Committee to confer with the Joint Standing Committee on
         Intelligence.


     4.     The Committee to submit its report on the Bill by not later than
         5 October 2000.


     5.     The Committee may exercise those powers in Joint Rule 32 that
         may assist it in carrying out their task.


     F Ginwala
     G N Pandor
     Speaker      Chairperson
     National Assembly National Council of Provinces

2.    The Minister for Safety and Security:


     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
     the Government of the People's Republic of China in respect of Police
     Co-operation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
     1996.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries Board for
     1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 1998-99.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
     the African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds Agreement, dated 10 May 2000:


         The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
         considered the request for approval by Parliament of The Agreement
         on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds,
         referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.


     Report to be considered.

                         TUESDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)     The Minister of Housing on 29 August 2000 submitted a draft of
         the Housing Amendment Bill, 2000, and the memorandum explaining
         the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Housing and the Select Committee on Public Services,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).



TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs:


     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Provincial Administration Support Programme in the
         Eastern Cape", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Decentralised Development Planning", tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Economic and Development Policy Advisory Programme",
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (4)    General Agreement of Co-operation between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United Mexican
         States, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises:


     (1)    Policy Framework for an Accelerated Agenda Towards the
         Restructuring of State Owned Enterprises.


     (2)    A Summary of the Policy Framework for an Accelerated Agenda for
         the Restructuring of State Owned Enterprises.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Statutes of the United Nations African Institute for the
         Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Statutes of the United Nations
         African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
         Offenders.

4.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.567 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21245 dated 9 June 2000, List of approved facilities for the
         purpose of performing community service in 2001 by medical
         practitioners, made in terms of the Health Professions Act, 1974.


     (2)    Government Notice No 2234 published in the Government Gazette No
         21292 dated 21 June 2000, the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied
         Health Service Professions Amendment Bill, 2000 published for
         comment.


     (3) Government Notice No 644 published in the Government Gazette No
         21313 dated 30 June 2000, Authorisation in terms of section 24 of
         the Human Tissue Act, 1983.


     (4)    Government Notice No R.570 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21256 dated 5 June 2000, Regulations made in terms of the
         Medical Schemes Act, 1998.


     (5)    Goewerment Kennisgewing No R.569 gepubliseer in die
         Staatskoerant No 21255 gedateer 5 Junie 2000, Regulasies geskep
         ingevolge die Wet of Mediese Skemas, 1998.
     (6)    Goewerment Kennisgewing No R.638 gepubliseer in die
         Staatskoerant No 21317 gedateer 22 Junie 2000, Regulasies geskep
         ingevolge die Wet of Mediese Skemas, 1998.

                        WEDNESDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     On 12 September 2000 the following document was presented, in
     accordance with the resolution adopted by the Assembly and the Council
     on 6 June 2000, to the Speaker of the National Assembly and the
     Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces by the South African
     Parliamentary Observer Mission to the Parliamentary Elections held in
     Zimbabwe:

 REPORT OF THE SA PARLIAMENTARY OBSERVER MISSION TO ZIMBABWE: 7-27 JUNE 2000


     1.     INTRODUCTION


     Following an invitation to the international community by the
     Government of Zimbabwe to send observers to be present during the
     parliamentary elections on 24 and 25 June 2000, Parliament mandated a
     multi-party delegation to observe the elections from 7 to 27 June 2000.


     The delegation consisted of 20 Members of Parliament and 4 officials.
     The delegation was known as the South African Parliamentary Observer
     Mission. The members of the Mission appear in Appendix A.


     The SA Parliamentary Observer Mission was very conscious of the fact
     that it was unique amongst observer missions in that:


     (a) It was the only delegation consisting entirely of public
         representatives;


     (b)    It was a delegation from Zimbabwe's neighbour and biggest
         trading partner. The two countries have had cultural, political,
         religious and historical links for centuries.
     2.     MANDATE AND APPROACH


     The S A Parliamentary Observer Mission received a clear mandate from
     Parliament to observe the elections on its behalf and to report back to
     it. Arising from this mandate, and taking into account accepted
     international practice by election observer teams, the Mission was
     agreed that:


     (a)    Its task was to observe and not monitor the elections i.e. that
         its mandate was neither to make interventions in the electoral
         process it was sent to observe nor to interfere in the internal
         political dynamics and debates of Zimbabwe;


     (b)    It would approach its task in an open minded and balanced manner
         and would not reach any conclusions until it had interacted with
         all relevant role-players and had had the opportunity to observe
         the situation for itself;


     (c)    Its task would be to report to Parliament on its observations.


     In addition it was agreed that the Mission would take the following
     approach to its mandate:


     (a)    It would act as a united delegation representing the Parliament
         and people of South Africa. It would attempt to resolve any
         political differences within the delegation itself whilst in
         Zimbabwe or, if necessary, in Parliament, upon its return. In this
         regard it was also agreed that the Mission would speak with one
         voice through the leader of the delegation whilst it was in
         Zimbabwe;


     (b)    It would interact with other observer missions and, where
         appropriate, co-operate with them in terms of logistic
         arrangements, but would maintain its independence at all times.


     Members of the Mission signed an undertaking to conduct themselves in
     terms of the regulations set out by the Elections Directorate of
     Zimbabwe, a copy of which is attached as Appendix B.


     3.     BACKGROUND


     The following brief historical background provides the context against
     which the parliamentary elections on 24 and 25 June 2000 took place:


     From the late 1800's to 1965 Zimbabwe was a British Colony known as
     Rhodesia.  In 1965 Ian Smith issued a Unilateral Declaration of
     Independence from Britain. From the mid-1960's the struggle for
     independence and full democratic rights took the form of war of
     liberation led by the Zimbabwe African People's Union (Zapu), led by
     Joshua Nkomo, and the Zimbabwe African National Union (Zanu), led by
     Robert Mugabe.  The rural populations in the communal areas and on the
     commercial farms bore the brunt of the harshest aspects of the war.


     In 1980 the Lancaster House agreement led to elections and Robert
     Gabriel Mugabe became the first President of an independent Zimbabwe.


     In the early 80s a bloody and violent conflict in parts of Matabeleland
     (known as the "gukhurahundi") took place. In 1987 PF-Zapu and Zanu-PF
     merged into Zanu-PF.


     Since 1980 there have been regular elections but there has been no
     serious challenger to ZANU-PF and the percentage polls have been low.
     A major reason for the interest in the Zimbabwe 2000 Elections by
     observers throughout the world and in SADC, in particular, is because
     the referendum result in February 2000 that rejected a proposed new
     Constitution was unexpected.


     The main contest was between the ZANU-PF of President Robert Mugabe and
     the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) that is led by former Zimbabwe
     Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU) General-Secretary, Morgan Tsvangirai.
     They and ZANU-PF were the only parties to contest all 120 seats.  A
     number of smaller parties participated as well as a large number of
     independent candidates. A list of parties contesting the election is
     set out in Appendix C.


     4.     PROGRAMME OF ACTION


     The SA Parliamentary Observer Mission adopted the following programme
     of action:


     4.1    Training
       On 2 June 2000 the Independent Electoral Institute of Southern Africa
         (IEISA) conducted a training workshop for members of the Mission.
         The workshop covered the accepted international standards,
         protocols and practice for election observer missions as well as
         the legal and institutional framework within which the Zimbabwean
         elections would be conducted.  The Mission also received a
         background briefing from the Department of Foreign Affairs.


     4.2    Briefing Meetings: 7 - 14 June 2000


       The Mission spent the period from 7-14 June 2000 in Harare receiving
         briefings from a wide range of political parties, media
         organisations, organisations from civil society, government
         departments as well as the South African High Commission.


       These briefings enabled the Mission to form an overall picture of the
         situation in Zimbabwe.  The list of briefings is set out in
         Appendix D.


     4.3    Visits to Provinces: 14 - 18 June 2000


       From 14-18 June 2000 the Mission divided itself into six teams to
         visit the following Provinces:


       Mashonaland East
       Mashonaland West
       Masvingo
       Manicaland
       Midlands
       Matabeleland


       The teams visited the Provinces with the mandate to:


         1. Meet with political parties, candidates, government departments
              and civil society to get briefings on the situation at local
              level.   Members of the Mission sought to meet the Police and
              the Provincial Registrars responsible for the election.


         2. Observe preparations for election days.


         3. Observe the progress of the campaign and in particular to
              evaluate the information received during the briefings
              received in Harare - especially with regard to the prevalence
              of violence and intimidation.


     4.4    Report back from Provincial Visits: 19 - 22 June 2000


       From 19 - 22 June 2000 the six teams returned to Harare to report on
         their observations in the different provinces, to receive further
         briefings and to plan how the election days themselves would be
         observed.


     4.5    Visits to Provinces during election days: 22 - 26 June 2000


       From 22-26 June 2000 the six teams returned to the different
         provinces to:


         1. Observe the logistic preparations for the voting (24 and 25
              June) and counting (26 June) days.
         2. Familiarise themselves with the location of the polling and
              counting stations which they would visit on the voting and
              counting days.


         3. Observe the election and counting process.


     4.6    Report Back


       The six teams returned to Harare on the 26 June 2000.  They reported
         back to the Mission as a whole on what they had observed in the
         different Provinces. The Mission had a final meeting on the
         morning of 27 June 2000 and the wording of an interim press
         statement was agreed upon.


     4.7    Reportback to Parliament


       It was agreed that the Mission would produce a consolidated report to
         Parliament representing the views of the Mission.


     5.     ELECTORAL INSTITUTIONS


     The elections were conducted under the auspices of a number of
     institutions:


     5.1    Elections Directorate


       The Elections Directorate is a body consisting of senior
         representatives of government departments that are involved in
         various aspects of conducting elections including Home Affairs,
         Transport, Public Works, the Zimbabwe National Defence Force and
         the Zimbabwe Republic Police.  The Registrar General sits on, and
         plays an important role in the Elections Directorate.


     5.2    Registrar General


       The Registrar General (RG) is responsible for the registration of all
         births, marriages and deaths, the issuing of national identity
         documents and passports and the compilation of a national voters'
         roll.  The RG provides the Demarcation Commission with the
         necessary information to demarcate constituencies.  The RG is
         responsible for administering Polling and Counting and appoints
         the Presiding Officers and staff.  The RG announces the results.


     5.3    Provincial Registrars


       These civil servants are responsible to the Registrar General and
         handle his/her responsibilities in each Province.


     5.4    Demarcation Commission


       This Commission is headed by a Judge of the Supreme Court and is
         responsible for demarcating the boundaries of Zimbabwe's 120
         constituencies. Zimbabwe has constituencies with a "first past the
         post" system and therefore the demarcation of constituencies is a
         matter of great interest.  Constituencies may be allocated between
         30 000 to over 50 000 voters. An additional 30 MPs are appointed
         by the President in terms of the Constitution and do not have
         constituencies.


     5.5    Electoral Supervisory Commission (ESC)


       This Commission is created in terms of the Constitution of Zimbabwe.
         It is an independent body appointed by the President to monitor
         elections and to pronounce whether they were conducted in a free
         and fair manner.


     6.     PREPARATIONS FOR VOTING AND COUNTING


     As indicated above the Registrar General and the Elections Directorate
     were primarily responsible for the logistic preparations for the
     elections. On the basis of the briefings it received from the Registrar
     General, Provincial Registrars as well as it's own observations it
     appeared to the Mission that these preparations were done in a very
     thorough manner. This was later vindicated by the manner in which
     voting and counting proceeded.


     Complaints were received regarding the following aspects of the
     logistic preparations for elections:


     1.     Many opposition parties were unhappy with the manner in which
         constituencies had been demarcated and alleged that the
         Demarcation Commission had displayed a bias towards rural
         constituencies, which were perceived to be Zanu-PF strongholds.


     2.     There were allegations that a large number of dead people were
         still on the voters roll. The Registrar General conceded that this
         was possible but explained that the process of removing a dead
         person was quite lengthy and could not be done without conclusive
         proof of death.


     3.     The manner in which Zimbabwean soldiers fighting in the DRC were
         to cast postal votes.


     4.     There were allegations that the ballot boxes had removable
         bottoms and that this would lead to fraud. This concern proved
         unfounded.


     5.     The supplementary voters roll only became available at a late
         stage and was not easily accessible to all candidates.


     The Mission received complaints from the Electoral Supervisory
     Commission and opposition parties that the ESC had been stripped of all
     real power and capacity to fulfil its constitutional obligations.  In
     particular the complaint arose that the Registrar General had taken
     over the function of accrediting domestic monitors. The Registrar
     General indicated that accreditation was a purely administrative
     matter. Monitors were ultimately accredited by the ESC, albeit two days
     before the election.


     7.     POLITICAL ACTIVITIES


     7.1    General


       The elections were contested by 15 parties and a large number of
         independent candidates.


       Despite the large number of parties contesting the elections it was
         clear that the main contest was between the Zimbabwe African
         National Union - Patriotic Front (Zanu-PF) and the Movement for
         Democratic Change (MDC). These were the only parties with
         candidates in each of Zimbabwe's 120 constituencies.


       Many of the smaller parties had regional support bases and only
         contested constituencies in particular regions.  The Zimbabwe
         African People's Union (ZAPU) only contested constituencies in
         Matabeleland.   ZANU (Ndonga) mainly contested constituencies in
         Manicaland. The Liberty Party and the Zimbabwe Independent Party
         mainly contested constituencies in Harare.  Other smaller parties
         such as the Zimbabwe Union of Democrats and the United Parties,
         while not regionally based, only contested a few constituencies.


       Campaigning took the form of mass rallies ("Star Rallies"), local
         constituency rallies and meetings, advertisements in newspapers,
         posters on bill boards, trees and buildings, pamphlets, letters to
         voters and spray-painting on road surfaces or on buildings.


       The visibility with which parties and candidates campaigned varied
         from area to area.


     7.2    Main Contending Parties: ZANU-PF and MDC


       ZANU-PF based its campaign on its record of obtaining independence,
         developing the country, indigenising ownership of the economy and
         the land issue.  Its principle slogan was "Land is the Economy,
         the Economy is the Land".   It emphasised its role as a
         revolutionary party that had fought a war of liberation and
         brought stability to Zimbabwe.  It presented the land issue as an
         extension of this struggle.  The MDC were described as "puppets"
         of the whites and the British.


       The MDC's focus was on the need for change. It emphasised the need
         for job creation and renewal of the economy, political reform,
         national unity, human rights and the rule of law. It criticised
         Zanu-PF and President Mugabe in particular for mismanaging the
         economy, corruption and cronyism in government and Zimbabwean
         involvement in the DRC conflict. It was also highly critical of
         Zanu-PF's policy on the land issue and the lawlessness associated
         with land invasions.


     7.3    Funding of Political Parties


       In terms of the legislation regulating state funding to political
         parties, a party has to have at least 15 seats in Parliament to
         qualify for a state grant.  Only ZANU-PF qualified and they
         received some Z$62 million (about R10 million) per annum from the
         State.  All the other parties and the independents had to
         fundraise from other sources.


     A list of rallies and meetings attended by the Mission is set out in
     Appendix E.


     8.     MEDIA


     The mission observed a robust debate in the Zimbabwean media and the
     print media in particular, concerning the elections and the issues
     surrounding the election campaign.


     The Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation (ZBC), which has a monopoly on
     the electronic media and certain state-owned newspapers gave inordinate
     coverage to ZANU-PF.  Other independently owned newspapers mostly
     supported the opposition parties and the MDC in particular. The
     international media was generally very critical of Zanu-PF.


     The Mission came across a large number of local and community
     newspapers in different parts of Zimbabwe. The political inclinations
     of these publications varied.


     South African media is widely read, watched and listened to. SABC TV,
     DSTV, and CNN are available via satellite transmission.


     9.     ZIMBABWE REPUBLIC POLICE


     The Mission received complaints that the Zimbabwe Republic Police were
     acting in a partisan manner by only acting against violence emanating
     from the ranks of opposition parties and that the ZRP was lax in
     investigating crimes alleged to have been committed by members of Zanu-
     PF.


     The Mission ascertained that the Police did refer crimes with a
     political content to a special department in Harare.  However, this
     does not seem to have been the case in every area of the country.


     The Mission was impressed with the professionalism and efficiency of
     the ZRP close to the election, on the election days and during the
     counting as well as in preparations to deal with any civil disruption
     following on from the elections.


     Close to the voting and counting days the mission observed and received
     reports of swift action by the ZRP against violent or disruptive
     behaviour from all quarters.


     The fact that there was a minimum of three police officers present at
     each polling station contributed to the peaceful conduct of the
     elections.


     10.    VIOLENCE


     The Mission received many reports of violence and intimidation both
     during briefings in Harare as well as during its visits to the
     Provinces.  Some of this violence appeared to be systematic and planned
     and aimed at intimidating supporters of other parties and creating no-
     go areas.  In other instances the violence appeared to be a more
     spontaneous result of the heightened political temperature in the
     country.


     There were numerous allegations of intimidation in rural areas and
     against farm workers by war veterans in the form of "re-education
     sessions". War veterans with whom the Mission interacted admitted
     holding "re-education sessions", however, they denied that intimidation
     was the intention of these sessions. There were also reports that
     numbers of rural residents were displaced from their homes by violence.


     Many parties and organizations reported that the violence and
     intimidation emanated mainly from the ranks of ZANU-PF. The mission
     observed that no single party seemed to have a monopoly on the use of
     violence.


     Whilst the pre-election period was characterised by tension, especially
     in rural areas and on commercial farms, the voting and counting process
     took place in a peaceful and calm atmosphere.


     Zimbabweans with whom the Mission interacted expressed the opinion that
     the presence of observers contributed to the calm and peaceful
     atmosphere in which voting and counting took place and the reduction of
     violence in the build up to the elections.


     11.    VOTING, COUNTING AND ANNOUNCEMENT OF RESULTS


     The Mission visited a large number of polling and counting stations on
     24, 25 and 26 June in all Provinces and in urban and rural areas.


     All teams reported that the voting was conducted efficiently in a
     peaceful atmosphere.  Almost all polling stations opened on time, had
     sufficient material, staff and Police on duty.


     At some polling stations a high number of voters were turned away
     because they did not have ID documents or were not registered as
     voters.


     Almost all polling stations visited by the Mission had polling agents
     from at least ZANU-PF and the MDC. Domestic and international
     monitors/observers were present at many polling and counting stations.


     Ballot boxes were guarded overnight by the Police and polling agents.
     Polling agents were provided with transport to accompany ballot boxes
     to the counting stations.


     The counting process was characterised by a meticulous and transparent
     process of reconciling of votes cast and ballot papers issued,
     carefully scrutinised by polling agents, observers and monitors.


     The Mission was satisfied that the opportunity for electoral fraud was
     negligible.


     Results were transmitted to the office of the Registrar General in
     Harare from where he announced them.  A total of 2 552 844 votes were
     cast out of some 5,1 million registered voters (50% poll).   ZANU-PF
     gained 1 220 951 votes; MDC gained 1 150 793 votes and the other
     parties obtained a total of 181 100 votes. ZANU-PF won 62 seats, MDC 57
     seats and ZANU-Ndonga 1 seat.


     The complete results are set out in Appendix F.


     12.    CONCLUSION


     The voting and counting process on 24, 25 and 26 June 2000 proceeded in
     a peaceful and orderly atmosphere.  The administration of voting and
     counting was conducted in a highly efficient and professional manner.
     The Mission was satisfied that the chances of any foul play were
     negligible.


     All the political parties that participated in the elections have
     indicated that they accept the outcome of the elections as a whole.
     Some have indicated that they will challenge the results in particular
     constituencies.


     The Mission is of the opinion that, on the whole, despite incidents of
     violence and intimidation in the run up to the election, the result of
     the parliamentary elections held on 24 and 25 June 2000 broadly
     reflects the will of the Zimbabwean people.

                                 APPENDIX A
A.    NAMES OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT AND STAFF ON THE DELEGATION

   MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT (20)

   ANC:Dr J Benjamin
        Mr M M Chikane
        Mr M M Z Dyani
        Mr E I Ebrahim
        Ms M C Lobe
        Mr S K Louw
        Ms N N Mapisa-Nqakula
        Mr N N Mpehle
        Mr A C Nel
        Mr T B Taabe (NCOP)
        Ms S C van der Merwe
        Mr T S Yengeni (Leader of the delegation)


   DP: Mr S B Farrow
       Mr D K Maluleke
       Mr G B D McIntosh


   IFP: Mr A M Mpontshane
        Mr M A Mzizi
   New NP:Mr E A Schoeman
           Mr A Z A van Jaarsveld


   ACDP:  Mrs C Dudley


   MEMBERS OF STAFF
   Mr Brent Simons (Media Liaison Officer)
   Mr Jabu Mavimbela (Foreign Affairs - Security Officer)
   Miss Nobuntu Toto (PA to the Chief Whip of the Majority Party)
   Mr Mbuyisazwe Tshabalala (Editor-in-Chief: Language Services - Financial
   coordinator)


                                 APPENDIX B



     3.3    CODE OF CONDUCT


     The code of conduct is a vital component of any observation mission.
     Different agencies, both international and national, prepare their own
     code of conduct. However there are universal components of a code of
     conduct that apply to all missions.


                          PARTICIPANT'S INFORMATION


     1.     Every accredited observer and person appointed by that observer
         must:


     1.1    Observe the election impartially and independently of any
         registered party or candidate contesting the election.


     1.2    Remain non-partisan and neutral.


     1.3    Be competent and professional in observing the election.


     1.4    Provide the Commission with a comprehensive review of the
         elections taking into account all relevant circumstances
         including:


            • the degree of impartiality shown by the Commission;


            • the degree of freedom of political parties to organise, move,
              assemble and express their views publicly;


            • the opportunity for political parties to national media and
              other resources of the state;


            • the fairness of access for political parties to national
              media and      other resources of the state;


            • the proper conduct of polling and counting of votes; and


            • any other issue that concerns the essential freedom and
              fairness of the election.


     1.5    Comply with all instructions given and every obligation imposed
         by:-


            • the Commission;


            • any electoral officer; or


            • any employee or officer of the Commission; or
            • a member of the security services acting on the instructions
              of an officer.


     2.     The accredited observers and any person appointed by that
         observer should:


     2.1    Avoid doing anything that would indicate or be seen as
         indicating partisan support for a candidate or registered party.


     2.2    Act in a strictly neutral and unbiased manner.


     2.3    Disclose to the Commission any relationship that could lead to
         conflict of interest regarding the performance of their duties as
         observers or with the process of observation or assessment of the
         election.


     2.4    Not accept any gifts or favour from a political party,
         organisation or person involved in the election process.


     2.5    Not participate in any function or activity that could lead to a
         perception of sympathy for a particular candidate or political
         party.


     2.6    Not express a view or opinion on any matter which is the subject
         of electoral campaigning.


     2.7    Not influence or attempt to influence the choice of a voter
         regarding any registered party or candidate in an election.


     2.8    Not wear, carry, or display any registered party's symbols or
         colours.


                                 APPENDIX C

LIST OF CONTESTING PARTIES


PARTY
REGISTERED CANDIDATES
1.ZANU (PF)
120
2.  MDC
120
3.  UP
59
4.  ZAPU
21
5.  ZUD
16
6.  ZANU
12
7.  LP
8
8.  LPZ
14
9.  ZIP
4
10. NDU
1
11. ZPP
1
12. ZCP
1
13. PDF
1
14. ANP
1
15. NPA
1
16. INDEPENDENTS
89
TOTAL
469


                                 APPENDIX D


              B.ORGANISATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS MET BY THE DELEGATION
           (The team arrived in Harare on Wednesday, 07 June 2000)


              BRIEFINGS THAT TOOK PLACE IN HARARE


              08.06.2000


                  1.   The South African High Commission
                       Mr Ndou (High Commissioner)
                       Mr Mditshwa (Deputy High Commissioner)
                       Mr Wynand van Wyk (Political Attaché)
                       Col.S Moerane (Military Attaché)
                  2.   Zanu-PF
                       Mr D Mutasa MP (Minister of Political Affairs; Zanu-
                       PF Secretary for Administration; Zanu-PF Head of
                       Foreign Bureau)
                       Mr Simon Khaya Moyo MP (Minister of Mines, the
                       Environment and Tourism; Acting Minister of Transport
                       and Energy; Zanu-PF Deputy Secretary for
                       Administration)
                       Mr Tony Gara MP (Deputy Minister for Local
                       Government and Housing; Chairperson of Zanu-PF in
                       Harare)
                       Mr David Masira MP (Deputy Minister of Agriculture;
                       Zanu-PF Deputy Secretary for Administration in
                       Mashonaland East)
                       Mr Obed Mpofu MP (Deputy Minister of Industry and
                       Commerce)
                       Mr Sthembiso Nyoni MP (Minister of State in the
                       Office of the Deputy President)
                       Ms Irene Zimbi MP (Member of the Central Committee)
                       Dr Olivia Muchena MP (Deputy Minister for Land and
                       Agriculture; Commissar of the Women's League)
                       Ms Thembani (Member of the Central Committee)
                       Dr Stanley Sakukanyu (Member of the Central
                       Committee)


                  3.   NATIONAL CONSTITUTIONAL ASSEMBLY (NCA)
                       Mr Maphosa


                  4.   ZIMBABWE HUMAN RIGHTS ASSOCIATION
                       Mr Mnyaradi Biti


              09.06.2000


                  5.   REGISTRAR GENERAL
                       Mr Tobaiwa Mudede


                  6.   ELECTORAL SUPERVISORY COMMISSION (ESC)
                       Mrs Raftopoulos


                  7.   COMMERCIAL FARMERS'S UNION
                       Mr Tim Henwood (President)
                       Mr David Hasluck (Chief Executive Officer)
                       Mr Colin Cloete (Deputy President)
                       Mr Rich Amyot (Deputy President)


                  8.   SADC - PARLIAMENTARY FORUM OBSERVER MISSION
                       Ms Nora Schimming-Chase (Namibia; Leader of the
                       delegation)
                       Dr Kasuka Mutukwa (Secretary General)
                       Dr Sipho Mzimela (South Africa)
                       Mr Albuguerque (Angola)
                       Mr Dlamini (Swaziland)
                       Mr Janguo (Tanzania)
                       Mr Chikwenga (Malawi)


                  9.   AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (ARDA)
                       Dr Joseph Made


              12.06.2000


                  10.  MOVEMENT FOR DEMOCRATIC CHANGE (MDC)
                       Mr Paul Nyathi (Election Director)
                       Ms Priscilla Misihairabwi (MDC candidate)
                       Mr Richard Maasdorp (Assistant Election Director)


                  11.  THE INDEPENDENT
                       Mr Trevor Ncube (Editor; second biggest shareholder)


                  12.  THE FINANCIAL GAZETTE
                       Mr Francis Mdlongwa (Editor)


                  13.  ZIMBABWE NATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
                       Mr Nhlanhla Masuku (President)


                  14.  CONFEDERATION OF ZIMBABWE INDUSTRIES
                       Mrs Rose Peters (Deputy President)


              13.06.2000


                  15.  DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS


                  16.  UNITED PARTIES
                       Bishop Abel Muzorewa
                  17.  ZANU NDONGA PARTY
                       Mr Isaac Manyemba


                  18.  LIBERTY PARTY
                       Mr C Z Moyo


                  19.  WAR VETERANS ASSOCIATION OF ZIMBABWE
                       Dr Chenjerai Hundzvi (National Chairman)
                       Mr Andrew Ndlovu (General Secretary for Projects)


                  20.  ZIMBABWE CONGRESS OF TRADE UNIONS
                       Mr Nicholas Mudzengerere
                       Four (4) members of the General Agricultural and
                       Plantation Workers Union


              14.06.2000


                  21.  MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS AND POLICE
                       Mr Dumisa Dabengwa


              21.06.2000
                  22.  Mr MIKE MATAURE (Ex Zanu-PF Member of Parliament)


                  23.  CATHOLIC COMMISSION FOR JUSTICE AND PEACE (CCJP)
                       Bishop P Mutume (President)
                       Mr T Zimbithi (Director)


                  24.  PROF. MAKUMBE (Political Analyst)


              22.06.2000


                  25.  Dr IBBO MANDAZA (Political Analyst; Editor of The
                       Mirror)


              23.06.2000


                  26.  ANGLICAN COMMISSION FOR JUSTICE AND PEACE


                  27.  WOMEN'S COALITION FOR GENDER AND DOMESTIC
                       VIOLENCE
                       Ms Thoko Mahle
                       Mrs Nhumdi
                       Ms Renfa Rudenga


              BRIEFINGS THAT TOOK PLACE IN THE PROVINCES


              14.06.2000


                  28.  COMMONWEALTH OBSERVERS IN MASVINGO


              15.06.2000


                  29.  POLICE CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT MUTAURWA (Harare
                       District Commander)


                  30.  POLICE INSPECTOR BONONGWE (Officer Commanding the
                       Marondera Urban Area)


                  31.  PROVINCIAL REGISTRAR, Mr MUSHANGWE (Masvingo)


                  32.  BLACK COMMERCIAL FARMER (Matebeleland)


              16.06.2000


                  33.  CHIEF INSPECTOR MUSHAWEJALO (Murehwa District)


                  34.  CHIEF INSPECTOR NCUBE (Chitungwiza)


                  35.  SUPERINTENDENT MBEWE (Chitungwiza)


                  36.  MR VICTOR CHITONGO (Zanu-PF candidate for Murehwa
                       North)


                  37.  OWNER OF AN OCCUPIED FARM (Murehwa North)


                  38.  MR O P O'CONNOR (Oribi Farm)


                  39.  PROVINCIAL COMMISSIONER OF POLICE (Ross Camp,
                       Bulawayo)


                  40.  ZIMBABWE CONGRESS OF TRADE UNIONS (Esat House,
                       Bulawayo)


                  41.  ZAPU (Rainbow Hotel, Bulawayo)


                  42.  ZANU-PF (Provincial Headquarters, Bulawayo)


                  43.  MDC (Rainbow Hotel, Bulawayo)


                  44.  COMMONWEALTH OBSERVERS ((Holiday Inn, Bulawayo)


              17.06.2000


                  45.  WAR VETERANS ON AN OCCUPIED FARM (Murehwa North)


                  46.  FARM WORKERS ON AN OCCUPIED FARM (Murehwa North)


                  47.  COMMONWEALTH AND EU OBSERVERS IN GWERU (Midlands)


              23.06.2000


                  48.  LOCAL CHIEF (Mberengwa East)


                  49.  Mr MALVERN, COMMERCIAL FARM MANAGER (Mapanzwe)


                  50.  Mrs MUCHEMENYI (Senior Assistant Commissioner of
                       Police in Mutare, Manicaland


                  51.  BISHOP BAKARE (Anglican Dioceses of Manicaland)


                  52.  INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS IN MANICALAND
                       European Union
                       Australian Parliament
                       US Embassy
                       SADC-PF
                       World Council of Churches


                                 APPENDIX E


          RALLIES AND POLITICAL MEETINGS ATTENDED BY THE DELEGATION


              15.06.2000


                  1.   Zanu-PF Rally at St Annes (Wedza District)
                  2.   MDC Rally at Marondera
                  3.   Meeting of all Zanu-PF candidates in Masvingo
                  4.   MDC Rally in Bulawayo City Hall


              16.06.2000


                  5.   Zanu-PF Rally at Murehwa North
                  6.   Zanu-PF Rally at Chivu South (Masvingo)
                  7.   Two Zanu-PF Rallies at Gokwe Central (Midlands)
                  8.         MDC Rally at Esigodini (Matebeleland)


              17.06.2000


                  9.   MDC Rally at Zengeza
                  10.  MDC Rally at Mahusekwa (Marondera West)
                  11.  Zanu-PF Rally in Harare
                  12.  MDC Rally at Mkoba (Midlands)
                  13.  MDC Rally (Esigodini, Matebeleland)
                  14.  Zanu-PF Star Rally (White City Stadium, Bulawayo)


              18.06.2000


                  15.  Zanu-PF Rally at Beatrice (Marondera West)
                  16.  MDC Rally in Harare
                  17.  Training Session for electoral officers at Midlands
                       State University


              22.06.2000


                  18.  Zanu-PF Rally in Masvingo Stadium
                  19.  MDC Rally (Manicaland)


              23.06.2000


                  20.  Zanu-PF Rally in Makone North (Manicaland)


                                 APPENDIX F


                  ELECTION RESULTS
     PARTY
     SEATS WON
     1.     ZANU (PF)
     62
     2.     MDC
     57
     3.     UP
     0
     4.     ZAPU
     0
     5.     ZUD
     0
     6.     ZANU
     1
     7.     LP
     0
     8.     LPZ
     0
     9.     ZIP
     0
     10.    NDU
     0
     11.    ZPP
     0
     12.    ZCP
     0
     13.    PDF
     0
     14.    ANP
     0
     15.    NPA
     0
     16.    INDEPENDENTS
     0
     TOTAL
     120

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     1.     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


         Bills passed by National Assembly on 12 September 2000 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Adult Basic Education and Training Bill [B 42B - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 76)  - (Select Committee on Education
              and Recreation - National Council of Provinces).


         (b)     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 48B - 2000] (National
              Assembly - sec 76) - (Select Committee on Education and
              Recreation - National Council of Provinces).


         Bill passed by National Assembly on 13 September 2000 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (c)     Competition Second Amendment Bill [B 41B - 2000] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Economic Affairs -
              National Council of Provinces).




     2.     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant committees as mentioned below:


         (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee
              on Local Government and Administration:


              (a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                  Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
                  Germany concerning the project "Provincial Administration
                  Support Programme in the Eastern Cape", tabled in terms
                  of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


              (b) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                  Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
                  Germany concerning the project "Decentralised Development
                  Planning", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                  Constitution, 1996.


         (2)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
              Finance:


              Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
              concerning the project "Economic and Development Policy
              Advisory Programme", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (3)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee
              on Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and
              report:


              (a) Statutes of the United Nations African Institute for the
                  Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
                  tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
                  1996.


              (b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Statutes of the United
                  Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and
                  the Treatment of Offenders.


         (4)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee
              on Labour and Public Enterprises:


              (a) Policy Framework for an Accelerated Agenda Towards the
                  Restructuring of State Owned Enterprises.


              (b) A Summary of the Policy Framework for an Accelerated
                  Agenda for the Restructuring of State Owned Enterprises.


         (5)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee
              on Social Services:


              (a) Government Notice No R.567 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 21245 dated 9 June 2000, List of approved
                  facilities for the purpose of performing community
                  service in 2001 by medical practitioners, made in terms
                  of the Health Professions Act, 1974.


              (b) Government Notice No 2234 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 21292 dated 21 June 2000, the Chiropractors,
                  Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions
                  Amendment Bill, 2000 published for comment.


              (c) Government Notice No 644 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 21313 dated 30 June 2000, Authorisation in
                  terms of section 24 of the Human Tissue Act, 1983.


              (d) Government Notice No R.570 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 21256 dated 5 June 2000, Regulations made in
                  terms of the Medical Schemes Act, 1998.


              (e) Government Notice No R.569 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 21255 dated 5 June 2000, Regulations made in
                  terms of the Medical Schemes Act, 1998.


              (f) Government Notice No R.638 published in the Government
                  Gazette No 21317 dated 22 June 2000, Regulations made in
                  terms of the Medical Schemes Act, 1998.


              (g) Report and Financial Statements of the Medical Research
                  Council for 1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-
                  General on the Financial Statements for 1998-99.
         (6)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
              Security and Constitutional Affairs:


              Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the People's Republic of China in
              respect of Police Co-operation, tabled in terms of section
              231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (7)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee
              on Economic Affairs:


              (a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries
                  Board for 1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-
                  General on the Financial Statements for 1998-99.


              (b) General Agreement of Co-operation between the Government
                  of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
                  United Mexican States, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
                  of the Constitution, 1996.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on the UNECE 1958
     Agreement on Wheeled Vehicles, dated 13 September 2000:


         The Select Committee on Ecomomic Affairs, having considered the
         request for approval by Parliament of the Agreement of the United
         Nations Economic Commission for Europe concerning the adoption of
         uniform technical prescriptions for wheeled vehicles, equipment
         and parts which can be fitted and/or be used on wheeled vehicles
         and the conditions for reciprocal recognition of approvals granted
         on the basis of these prescriptions, referred to it, recommends
         that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
         approve the said Agreement.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on the UNECE
     Global Agreement on Wheeled Vehicles, dated 13 September 2000:


         The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having considered the
         request for approval by Parliament of the Agreement of the United
         Nations Economic Commission for Europe concerning the
         establishment of Global Technical Regulations for wheeled
         vehicles, equipment and parts which can be fitted and/or be used
         on wheeled vehicles, referred to it, recommends that the Council,
         in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
         Agreement.


     Report to be considered.

                         THURSDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     (1)    The Minister of Sport and Recreation on 4 September 2000
         submitted a draft of the South African Sports Commission Amendment
         Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum explaining the objects of
         the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in
         terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation and the Select
         Committee on Education and Recreation, respectively, by the
         Speaker and the Chairperson in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bills passed by National Assembly on 14 September 2000 and transmitted
     for concurrence:


     (a)    Finance Bill [B 40 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
         (Select Committee on Finance - National Council of Provinces).


     (b)    Banks Amendment Bill [B 56B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75)
         - (Select Committee on Finance - National Council of Provinces).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Second Adjustments Estimate of Expenditure to be defrayed from
         the National Revenue Fund during the Financial Year ending 31
         March 2000 [RP 5-2000].


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Adjustments Estimate for 1999-
         2000.

2.    The Minister of Transport:
     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for 1998-99,
     including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
     for 1998-99.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on SMME sector,
     dated 13 September 2000:


     The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having held public hearings
     on the promotion of the SMME (small, medium and micro enterprise)
     sector and the role of banks, reports as follows:


     The Committee and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry of the
     National Assembly held the public hearings on 14 and 21 June 2000. The
     immediate background to the hearings was a workshop on SMME promotion,
     organised by the NCOP, where it was reiterated that access to finance
     was a critical issue and new initiatives were called for in relation to
     banks.
     The objective of the hearings was to examine the extent of the
     involvement of banks in SMME finance and problems encountered in this
     regard, as well as proposals to increase access to finance by SMMEs.
     The hearings attracted a good deal of public attention. Many
     individuals wrote to the Committee with specific complaints, and many
     significant stakeholders gave oral evidence. The hearings were intended
     to contribute to a positive way forward and to highlight the work still
     to be done.


     A.     Banking Council and Associated Banks (Absa, Nedcor, Standard
         Bank)


         The Council began by highlighting a number of steps they had taken
         since the Portfolio Committee's 1999 hearings on bank charges and
         micro-finance. These included the introduction of a new Code of
         Banking Conduct, appointment of an Adjudicator independent of the
         Council, the establishment of a community-based financial
         institution, Sizanani, and the recent discussions with Khula
         around the provision of venture capital.


         The Council pointed to a structural tension between their
         involvement in economic transformation and the maintenance of a
         "sound financial sector". It acknowledges that there is a need for
         economic restructuring, including the drawing of historically
         disadvantaged people into the formal economy, income
         redistribution and addressing problems created by low levels of
         capital accumulation and entrepreneurial skills.


         This needed to be balanced against the need to maintain a sound
         financial sector in line with international best practice.
         According to the Council, the unfolding international environment
         is creating new competitive pressures, thereby placing certain
         constraints on the banking industry in South Africa. These include
         pressures to eliminate cross-subsidisation and to scale down less
         profitable activities.


         The Council presented a profile of the SMME sector in relation to
         the cost and size of loans. It argued that the unit costs of
         making loans to micro-enterprises were too high for banks, which
         could also not provide the support needed for entrepreneurs with
         limited managerial skills. They said banks could only become
         involved in financing very small businesses through specialised
         institutions such as Sizanani. The banks are, however, currently
         very much involved in servicing the small and medium enterprise
         sector and could expect to continue to be involved in this segment
         of the market.


         Absa, Nedcor and Standard Bank provided a profile of their
         individual institutions, mission statements, total loan book and
         some indication of their involvement in the SME sector. It was
         apparent that the three institutions were using different
         criteria, and from the information presented it was difficult, if
         not impossible, to determine what percentage of the loan book was
         going to black entrepreneurs. Indeed, some of the banks themselves
         acknowledged that they had no real basis for measuring which of
         their clients were previously disadvantaged individuals.


         The Council proposed the establishment of community-based
         financial institutions to service the micro and very small
         sectors, which it said the banks could not finance. The Council
         also proposed the strengthening of the NGO and retail finance
         intermediary sectors that are currently involved in this function.
         The Council also proposed the strengthening of the Sizanani
         project. No clear answers were provided to repeated questions
         about banks' engagement in "red-lining" practices.


     B.     Business Association, Investment Group, Financial Consultancy


         1. South Cape Investment Network


              The presenter referred to the constraints imposed upon smaller
              enterprises by banks. The Network proposed that black-owned
              and -controlled small businesses face more challenges than
              those owned by their white counterparts. A case study was
              presented of a bank manager who refused to open a cheque
              account for an empowerment group.
              It was reported that black entrepreneurs continue to face
              hostility from white bank managers, who are unsympathetic to
              the experience and plight of black-owned small enterprises.
              The Network, in collaboration with other stakeholders in the
              Southern Cape, has taken up the issue of racism in the
              financial sector to the Human Rights Commission. Some of the
              issues raised included staff and management attitudes, red-
              lining and a general disregard for the South African context.


         2. Western Cape Black Business and Professionals Alliance


              The Alliance comprises several institutions operating
              throughout the country, and consists of accountants, building
              contractors, lawyers and the Black Management Forum. According
              to them, a key challenge is the changing of an existing
              mindset in the banking industry that sees black business as
              representing a high risk. Banks are doing very little to
              provide start-up capital, guarantees and bridging finance for
              small black business.


              The Alliance focused its submission on the construction
              industry. Three areas were addressed: Provision of bank
              guarantees, access to bridging finance and bank credit ratings
              of construction companies. Black contractors are currently
              receiving construction tenders through government procurement
              processes, but are unable to source funds from the relevant
              financial institutions. The Alliance reported that their
              members are then forced to either forfeit the contract or
              enter into a joint venture with a white company. According to
              the Alliance, this trend does not contribute to economic
              empowerment.


              Similarly, access to bridging finance, credit ratings and
              financing of commercial property in black areas are barriers
              to emerging small entrepreneurs. A construction tender
              requires bridging finance and a credit rating from a financial
              institution. Banks have given several negative ratings to
              members of the Alliance. They said that these problems are not
              confined to micro and very small enterprises. They said that
              small and medium established black-owned businesses (not just
              start-ups) were encountering such problems.


         3. EYETHU Butchery


              The presenter, the owner of several properties and businesses
              employing more than 40 people, is an established entrepreneur
              with a proven track record. She has been a customer of
              Standard Bank for the past 19 years. She characterises her
              relationship with the bank as a "hands off" relationship that
              has not contributed to her success or business growth. It was
              reported that the local bank manager does not have a "passion"
              or commitment to the development of SMMEs.


              Bureaucratic requirements, imposed by the bank, have slowed
              down the growth of her business. Several of her (white)
              competitors have developed more co-operative relationships
              with the bank manager and are receiving preferential terms
              from the bank. Access to working capital is often restricted
              due to stringent collateral requirements. It was reported that
              when collateral is provided, banks are still hesitant to
              provide access to finance. This impacts negatively on the cash-
              flow and stock levels of the business, which in turn
              influences the growth of the business.


         4. Citizens Finance, Financial and Business Consulting


              The presenter highlighted the important role of banks in
              contributing towards the economic growth of the South African
              economy. Previous government policies were not supportive of
              SMME development, especially black-owned SMMEs. It is
              estimated that black entrepreneurs received less than 2% of
              the total bank credit under the previous government. It was
              argued that the policy of banks has not changed in respect of
              SMME finance.
              Banks look more favourably to financing empowerment deals that
              involve mergers and acquisitions. Banks view SMMEs as a high
              risk, but poor performance of SMMEs is due to underdeveloped
              entrepreneurial skill, which in turn requires access to
              finance. There is no history of an understanding between banks
              and black communities. The government has begun addressing
              several of these challenges through the SMME strategy. The
              effectiveness of the strategy needs to be evaluated.


              Banks, in turn, have also introduced several measures,
              including the Community Bank, that was recently closed down.
              Banks have also established the SMME desks and the Sizanani
              project. It was suggested that the government had
              overestimated the role of banks in advancing the SMME sector.
              In general, government policies have been correct, but the
              implementation has been more difficult than envisaged. As part
              of a way forward, the presenter proposed that SMME policies be
              targeted and focused. The existing economic structure needs to
              be changed. This is a long-term objective.


              Banks must find new and creative ways of providing access to
              finance. The SMME sector must be made less risky. More
              training must be provided. The government must increase
              funding to SMME programmes and actively support business
              associations. It was suggested that consultation between banks
              and the government needs to be strengthened to provide
              targeted financial services. The presenter concluded by
              proposing an improved communication between banks and the
              government so as to establish a dynamic relationship.


         5. Diakonia Council of Churches (DCC)


              The objective of the DCC is to contribute to peace,
              development and a better quality of life for the people of the
              greater Durban. Individual congregations have expressed
              concern over the increasing unemployment and poverty in the
              region. The DCC is a result of a response to the local
              situation. A project of the DCC includes life skills and
              technical and small business training. In the past four years,
              over 1 500 people have been trained in a range of skills such
              as sewing, electrical installation, carpentry, construction
              and motor mechanics. The presenter highlighted that the idea
              of skills training is to generate "job creators" rather than
              job seekers.


              Several case studies were provided, which emphasised the
              importance of access to finance in creating a culture of
              entrepreneurship, facilitating employment and providing income
              to large numbers of vulnerable people. Several barriers to
              micro enterprise development were identified: Banks exclude
              micro entrepreneurs on the basis that a minimum amount must be
              maintained in a bank account; banks open accounts for people
              with permanent jobs only; and banks levy excessive
              administrative costs and conditions. The micro and very small
              enterprise sector is an important income generator for a vast
              number of people.
              The DCC proposed a change in the banking "mindset" on risk and
              economic growth. It also proposed the removal of collateral
              requirements for certain loans in the micro and very small
              enterprise sector, no minimum amount for loans, that interest
              be charged at market rates and that loans not be linked to
              savings. The DCC also called for improved sensitivity of bank
              staff in local branches.


         6. National African Federation Chamber of Commerce (Nafcoc)


              The submission focused on the failure to accord organisations
              like Nafcoc a more prominent role in the SMME programme, the
              demographic make-up of staff in the Department of Trade and
              Industry responsible for the SMME programme, and the slow pace
              of land reform, as constraints faced by black entrepreneurs.
              Nothing specific was said about banks and access to finance by
              SMMEs.


     C.     SA Reserve Bank: Bank Supervision Department (BSD)
         The presentation highlighted the importance of banking and the
         significance of a sound, credible financial environment for
         economic growth. The Banks Act of 1990 provided for "prudential
         regulation and risk management" of financial institutions. This
         Act, reflecting a number of concerns of the time, focused on the
         regulation of deposit-taking institutions and prohibited non-
         registered entities from accepting deposits. The BSD's main
         function is to protect depositors and maintain sound credit
         standards. The presenter stressed the importance of a sound
         credible financial system, and called for circumspection when
         addressing structural challenges.


         It was reported that over the years a number of initiatives had
         been taken to address constraints experienced by "unbanked
         people". These included the passage of the Mutual Banks Act, the
         promotion of community banking, stokvels, savings co-operatives,
         village financial service co-operatives, the launch of the
         Mortgage Indemnity Scheme and consultations with stakeholders
         about alternative strategies to informal financing and micro-
         lending.


         There have also been moves to establish an effective regulatory
         environment for the micro-lending industry through the Micro-
         Finance Regulatory Council. It is possible that this Council will
         facilitate the accepting of deposits by micro-finance
         institutions. It was reported that FinaSol and the Financial
         Services Association have been appointed as regulatory bodies for
         the village financial service co-operatives. All of these
         initiatives have more or less operated on the basis of exemption
         from the Banks Act.


         The presenters expressed the view that what was needed in the
         medium to long term was to facilitate the emergence of new
         institutions that might be more effective than banks in financing
         SMMEs. They argued strongly that the government should not force
         banks to lend to SMMEs, the so-called stick method. They felt that
         greater success might be achieved by increasing competition in the
         market. This might be achieved by encouraging the emergence of a
         securities market as an instrument for accessing finance. Various
         co-operative ventures could also be encouraged. The success of
         this strategy will largely depend on the availability of financial
         information.


         It was reported that the Reserve Bank, due to improper practices
         encountered by various institutions in the past, had expanded the
         definition of a deposit-taker. This placed certain restrictions on
         the emergence of what may be more appropriate financial
         institutions. What was required, was a streamlining and refocusing
         of legislation, including the Banks Act, the Companies Act, the
         draft Collective Investments Schemes Bill and the draft
         Investments Services Bill, to overcome current legislative
         restrictions that make it impossible to access the securities
         market for SMME finance. Redefining deposit-takers in conjunction
         with the fine-tuning of the above legislation was called for as
         part of a strategy to promote competition between financial
         instruments. The presenters also supported greater compulsory
         disclosure by financial institutions of their involvement in
         community-based activities, including provision of finance to
         SMMEs.


     D.     Government


         1. Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), Chief Directorate:
              Business Regulation and Consumer Services, and Khula
              Enterprise Finance


              The DTI highlighted the importance of the SMME sector as a
              means of poverty alleviation, a vehicle for black economic
              empowerment, in increasing competition and promoting job
              creation. The many barriers to SMME development were re-
              emphasised.


              The National Enterprise Survey, commissioned by The Presidency
              with the support of the Ministry of Trade and Industry, had
              reported that black-owned firms found it more difficult to
              access finance than their white counterparts. The same survey
              found that while access to finance was not a major problem for
              South African companies in general, it was for black-owned
              SMMEs. These problems were particularly acute for recently
              established enterprises, i.e. those that are three years and
              younger.


              The survey highlighted the following problems experienced by
              SMMEs in accessing finance: A lack of collateral and equity
              finance, effectiveness of affirmative procurement, perception
              of risk, failure rate of start-ups, management support
              systems, high costs of operating SMMEs, and the adequacy of
              credit guarantees. The survey also found that there were
              relationship problems between bank managers and black
              entrepreneurs, regulatory inconsistencies, problems with high
              interest rates, the Usury Act, the Credit Agreement Act, a
              lack of second-tier institutions and tax incentives.


              Structural and institutional challenges require sustainable
              interventions at several levels. As with other stakeholders,
              banks have a crucial role to play in the formation of capital
              in the economy. The DTI recognised the global constraints
              experienced by banks in South Africa, and argued for an
              approach which balanced the need for sound banking practice
              against the imperative to extend services to people excluded
              from financial services. The growth of the micro-lending
              sector had exposed the slow responsiveness of South African
              banks in entering profitable markets.


              The government will continue to encourage banks to improve
              access to finance for disadvantaged communities and also to
              promote alternative financial institutions. It was noted that
              it was becoming increasingly difficult to measure the extent
              of credit extension to SMMEs due to definitional
              inconsistencies, but studies have agreed that overall bank
              credit extension was low. Another key challenge facing the
              government was to work to improve banking practices in
              relation to black entrepreneurs. It was noted that SMMEs
              complained of continued discrimination and blacklisting.


              The presenter highlighted that banks were crucial to any SMME
              strategy as a result of their outreach, capital base, product
              and expertise. Lack of competition in the banking sector
              remained a fundamental problem. The DTI supported the
              promotion of the micro-lending and credit union sectors as
              alternative instruments, as well as the easing of regulations
              to allow smaller banks to establish themselves. It was
              reported that the DTI, in consultation with other departments,
              was looking into the implementation of a disclosure
              requirement mechanism. The presenter cautioned against simply
              importing a US-based Community Reinvestment Act, given the
              different structural model of US banking. There was, however,
              support for compulsory disclosure of the type contained within
              this type of legislation as a step towards financial reform.
              The low level of bank utilisation of the Khula Guarantee
              Scheme was also highlighted as a concern, and the DTI is at
              present monitoring the unfolding scenario in this regard. The
              participation of a range of stakeholders in developing a
              strategy to address the many challenges facing the SMME sector
              in accessing finance was supported.


     E.     Conclusion and recommendations


         Improving access to finance for black-owned SMMEs is agreed by
         virtually everyone to be a major priority of economic policy.


         The hearings identified a number of "structural" and
         "relationship" challenges that will have to be addressed in making
         this priority policy objective a reality.


         Structural issues include transforming the present financial
         architecture to make it more appropriate to current priorities.
         This was argued particularly in the submission of the SARB. A
         number of scams in the 1980s led to the introduction of strict
         controls over deposit-taking institutions, which, while still
         warranted in many respects, tended to limit the emergence of other
         financial institutions. Alternative institutions today are still
         largely operating on the basis of exemptions from the Banks Act or
         Usury Act, rather than according to their own purpose-built
         regulatory framework. The Committee agrees with the SARB that
         there is an urgent need for a systematic and inclusive review of
         the broad legislative and regulatory framework of financial
         institutions with a view to devising strategies to encourage the
         emergence of a range of institutions that might serve this segment
         of the market.


         At this time, the Committee is of the view that the banks need to
         play a more active role than they have to date. The banks
         themselves agreed that provision of finance to small and medium
         businesses was very much an activity they needed to engage in, and
         that by co-operating in specialist divisions like Sizanani, they
         could serve the "very small" sector as well. The only real debate,
         even according to the banks themselves, was over whether, and how,
         they could be involved in serving the micro sector.


         The Banking Council suggested that the costs of finance, as well
         as being linked to the size of an enterprise, was also a function
         of the degree of access to collateral and the level of managerial
         skill. The Committee proposes the exploration of creative
         partnerships to address such constraints, to deal with the
         perception of risk and co-operate in the promotion of alternative
         financial institutions. Organisations like the Industrial
         Development Corporation are already playing a crucial role in the
         provision of finance, and need to be more actively drawn into the
         strategy.


         Mentoring is generally agreed to be a major challenge, both to
         transfer skills and as a mechanism for reducing risk. Focused and
         targeted training linked to loan applications is clearly required.
         Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency has already launched several
         mentoring programmes. Banks need to be engaged, both on ways they
         can contribute to improving the efficiency of such programmes and
         on how they can be validated in the process of loan applications.


         The system of payment of government contracts also needs review,
         particularly as it impacts on SMMEs. The Committee is aware that
         the Public Finance Management Act should lead to ending the
         practice of long delays in payment for work completed. However,
         the question of finance for the period between the award of a
         tender and completion of a contract needs attention. Black
         business people complain that banks are currently not providing
         bridging finance for SMMEs that have been awarded tenders. Being
         awarded a tender, coupled with a proven ability to perform,
         should, in the Committee's view, be regarded as a form of
         collateral by banks. Relevant procurement authorities and banks
         should explore this issue.


         In addition to structural issues, there are clearly also a number
         of relationship problems. There are too many black-owned small
         businesses who complain that attitudes to banks are less than
         positive and who feel that relationships are "at arms length", for
         this dimension to be ignored. Entrepreneurs complain of an
         alienating and unsympathetic environment, and there is a clear
         perception that black businesses are viewed less favourably than
         white.


         The Committee draws attention to the fact that banks could face
         litigation under equality law if they engage in discriminatory
         practices, including "red-lining", which many say continue to be
         prevalent. Equality law also obliges banks and other institutions
         to establish proactive measures to combat the effects of
         discrimination, particularly in relation to race, gender and
         disability. The Banking Council, in its submission, also drew
         attention to equality law and, in fact, invited aggrieved parties
         to use this remedy to deal with any discriminatory bank practices.
         Beyond this, the Committees believes that banks need to urgently
         review what the SARB called the "politeness factor", and develop a
         more positive attitude towards SMMEs. Steps need to be taken to
         ensure that decisions taken by top management in this regard are
         translated into meaningful change at the level of local managers
         and officials.


         Furthermore, in the Committee's view, there is an urgent need for
         a uniform system of disclosure that will allow the performance of
         particular institutions in providing SMME finance and other
         national priority activities to be measured and compared to the
         performance of other institutions. The Committee is of the view
         that this will require legislative and regulatory intervention.
         There was, in fact, virtual unanimity amongst presenters that
         uniform disclosure requirements allowing for such measurement were
         necessary. While the US Community Reinvestment Act was developed
         in a specific context, different in significant respects from our
         own, a broader discussion of the type of legislation that is
         appropriate to specific South African conditions needs to be
         encouraged.


         The Committee noted that only one national black business
         organisation representing SMME interests participated in the
         hearings. Members of the Committee expressed disappointment that
         the Nafcoc presentation offered little insight on the issues under
         review, which the National Enterprise Survey identified as major
         constraints. Black business needs an organised leadership to
         champion their cause and lobby and negotiate in a more favourable
         climate. The Committee hopes that organised business in general,
         and black organised business in particular, will in future be more
         proactive in presenting proposals to deal with the many
         constraints that black small entrepreneurs face.


         The Committee would like to thank all those who participated in
         the hearings and endorsed the continued engagement between the
         government, organised business, black business and banks.


     Report to be considered.


