---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 26 January 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-01-26
---

WEDNESDAY, 26 JANUARY 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                            WELCOMING OF MEMBERS

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, on behalf of the presiding
officers of the National Council of Provinces, I would like to welcome
members back. I hope this will be a busy, rewarding and successful year for
members of the National Council of Provinces and for Parliament generally.

I hope members have been doing a great deal with respect to their
constituency work and have come back to Parliament with fresh energy and
enthusiasm in order to ensure that the year 2000 is successful. With those
words I welcome you all back.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek môre sal
voorstel:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) met spyt verneem van die grootskaalse skade wat gely is in die
       besproeiingsboerderybedryf in die Noord-Kaap as gevolg van die
       ongekende reënval;


  (2) hiervan kennis moet neem omdat landbou in die Noord-Kaap 'n dominante
       rol speel in die ekonomie van die provinsie en daarom ook ten opsigte
       van werkverskaffing;


  (3) verder kennis neem dat rampe van sodanige omvang gepaardgaan met 'n
       drastiese afname van inkomste vir die hele provinsie, wat reeds
       beraam word op ongeveer R500 miljoen, en dus 'n groot invloed het op
       indiensneming en dus ook 'n belangrike rol speel ten opsigte van die
       bekamping van werkloosheid;


  (4) ook kennis neem van die dankbaarheid wat daar is oor hierdie
       ongekende reëns in die eksklusiewe boerderygedeeltes van die Noord-
       Kaap waar dit 'n baie welkome en belangrike uitkoms gebied het; en


  (5) besluit om aandag te skenk aan die effek wat natuurlike rampe op die
       landbou het en om verder saam met georganiseerde landbou,
       werknemersorganisasies en ander rolspelers opnuut te kyk na maniere
       om hierdie belangrike bedryf in Suid-Afrika te ondersteun.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
the next sitting day:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with regret the large-scale damage suffered in the irrigation
       farming industry in the Northern Cape as a result of the
       unprecedented rainfall;


  (2) must take note of this because in the Northern Cape agriculture plays
       a dominant role in the economy of the province and therefore also
       with regard to the provision of employment;


  (3) further notes that disasters of this degree are associated with a
       drastic reduction in revenue for the entire province, which is
       already estimated to be approximately R500 million, and therefore
       have a significant impact on employment and thus also play an
       important role with regard to the combating of unemployment;


  (4) also notes the gratitude regarding this unprecedented rain in the
       exclusive farming regions of the Northern Cape where it provided very
       welcome and important relief; and


  (5) resolves to give attention to the effect that natural disasters have
       on agriculture and furthermore, together with organised agriculture,
       employees' organisations and other role-players, to look anew at ways
       to support this important industry in South Africa.]

Mnr P A MATTHEE: Mev die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:


  Dat die Raad-


  (1) kennis neem van die afgryslike moorde en ander geweldsmisdade wat
       sedert die laaste sitting van die Raad verlede jaar, in ons land
       plaasgevind het;


  (2) die premiers van al die verskillende provinsies versoek om so gou as
       moontlik, maar voor of op 31 Mei 2000, die Raad van 'n verslag te
       voorsien waarin uiteengesit word of die Suid-Afrikaanse Polisiediens
       in hulle onderskeie provinsies enige tekort aan behoorlik opgeleide
       personeel en/of toerusting, insluitende voertuie en ander logistieke
       ondersteuning, ondervind wat hulle kortwiek in hulle pogings om
       misdaad maksimaal te voorkom en te bekamp, en indien wel, presies wat
       daardie tekorte is en wat 'n beraamde begroting is om dit reg te
       stel.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr P A MATTHEE: Madam Chair, I give notice that I shall move on the next
sitting day:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the dreadful murders and other violent crimes that have been
       committed in our country since the last sitting of this Council last
       year; and


  (2) requests the Premiers of all the various provinces, as soon as
       possible but on or before 31 May 2000, to furnish the Council with a
       report in which they explain whether the SA Police Service in their
       respective provinces is experiencing any shortage of adequately
       trained personnel and/or equipment, inclusive of vehicles and other
       logistical support, which is handicapping it in its efforts to
       prevent and combat crime to the maximum and, if so, precisely what
       those shortages are, and an estimated budget to rectify this.]
                          FIRES IN THE WESTERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Mev die Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) met skok en medelye kennis neem van die talle brande wat in die
       afgelope tyd in die Wes-Kaap plaasgevind het;


  (2) sy simpatie uitspreek teenoor persone wat persoonlik en materieel
       daardeur getref is;


  (3) die gemeenskappe, organisasies, kerke en verenigings waar die brande
       voorgekom het, bedank vir hulle betrokkenheid, hulp en deernis
       teenoor die slagoffers van hierdie brandramp;


  (4) die brandslaners, talle vrywilligers asook brandweerdienste van die
       onderskeie plaaslike owerhede en die Nasionale Weermag bedank vir
       hulle onbaatsugtige diens wat meestal in uiters moeilike
       omstandighede en met 'n gebrek aan rus en slaap gepaard gegaan het;


  (5) die publiek aanmoedig om die rampfonds wat in die lewe geroep word,
       te ondersteun;


  (6) die Regering vra om kennis te neem van die Premier van die Wes-Kaap
       se oproep dat dit tot 'n rampgebied verklaar word; en


  (7) vra dat 'n nasionale rampbestuursplan in die lewe geroep word en dat
       hierdie plan so vinnig moontlik voorsiening sal maak vir hierdie tipe
       onvoorsiene rampe wat in ons land kan voorkom en waardeur persone
       geraak kan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr C ACKERMANN: Madam Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with alarm and compassion the many fires which have recently
       occurred in the Western Cape;
  (2) expresses its sympathy with the people who have been personally and
       materially affected in this regard;


  (3) thanks the communities, organisations, churches and associations
       among whom the fires occurred for their involvement, assistance and
       commiseration regarding the victims of these fires;


  (4) thanks the fire-fighters, the many volunteers as well as the various
       local authorities' fire departments and the National Defence Force
       for their selfless services which mostly went accompanied by a lack
       of rest and sleep under extremely difficult circumstances;


  (5) encourages the public to support the disaster fund that has been set
       up;


  (6) requests the Government to take note of the call by the Premier of
       the Western Cape that it be declared a disaster area; and


  (7) requests that a national disaster management plan be established and
       that such plan provide as soon as possible for this type of
       unforeseen disaster which can occur in our country and by which
       people can be affected.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                 ROAD ACCIDENTS LEADING TO DEATH AND INJURY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms P C P MAJODINA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note -


       (a)  with great concern of the recent road accident in the Eastern
           Cape Province on 21 January 2000;


       (b)  that this accident claimed the lives of 26 people travelling in
           the bus carrying a total of 75 passengers coming from Port St
           Johns, Libode, Umtata, Engcobo and Cala to their place of work
           in Rustenburg;


       (c)  that the horror accident apparently occurred whilst this bus was
           in the process of overtaking a small vehicle;


       (d)  that this was on a clear stretch of road which was apparently
           wet;


       (e)  that the bus was definitely overloaded and had been travelling
           at a high speed; and


       (f)  that 18 passengers died at the scene and eight later in
           hospital;


  (2) recommends that -


       (a)  an immediate investigation of this accident be carried out with
           the assistance of the Department of Transport and the CSIR;


       (b)  the provincial Department of Transport continues with
           implementing the resolutions as adopted at the Cape Town bus
           summit in November 1999 and the envisaged commission of inquiry
           in those resolutions which should be extended to cover even this
           latest accident; and


       (c)  the President be implored to declare this particular accident as
           a disaster;


  (3) further notes that -


       (a)  the Member, Boysie Willem, from the Eastern Cape was involved in
           a terrible collision with a police truck on 14 January 2000; and


       (b)  he was badly injured together with his wife, his kids and a
           younger brother; and


  (4) wishes them a speedy recovery.

Ms C S BOTHA: Chairperson, I move as an amendment that the bus accident be
``noted'' as a disaster and not ``declared'' a disaster.

Amendment agreed to.


Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely:


  (1) takes note -


       (a)  with great concern of the recent road accident in the Eastern
           Cape Province on 21 January 2000;


       (b)  that this accident claimed the lives of 26 people travelling in
           the bus carrying a total of 75 passengers coming from Port St
           Johns, Libode, Umtata, Engcobo and Cala to their place of work
           in Rustenburg;


       (c)  that the horror accident apparently occurred whilst this bus was
           in the process of overtaking a small vehicle;


       (d)  that this was on a clear stretch of road which was apparently
           wet;


       (e)  that the bus was definitely overloaded and had been travelling
           at a high speed; and


       (f)  that 18 passengers died at the scene and eight later in
           hospital;


  (2) recommends that -


       (a)  an immediate investigation of this accident be carried out with
           the assistance of the Department of Transport and the CSIR;


       (b)  the provincial Department of Transport continues with
           implementing the resolutions as adopted at the Cape Town bus
           summit in November 1999 and the envisaged commission of inquiry
           in those resolutions which should be extended to cover even this
           latest accident; and


       (c)  the President be implored to note this particular accident as a
           disaster;


  (3) further notes that -


       (a)  the Member, Boysie Willem, from the Eastern Cape was involved in
           a terrible collision with a police truck on 14 January 2000; and


       (b)  he was badly injured together with his wife, his kids and a
           younger brother; and


  (4) wishes them a speedy recovery.

                       RECENT DISASTERS AND TRAGEDIES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) expresses its sadness at the fact that -


       (a)  the closing of the last millennium was characterised by the
           tragedies caused by air crashes, an increase in road accidents,
           the bombings in Cape Town, floods and ongoing crime and
           violence; and
       (b)  the new millennium has started with the fire disaster in the
           Cape Peninsula;


  (2) expresses its deep sympathy with all those affected by these
       tragedies; and


  (3) urges South African citizens to stop crime and violence and to start
       living.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    ASMARA CONFERENCE IN ERITREA FOR THE PROMOTION OF INDIGENOUS AFRICAN
                                  LANGUAGES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note of the Asmara Conference in Eritrea where a declaration
       has been drawn up to promote the use of Africa's indigenous
       languages;
  (2) welcomes this declaration as part of the African awakening and
       seizure of the continent's people through their diversity of mother
       languages;


  (3) acknowledges that the indigenous languages in Africa are essential
       for the promotion of the ideas of the people of Africa and the
       African Renaissance;


  (4) recognises that the report by top African writers, publishers and
       academics who attended the conference, acknowledges the diversity of
       the African languages that reflects the cultural heritage of the
       continent and must accordingly be utilised to promote oneness;


  (5) expresses the wish, as South Africans were involved in the Asmara
       declaration, that the representatives inform the relevant Select
       Committee fully thereof and make a copy available;


  (6) is of the view that steps should be taken to translate the document
       into all South Africa's indigenous languages for circulation; and


  (7) resolves to deliberate on the report of the Committee.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I ask that members ensure that their
motions are kept brief, because members are tabling motions that are rather
too long. We have already asked previously that they be kept brief.

                         1999 MATRICULATION RESULTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mev J WITBOOI: Mev die Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) die 1999-matrikulante gelukwens wat suksesvol was;


  (2) die Wes-Kaap-regering gelukwens met die hoogste slaagsyfer in die
       land; en
  (3) met groot kommer kennis neem van die feit dat die helfte van die land
       se matrikulante die 1999-eksamen nie geslaag het nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mrs J WITBOOI: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates the successful matriculants of 1999;


  (2) congratulates the Western Cape government on the highest pass rate in
       the country; and


  (3) notes with great concern the fact that half the country's
       matriculants did not pass the 1999 examination.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.]

                      CONGRATULATIONS TO BAFANA BAFANA

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council congratulates Bafana Bafana on their victory to date in
  the Africa Nations Cup and wishes them every success in the rest of their
  games.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Chairperson, I have an amendment. Bafana Bafana are not
playing today. I think Mrs Vilakazi is referring to the match against Gabon
which took place on Sunday night. I therefore think we should say ``the
recent Bafana Bafana victory''.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! The motion has already been agreed to,
and thus we cannot amend it. I am sure we could make a correction if there
is a substantive error, but we have agreed to the motion, and I believe
``to date'' was the phrase used, not ``today''.

                           PHARMACY AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We welcome the Minister of Health who
is the first Minister to speak in the NCOP in the year 2000. We hope it
will be a healthy year for us.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you, Chairperson, this amending Bill seeks to
ensure just that.

Chairperson, members of the national committee and of provinces and my dear
colleagues, there are many challenges to be met in order to improve health
in South Africa. National indicators of health status reflect large
disparities in health status on the basis of race, geographic region and
socioeconomic status. The Department of Health continues to strive for
better health outcomes for all South Africans. We are committed to the
continuous improvement and maintenance of the health of our people.

The overall goals and objectives of the health care service therefore are:
To provide a comprehensive and integrated health care service; to promote
equity, accessibility and utilisation of health care services; to extend
the availability and ensure the appropriate use of health care services; to
strengthen health promotion activities; to develop the human resource plan
for the health sector; to foster community participation across the health
sector; and to improve health sector planning and monitoring of health
status and services. These goals and objectives underscore all that we do
as a health care service.

The 10 point plan will facilitate the process of accelerated quality health
service delivery. Quality health service delivery is an outcome of many
activities. One of these activities should ensure the availability of
appropriate drugs in the correct quantities where and when needed, in a
reliable, affordable and cost-effective manner.

The availability of drugs in a reliable, affordable and cost-effective
manner is therefore very crucial and integral in the treatment regimens
aimed at improving the quality of life. To achieve this it is vital that
the following crucial activities, as outlined in our national drug policy
of January 1996, be carried out. These are the selection of drugs which
should be on the essential drugs list, the procurement and distribution of
these drugs; the rational use of these drugs by both prescribers and
consumers; the strengthening of drug management systems in order to reduce
theft; and the improving of the drug supply chain in order to reduce
shortages.

The crucial steps cannot be left to chance by any responsible health
delivery system. They should be well handled at all levels all the time in
order to ensure a reliable, constant flow of essential drugs. Pharmacists,
as a professional category that is uniquely trained in these aspects,
should be available in order to handle these activities in our health
delivery system.

Shortages, or the unavailability of pharmacists in our health services,
compromise and cripple the entire system of drug management, supply and
rational usage at key strategic points.

In South Africa we currently have 10 206 registered pharmacists, with a
51:49 female-male ratio recorded. About 83% of these are practising full
time in South Africa. The following statistics sketch the scenario by
province - I am sure you will be interested in this. The number of
registered pharmacists in South Africa, as I have already indicated, is 10
206. Of these, 1 490 are in KwaZulu-Natal, 826 in the Eastern Cape, 4 118
in Gauteng, 433 in North West, 271 in the Northern Province, 112 in the
Northern Cape, 398 in Mpumalanga, 415 in the Free State and 1 664 in the
Western Cape, and 444 are practising outside South Africa.

A severe maldistribution of pharmacists is also found between the public
and private sectors. Only 26% of pharmacists are employed in the public
sector, which serves more than 80% of our population. Only 15% of
pharmacists actually provide services in the public sector, if we exclude
those employed in administrative and academic positions. It is only 15%.
Currently about 50% of pharmacy posts in the public sector are vacant.

It is also important to note that there is one pharmacist for every 3 752
people in South Africa, and that is a ratio of 1:3. There is one pharmacist
for every 1 738 people in Gauteng and one pharmacist for every 16 446
people in the Northern Cape, and yet the World Health Organisation average
for industrialised countries is one pharmacist for 2 300 people.

About 500 pharmacy students qualify from academic institutions annually to
become interns. Of these, about 25% do their internship training in public
sector institutions. It is therefore imperative for any responsible
government that is serious about service delivery and which focuses on good
quality health care that is accessible to all South Africans and realises
the crucial role that pharmacists play in ensuring that all aspects that
pertain to drug supply and management and rational usage are adhered to, to
do something about this unacceptable situation which I have just sketched
for members.

We have to make sure that appropriate pharmaceutical services are in place
and an adequate number of pharmacists are found within the public sector.

The Pharmacy Amendment Bill, to be called the Pharmacy Amendment Act of
1999, amends the Pharmacy Act of 1976 so as to provide for the performance
of community service by persons registered for the first time as pharmacist
and to provide for matters connecting therewith as from 1 January 2001.

Any person registering for the first time as a pharmacist in terms of this
Act shall perform remunerated pharmaceutical community service for a period
of one year in terms of the regulations that are contemplated. On the
completion of such service such a person will be entitled to registration
to practise as a pharmacist. The introduction of this service will make
available to the public sector about 500 pharmacists annually as from 1
January 2001.

I am sure hon members will agree with me that this will go a long way in
addressing the acute shortage of pharmacists in the public sector. Our
health care strategic framework for 1999 to 2004 aims to build on our
current strengths and weaknesses, and relates this to our vision and the
future. We therefore have to consolidate our achievements and aggressively
take on the remaining challenges.

With regard to pharmaceutical services, the achievements to date include
the compilation of the essential drugs list and the standard treatment
guidelines for adults, paediatrics and primary health care services. To
support this, however, we have an inadequate system of appropriate drug
supply management and rational drug use at all levels of health service
delivery. The availability of essential drugs where and when they are
needed and their usage in a rational way remains one of the key challenges
to the success of our health services in making good quality health care
accessible.

The availability of additional pharmacists within the public sector when
this Bill is implemented will certainly complement all our efforts at
achieving good quality health care that is accessible to the people of
South Africa. The people of this country will definitely benefit from these
endeavours. [Applause.]

Ms L JACOBUS: Comrade Chairperson, Comrade Minister, special delegates and
members, the Pharmacy Amendment Bill before us today is of significant
importance, especially to our people in the remote rural areas of our
country. I had the privilege of travelling to the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-
Natal early in December 1999 on a site visit to some of our clinics and
other health facilities in these two provinces. What we discovered there
was shocking, to say the least, and a full report on the findings of this
study tour will be tabled in this House in due course.

Amongst the major problems raised there was a shortage of medical staff.
When Parliament passed the Medical, Dental and Supplementary Health Service
Professions Amendment Bill in 1998, it did so in order to address the
shortage of medical doctors, and to ensure an equitable distribution of
human resources throughout the country. This proposed amendment before us
today will be doing exactly the same with respect to pharmacists.

During our engagement with the department, they submitted to us a list of
the number of practising pharmacists in South Africa as at the end of 1999.
These currently total 10 206, of which the large majority, which is 4 118,
is concentrated in Gauteng. The large rural provinces of the Northern
Province and the Northern Cape have 271 and 112 pharmacists respectively.
According to statistics of the World Health Organisation, the average
number of pharmacists for industrialised countries like ourselves is 1:2
300.

Gauteng has statistically the highest distribution of pharmacists. When
compared with the Northern Cape, it has approximately 4 000 more
pharmacists. However, a report released by the MEC for health in Gauteng
indicates that state-run hospitals and clinics are not the beneficiaries of
this large number of pharmacists. The report, which was the result of a
commission of inquiry into hospital care and practices in Gauteng,
indicated that some hospitals are unable to cope with the patient load and
that between 300 and 500 patients are requested to return the following day
for medication after having spent the greater part of the day waiting for
it. This is clearly an untenable situation.

The commission also found that hospitals generally experience a high
turnover of pharmacists. As a consequence of the shortage of pharmacists,
ward sisters end up performing this function, dispensaries have no
inventory system and expired medication is handed out to patients.

These consequences are duplicated throughout the country with no province
being exempt. It is my belief that no responsible government can allow such
practices to continue unchecked. Our Government will certainly not tolerate
this.

At the moment the ratio of pharmacists to patients in the Northern Province
is 1:16 446. It is clear that a situation of this nature is unacceptable
and needs to be addressed with the utmost urgency. This amendment, minor as
it might seem on paper, gives effect to section 27(1) of our Constitution,
which relates to the right of access to health care services for all, and
this is one of the most basic rights enshrined in our Bill of Rights.

The process of consultation included all the major stakeholders in all nine
provinces and tertiary institutions responsible for training pharmacists. I
want to believe that the department will continue engaging them on
especially some of the concerns raised by the students themselves. These
concerns, I must say, are documented with us and with the department, and
they are mainly logistical. The department has given us, as a committee,
the assurance that it will come back to us during the course of the year to
report on progress in relation to the preparations in all the provinces and
the progress made in addressing some of these concerns. We as permanent
delegates from our respective provinces also have a responsibility to
ensure that we are on course with infrastructural and other preparations
for the intake of 2001.

Before I conclude, I would like to extend the call of our President to all
of us to accelerate the process of transformation inspired by the new
patriotism brought about by this very young democracy of ours. The adoption
of this Bill is one of the steps in this direction.
I would like to read the report of the committee for adoption by the House:


  The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the subject of
  the Pharmacy Amendment Bill [B 51-99] ... referred to it and classified
  by the JTM as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

[Applause.]

Dr P J C NEL: Madam Chair, unfortunately I was not informed that my name
would appear on the speakers' list, so I withdraw.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I would like to express some surprise
at that. I think the Chief Whip and the Whip from your province, or the
party Whip, or some such individual, owes us an explanation as to what
ensued.

Ms S N NTLABATI: Madam Chairperson, today we are 21 years and some months
older since the last time the big conference in Alma-Ata was held where we
said ``total health by the year 2000''. Central to everything which was
expected there was that from that time, ie 1978, to today, at least some of
the things which could be affordable, such as accessibility of health
service to everybody, should have been achieved. It is unfortunate that in
our country, in fact, most of Africa, we still have very far to go, and we
owe our people an explanation.

Central to the struggle of the ANC was the question of equity. It is
because of that that we say that we could not have done any better than see
this Bill drafted in order to achieve equity through accessibility of
health services to the people. I think I also have to confirm that the
transformation agenda is still on track. Very soon, ie once we implement
this Bill, our people will enjoy a season of delight. Slowly, they will be
coming out of misery.

We inherited a system which lacked access to health care. It is on that
note that we say we shall be addressing, by this Bill, the inequalities in
terms of access. We shall be ensuring adequate, reliable and safe drug
supplies and improving the rendering of pharmaceutical services.

Central also to this Bill is the question of the human resource component
which is so crucial to the health system. At this point we are talking
about the pharmacists. We needed this Bill nearly 20 or 21 years ago but,
nevertheless, we are going to catch up. Transformation comes with new
concepts and new terminology, hence we have to bring in the concept of
community service, which is, in actual fact, not new. Countries such as
Holland and Cuba may have used other terms such as vocational, but this is
nothing new.

This Bill aims to plead with our young men and women, not only those who
are in the pharmacy classes and not only those who study medicine, but even
others who are not affected by the Bill, just to volunteer for community
service when they have completed their studies. It is a service to one's
country. They must not wait for the law to force them, they must please act
like patriots.

To be specific, in my province, as has been said, we have 450 pharmacists.
Indeed, we would be guilty of an offence if the WHO were to check up on us
very closely. It has been said that only 15% of the pharmacists that we
train render services in hospital pharmacies. It costs between R50 000 and
R60 000 to produce one pharmacist, so what is so terrible about providing a
service, for one year only, to the people who are the taxpayers?
We are also pleading with the people who, through lack of understanding,
want to discourage the idea of community service when we are asking for it.
I am pleading with them that they must first go and look around the
provinces and see what is actually happening.

In closing, I will say, the time has come that what I have, if it is
affordable, others must also have. I challenge the young men and women who
are in the pharmacy classes, as they write down which places they want to
work in, to choose the rural areas. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms E C GOUWS: Madam chairperson, hon Minister, the DP has always supported
the principle of community service, and we say so again today in this
House. However, we do not believe that it should apply only to one category
of professionals such as those involved in health care, but that it should
apply across the entire spectrum of professionals.

Gemeenskapsdiens vir ons en ons land met sy agtergeblewe gemeenskappe en
groot plattelandse gebiede en swak infrastruktuur is 'n noodsaaklikheid. Ek
herhaal egter dat ons glo dit moet op 'n vrywillige basis geskied. Beter
gestel, die betrokke individu moet ten minste geken word in die
uiteindelike besluit van waar, hoe en saam met wie hy of sy in die toekoms
gaan werk.

Ons moet daarteen waak om te voorskriftelik op te tree, want dan neem ons
die vreugde in sy werk van die jong gekwalifiseerde weg. Die DP hou nie van
die idee dat die staat besluit oor hoe en waar en met watter hulpmiddels
die jongmense 'n diens moet lewer nie.

Laat ons dit maar vir mekaar sê: die goeie en suksesvolle werker is dié wie
se werkomstandighede gunstig is. Met ander woorde, 'n gelukkige werker is
'n goeie werker.

As ons goeie vrugte van gemeenskapdiens wil pluk, moet ons sorg dat die
mense se omstandighede goed is, en dat hulle gelukkig is. Dan en dan alleen
sal hierdie diens suksesvol en 'n bate vir die gemeenskap wees.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Community service is a necessity for us and our country, with its
disadvantaged communities and large rural areas, as well as its poor
infrastructure. However, I repeat that we believe it should occur on a
voluntary basis. Stated in a better way, the relevant individual should at
least be consulted with regard to the eventual decision as to where, how
and with whom he or she will be working in the future.

We must guard against being too prescriptive, because then we deprive the
young qualified person of the joys of his work. The DP does not like the
idea of the State deciding how and where and with what resources the young
people should deliver a service.

Let us be honest with one another: the good and successful employee is the
one who has a favourable working situation. In other words, a happy worker
is a good worker.

If we want to reap the fruits of community service, we must see to it that
the people have favourable circumstances, and that they are happy. Then,
and only then, will this service be successful and serve as an asset to the
community.]

We have had community service in place for newly qualified doctors for a
year now. We have received multiple complaints of unhappiness and misery
from young doctors, not because they are against the idea of community
service, but because of the chaotic administrative and organisational
systems, especially in certain provinces and areas. Are we positive that
everything is in place and that the same administrative bungling will not
be repeated as in the case of the young medical doctors?

We must do everything in our power to ensure that we have happy workers. We
have seen and heard of the problems of people who are relocated to other
working areas where they are not happy. We have seen the results of unhappy
working conditions - I am now thinking of teachers and police officers.
Doctors doing community service are on the same track. Must we add yet
another unhappy young person to this list? This, we have found out to our
regret, simply does not work.

We are experiencing a brain drain, not because the young people do not feel
for their country, but because of bad administration, little money and lack
of consultation. These things have a demoralising effect on the young
graduates looking forward to applying their knowledge in practice.

Is daar werklik oorleg gepleeg met die aptekerswesestudente? Hulle beweer
ja, daar is, maar heeltemal ontoereikend. Die meerderheid studente is nié
teen gemeenskapsdiens nie. Ons het die syfers. Hulle is nié dislojale
burgers nie, maar hulle het hulle bedenkings of hierdie diens reeds teen
die begin van 2001 effektief in plek geplaas sal kan word. Daar is nog baie
beplanning en evaluering wat gedoen moet word. Wat vir die staat en die
Minister moontlik onbenullige tegniese punte is, is vir hierdie jongmense
van die uiterste belang. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Was there really any consultation with the pharmacy students? They allege
yes, there was some consultation, but it was completely insufficient. The
majority of students are not opposed to community service. We do have the
statistics. They are not disloyal citizens, but they have their
reservations about whether this service will be effectively in place by the
beginning of 2001. There is still a great deal of planning and evaluation
that has to be done. What are possibly unimportant technical points to the
state and the Minister are of the utmost importance to these young people.]

These minor technicalities, such as how allocation will be done, where
students will be sent, whether there will be adequate supervision for these
young trained, but inexperienced, pharmacists and what the conditions of
service will be, are the things that are of concern to the DP. As a party,
therefore, we cannot support this Bill.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Minister of Health Dr M E Tshabalala-
Msimang and hon members, the enactment of this Pharmacy Amendment Bill is
definitely highly applauded by my province, KwaZulu-Natal, including me as
a person.

Taking this direction, which would see to it that quality care is given to
all in this new millennium is indeed a milestone which can never be
disputed. The pressure of work that has been experienced by health workers
in the clinical sector during the previous decades will be gradually
alleviated. The health care givers, especially in the nursing profession,
despite their heavy workload within the parameters of their profession,
have acted to fill the gaps, dispensing medicine in the absence of
pharmacists. This usually happens in the underserved areas of society - I
am talking about rural areas and other low socioeconomic areas.
I have worked in the nursing profession for a long time and I am familiar
with quite a number of the problems that emanate from and exist because of
the shortage of pharmacists in health care services. With the community
service for pharmacists introduced by this Bill, the students will acquire
experience that will make them fully fledged pharmacists when they complete
their training.

They will have a better understanding of the community they serve. The
health services will always be assured of the availability of this category
of people, as is the case with nurses and medical students. In promoting
quality care for patients by working in collaboration with other health
disciplines, pharmaceutical care will not exist in isolation from other
health care givers. It belongs to the multidisciplinary team.

Pharmacists are responsible directly to the patients for the cost, quality
and results of pharmaceutical care, like other health care givers. They are
problem solvers who must be capable of adapting to changes in health care.

On behalf of my province KwaZulu-Natal and on behalf of my party, the IFP,
we support this Bill as it is on the Table.
Lo Mthetho ophasiswayo namhlanje siwushayela ihlombe thina esikwaziyo
ukuhlupheka. Kubuhlungu kabi ukuvuka ekuseni uhambe uye esibhedlela noma
emtholampilo ufike uhlangane nokuthi ozokhipha imithi akekho noma mhlawumbe
kukhona oyedwa kanti abantu bona baningi kakhulu. Ngakho-ke, kuze kushaye
isikhathi sokushayisa abantu bengayitholile imithi. Lokhu kuvamise
ezindaweni zasemakhaya. Angizukusho mina ukuthi yizindawo zasemaphandleni
njengoba besho abanye abangalwazi ulimi lwesiZulu. Amaphandle yilapho
kuhlala khona izilwane, hhayi abantu. Abantu bahlala ezindaweni
ezisemakhaya.

Abahlengikazi esikhathini esiningi basebenza kanzima benza umsebenzi
wabezemithi, (ama-pharmacists). Siyazi sonke ukuthi umhlengikazi
ungumgogodla wezempilo. Udokotela uma engekho, ukhona umhlengikazi. Wenza
umsebenzi kadokotela nowakhe kanye nowabanye uma bengekho ukuze ahlenge
impilo yesiguli sakhe.

Uma-ke abafundi bakwezemithi bezophakwa nabo basebenze emphakathini ukuze
baqeqesheke kahle bawazi, bawujwayele futhi bawuthande umphakathi,
yisibusiso leso esivela ngaphezulu. Siyawuncoma kakhulu lo mthetho
osezithebeni namhlanje othi abafundela ulwazi lwemithi mabayikhiphele
iziguli njengokubona kukadokotela. Abahlengikazi bazokhululeka bakwazi
ukubhekana nomsebenzi wabo ngqo, bayeke ukuba yizivimbo noma amaspigots,
kuzo zonke izindawo.

Sibonile kwezinye izindawo abagulayo, ngenxa yokugcwala kwalapho kukhishwa
khona imithi, bebuyela emakhaya imithi bengayiphethe kuthiwe abayilande
ngakusasa ukugula kube kuthe bhe. Umuntu athole ukuthi umenzi wemithi
oyedwa ukhiphela imithi inqwaba yeziguli. Uma engekho, kwenzeke lokhu
esengikushilo. Angiyiphathi-ke eyasezibhedlela zasemakhaya, izinkinga
ziningi kakhulu khona.

Siyethemba ukuthi lo mthetho phasiswayo uzoletha abezemithi abaningi kuzo
zonke izindawo bakhiphe imithi emini nasebusuku njengoba kwenza
abahlengikazi nodokotela. Muhle lo mthetho. Siwushayela ihlombe.
Siyothokoza uma kulungiswa isimo kuhlangatshezwane nezidingo zalo msebenzi
ukuze abafundayo bakunamele ukuphakwa kwabo emakhaya.

Egameni lesifundazwe sami saKwaZulu-Natali nasegameni leqembu Inkatha
Freedom Party ngithi halala. Elethu. Siyawesekela lo mthetho. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)
[We, the people who have experienced hardships, applaud the Bill that is
being passed. It is sad to wake up in the morning, especially when one is
ill and has to go to hospital or the clinic, only to find that there is no
one to give one medicine at the pharmacy. Or perhaps there is only one
person to attend a huge number of people. People wait for medicines until
it is time for the staff to knock off. I would not call the rural areas
``the countryside'' as those who do not know the Zulu language have done.
People stay in rural areas, not in the countryside.

Nurses work hard doing the work of pharmacists. We all know that nurses are
a fountain of life. When a doctor is absent, a nurse does her own job and a
doctor's job. She also does her colleagues' job to save people's lives.

If medical students are deployed in communities as part of their training,
to cause them to like working with people, that will be a blessing. We are
happy with this Bill as it says the medical students should give medicines
to people according to the doctor's prescription. This will bring the
nurses relief and enable them to focus on their job. They will not have to
do everybody's jobs.

We have seen other places where people were told to come the following day
to collect medicine whilst they were in pain. This happened because there
were a lot of people waiting for medicines, whereas the number of staff
that served them was not enough. One found that one pharmacist had to
attend to a lot of people. In cases where there were no pharmacists people
had to come back the following day. The situation was worse in rural
hospitals. We hope that this Bill will enable pharmacists to give medicine
to people day and night. In fact, they will be working the same way as
nurses and doctors.

This is a good Bill and we applaud it. We are happy if the situation is
corrected and the demands of this job are met so that medical students will
enjoy their deployment to rural areas.

In the name of my province, KwaZulu-Natal, and also in the name of my
party, the IFP, I wish to say congratulations. The country is ours. We
support this Bill. [Applause.]]

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chairperson, I must say, isiZulu is a beautiful
language, and I always enjoy hearing our colleagues speaking that beautiful
language.
The Pharmacy Amendment Bill makes it mandatory that a person registering
for the first time as a pharmacist must do pharmaceutical community work
for one year before they can practise as a qualified pharmacist. Christian
democrats do not object to community service, and I believe the track
record of Christians and the church, generally, in voluntary community
service speaks volumes in South Africa and, of course, we support it.

What concerns us is that certain categories of health workers are being
penalised and discriminated against because of their choice of career. It
is not that we object to the principle of doing charitable work, but we are
not even sure that the measure is not unconstitutional. If we read section
13 of the Constitution on forced labour and section 9 on equality, it seems
we have here discrimination against a particular class of worker.

The ACDP understands the problem. We understand that there must be a
solution to the problem and we understand the sentiments that underlie the
Government wanting to solve the problem. However, we think the solution is
to offer bursaries to people entering the particular categories of work
required, in this case pharmacists.
If we are short of pharmacists, then we must make bursaries available for
students to study pharmacy for nothing, conditional upon them working for
the state for a period of, say, three years after graduation. It is a
principle and practice well established in South Africa and well
established worldwide, and it works very well indeed.

The old saying applies here that if one wants more of something, one should
subsidise it. If one wants less of something, one should tax it. By
bringing this new kind of impost, it may well have the opposite effect to
that intended. One will have fewer pharmacists, and not more. This is a
fair, tried and successful approach, and it is a fair bargain. Tied or
forced labour is not something South Africa would want to give birth to in
our new democracy.

The amendment to the Pharmacy Act also gives the Minister unlimited power
to decide where the service is to be performed and the conditions of
employment. This too, is unacceptable as far as we are concerned. If the
Minister was to tell my little girl, who has just qualified, that she must
go to some remote, and perhaps what I would consider inhospitable, spot, I
would not like that at all.

The ACDP is opposed to all forms of social engineering. We prefer to see
the use of incentives - fair incentives - wherever possible, and maximum
choice. We favour community service - it lies at the heart of what we
believe - but we are against this amendment, which discriminates,
manipulates and robs people of the exercise of their own discretion. We are
against the measure, and we have made it known within our provincial
delegation.

Mr J HORNE: Chairperson, hon Minister, members of the Council, I would
briefly like to take this opportunity, on behalf of my province, the
Northern Cape, to support the Bill under discussion.

The Northern Cape's portfolio committee on health has taken a proactive
stance with regard to the issue of community service for pharmacists.
Consultations with relevant role-players and the department have indicated
that community service should be a priority in the Northern Cape in view of
the fact that adequate pharmaceutical services are currently lacking owing
to a shortage of operative pharmaceutical personnel.

The Northern Cape has only 1,1% of the total registered pharmacists in
South Africa, the majority of whom are employed in the private sector. Of
the 108 registered pharmacists in the province, only 16 are currently
working in the public sector. These 16 pharmacists provide services to the
majority of the population in the province as large parts of the province
are rural, with no private pharmacists.

The staffing levels of pharmaceutical services do not conform to the World
Health Organisation's norms or standards. Currently, there is only one
pharmacist per 7 777 persons in the Northern Cape.

The relevant stakeholders were informed of the application process, the
allocation criteria and the control systems which will be in place. As
regards the application process, the national Department of Health and
pharmaceutical services in the province will work jointly. However, it will
be the responsibility of the province to set up the conditions of
employment.

The allocation will be done on the basis of service needs. If there are any
bursary holders, they will be allocated to the province from which they
receive their bursaries. Allocations to the different districts will be
done from a central point in the province.

The control will be under the jurisdiction of pharmaceutical services in
the province, which will provide quarterly reports to the national
Department of Health on progress regarding community service.

The statutory council called the SA Pharmacy Council will register
pharmacists upon successful completion of community service. Personnel will
provide support to community service pharmacists from the pharmaceutical
service component of the Department of Health and problem-resolution
committees will be set up in the province.

The Bill follows the same route as in the case of medical practitioners,
which has proved to be a success and therefore needs the support of us all.
It has ensured that effective medical and health services become a reality.

In all nine provinces, there are shortages of pharmacists. Although the
legislation requires one-year community service, it will enable the
pharmacists to gain valuable practical experience which will be to their
benefit when they open their own pharmacies or are employed in the
pharmaceutical business world.

The Bill will not only reduce the acute shortage of pharmacists, but will
also bring about a much improved general health service to the communities.
Therefore the Northern Cape province supports it. It is preferable to start
the service in January 2001, once the Act and regulations are promulgated.
[Applause.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson, hon Minister and members thank you for this
opportunity to participate in this debate. However, my greatest thanks are
directed to the Almighty God for His abundant blessings over all of us in
the new millennium.

According to available statistics, there were, in the North West province
in 1999, 433 pharmacists in state employment to a population of
approximately 3,8 million. This means one pharmacist was dispensing
medicine and drugs to approximately 8 000 patients. This situation applies,
in varying degrees, to all other provinces in our country.

According to the World Health Organisation, the average for industrialised
countries is 1:2 300. When one compares this ratio with our situation, one
realises that we are confronted by a huge problem that calls for our
immediate attention. The amendment before this House seeks to address this
acute shortage of pharmacists working for the state. The insertion of
section 14(a) in Act 53 of 1974, makes provision for the performance of
community service of one year by pharmacists who are registering for the
first time.

Most of our people in this country use state health facilities, and
therefore we need to influence the distribution of pharmaceutical services
adequately in each province. The distribution of pharmaceutical services
throughout the provinces would not happen on its own, and therefore there
is merit in having this kind of legislation. With the introduction of
community service for the medical practitioners in 1998, this shortage is
being gradually reduced. Similarly, the proposed amendment to the Pharmacy
Act of 1974 would be to the national good.

On behalf of the North West province and the UCDP, we support the Bill as
it is. [Applause.]

Dr A E VAN ZYL (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members and
colleagues, the Standing Committee on Health and Welfare of the Western
Cape is made up of members of the different political parties; three New NP
members, three ANC and one DP.

On 5 November last year, the committee members listened to the concerns
raised by the pharmacy students, the director of the University of the
Western Cape pharmacy school, and representatives from the Pharmaceutical
Society of SA relating to the proposed amendment. The students agreed to
community service, and agreed that it was beneficial to the country. They
agreed to do community service. They only asked to be considered, as the
Bill affected them, their lives, their futures and their families.

Last week at a meeting Dr Zokufa, spokesperson for the department and
Minister, emphasised that the intention was to make community service so
attractive that pharmacists would want to remain in government service even
after their year of service. The student pharmacists, on the other hand,
asked that commencement of community service start in the year 2002 and not
in 2001. This would allow students who qualified in 1999 a little more time
to repay their student loans and organise their future lives. Why can this
be not granted? Why are we so pressed to pass laws without consideration
for the people it will affect?

A survey showed that second-year students had no problems with doing
community service compared with those in the final year. This is because
the second-year students will be able to prepare for community service
better. The survey also showed that 66% of the second year students said
that they would still have done pharmacy had they known about community
service beforehand.

In the Western Cape many pharmacists are women. A large percentage of these
women are from the Muslim community. Is sending them into rural areas,
where their working conditions are not secure, how the Minister intends
encouraging our youth to become professionals in this discipline?

I am confused. As politicians we were elected by our South African public
to represent them, to serve them, to look after them, to work on their
behalf. Or am I mistaken? Is this amendment actually intended for
foreigners: Cubans, Russians, Congolese, Zimbabweans or others?
My place of work is in the provincial administrative building in Wale
Street. For access to my office I must have an identity pass card, and
visitors must leave their names and addresses at security checkpoints
before they are allowed to visit anyone in the building. How fortunate we
are! We are protected and can perform our jobs in safety. What a luxury we
take for granted! What about our sons, daughters, nieces, nephews - our
family and friends, for whom this Bill is intended?

Why do we show so little respect, recognition, understanding and confidence
for our people, our South Africans who have gone through difficult times,
who are now plagued by other, more desperate worries like violence, rape,
murder, accidents and HIV/Aids? Why do we not make laws that reflect their
input? Why do our laws not demonstrate upliftment in the form of
recognition? Why do our laws have to be in the form of punishment? For that
matter, why do our standing committees invite our public to give their
input if their input is ignored?

Concerning the Pharmacy Amendment Bill, we were also told last week that
regulations are being drafted, and are intended to cover all these
concerns. However, do we not perhaps forget that legislation should be
correct in all its aspects, especially legally? Why not correct the Bill in
the first place?

Finally, registration as a professional is mostly of importance in the
country where that person will be practising. Registration as a pharmacist
in South Africa is not a prerequisite to work in the United States or
anywhere else in the world. The pharmacist will have to register in England
if he or she wants to work there. That, I hope, clarifies the fear that
allowing pharmacists to register ... [Time expired.]

Mr M I MAKOELA: Madam Chairperson, when the subject of community service
for doctors was first discussed there was a great deal of opposition, like
that we are hearing now, some of it extremely harsh and very irrational.
For example, some newspapers reported at that time that the proposed Bill
was an outrageous transgression of the civil rights of trainee doctors, as
we are hearing now from the ACDP, and that it was contrary to natural
justice. That is still being said by the ACDP today.

There were also the prophets of doom who, as we have heard from the DP, the
ACDP and the Western Cape, predicted there would be a mass exodus of young
doctors to other countries in an attempt to avoid community service. They
are still continuing today.

Nevertheless, none of the bad publicity received deterred us from bringing
doctors closer to the people. We knew we needed to ensure equal access to
resources. Our people were suffering and we are in government to help
alleviate that suffering. Unfortunately, unlike the ACDP and the DP, we do
not represent rich people. We represent the poor of the country, and we
make no apology for that.

We are not going to pretend that the process of allocating doctors was
without logistical problems. There were a good few examples of those, but
what has heartened this Government is the overwhelmingly positive response
at grass-roots level from public hospitals, clinics and patients who
received the services of these young doctors.

The department shared with our committee some of the comments received from
those doctors providing services to the community. Many of them saw the
process as a unique learning experience, unlike what was reflected in the
comments of the previous speakers.

Today we are going further by asking our young pharmacists to contribute to
nation-building by assisting the Department of Health and the community at
large with their valuable service for one year. We, as Government, are
asking a little extra. We ask young people to serve their country, thereby
making some personal sacrifices and giving up some modern conveniences, but
we need to ask them for this sacrifice, nonetheless. If it was not
absolutely necessary, we would not be asking.

If I may just for the moment share with hon members the situation in my
province with regard to pharmacists, then hon members here and members of
the public will begin to appreciate the backlog of inequities which the
Ministry, this committee and the Department of Health are trying to
alleviate with this legislation. In my province, the Northern Province,
there is one pharmacist for every 16 446 people. Some people from my
province do not even know what a pharmacist is.

What we see this Bill doing is ensuring that of the pharmacy students in
their fourth year right now, at least a few will come to the Northern
Province. We want to assure them of the most hospitable, peaceful and
unforgettable experience. In return, these young people will be performing
a priceless task for my constituency and for others like mine.

Furthermore, we would like to see the unequal interprovincial distribution
of health care personnel, especially pharmacists, rectified. The more rural
provinces such as the Northern Province will continue to carry the burden
of insufficient resources if we do not develop a strategic plan to rectify
the situation.

The Minister has assured us in her health sector strategic framework for
1999-2004 that one important priority of the department and her Ministry is
to ensure equity and the distribution of and access to health resources. We
hope that statistics such as those in the survey done by the SA Institute
of Race Relations with regard to medical personnel registered with the
Interim National Medical and Dental Council of SA, the Interim Nursing
Council and the Interim Pharmacy Council of SA between 1990 and 1996, will
become a thing of the past very quickly. In this survey it was found that
in 1996 there were 4 235 dentists, 28 381 doctors and 9 752 pharmacists for
the whole of South Africa. Pharmacists formed only 4% of registered health
workers.

Our Constitution guarantees everyone the right of access to health care
services, but if we do not have the resources, we cannot provide access.
Pharmacists are an extremely valuable resource. We need to pool all our
resources and distribute them evenly throughout the country, and therefore
our province supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr P G QOKWENI: Madam Chair, hon Minister and members of the NCOP, our
Constitution provides for the right of access by everyone to health care
services, and requires the state to take reasonable legislative and other
measures within its available resources to achieve the progressive
realisation of that right. The amendment this House is debating this
afternoon, that of providing for the performance of community service by
persons registering for the first time as pharmacists, is intended to
address this vision.

The province of the Eastern Cape is composed largely of rural land and
rural communities with a myriad of disadvantages. Many of its people have
never seen a pharmacist, let alone a pharmacist at work. Those that we
produce are continually lost to the bright lights and glamour of Cape Town,
Durban and Gauteng. This Bill will at least add to the trickle of 826
pharmacists that we currently have and facilitate an increase through the
community pharmaceutical service recruits.

When the initiative to amend the existing Act through this Bill was
considered, the concern centred mainly around how best to engage the
pharmacy students in a consultative process and not whether or not there
was a need for community service. This need was self-evident. The student
pharmacists would leave their homes and families and render services in
remote rural areas. One would love to confirm that they were clear about
the expectations.

We are now satisfied that the process of consultation has provided the
department, and will do so continually, with the opportunity of addressing
the concerns raised by the SA Pharmaceutical Students Federation with
regard to where and how they would do this service, what support and
protection they would receive from the department and in fact that they
would not be seen as cheap labour.

We can ensure that the pharmacists are brought to those areas of the
province where they are needed most and that the best possible measures are
taken to give them comparable security. Our province cannot wait for the
implementation of this Bill. We want to assure the hon the Minister that we
will take care of the students deployed to our province, because we
understand the value of better access to health services. So the Eastern
Cape is in full support of the Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, hon members, special delegates and
colleagues, let me thank everyone very much for a very sensitive and lively
debate and for the majority of colleagues who have come out in support of
the Bill, except, of course, those who debated out of tune, particularly
the DP, the New NP and the ACDP. I think by now, at the end of this debate,
we all know who their constituency is. We all know the character and the
composition of their constituencies.

Those of us who have had a chance to visit the clinics and health centres
in our constituencies, especially in the remote rural areas, will concede
that, indeed, the availability of drugs even in those areas has improved.
This is also confirmed by our own surveys that indicate that more than 80%
of essential drugs in our clinics and health centres, including the health
institutions, are available.

The problem that gets highlighted each time we visit these clinics is the
difficulty in the availability of drugs for chronic diseases. The reason is
the shortage and absence of pharmacists who must dispense these drugs. This
in turn undermines even the provisions of our patients' rights charter. I
think members will agree with me that this arrangement and the adoption of
this Bill will go a long way towards ensuring the availability, at all
levels and at all times, of a reliable and constant flow of drugs and also
for the management and treatment of chronic illnesses, particularly of the
elderly.

The chairperson of the committee spoke about the shortage of medical staff
in the rural areas. Yes, that is true, but let me assure the member that
just this week we had a meeting with all the co-ordinators of the programme
of doctors who have come to South Africa on the government-to-government
agreement which seeks to make doctors available in the rural areas. I think
we need to thank Cuba and other European countries that have made these
doctors available in the rural areas. I think the next thing that we must
do is to ensure that other categories of health workers are also available
and present in the rural areas in particular.

Let me assure members that the department and the Ministry will do its best
during the course of this year, and not in the year 2002 or the year
leading to 2002, but this year, to prepare for those students to do
community service. Of course, we shall be building on our experiences.

The last speaker referred to Alma-Ata. I think by now everybody agrees that
the Alma-Ata Declaration is very ambitious indeed. But it did assist us to
focus on the delivery of health care, particularly for the disadvantaged
communities and also to ensure equity in health care delivery. I think we
have done that as a country and, again, we are building on our experience.
Certainly, in our country, there are visible and tangible examples of the
progress made in health care delivery. These are informed, in part, by the
international instruments and also guided by the provisions of our own
Constitution.

To Mrs Gouws I say, yes, indeed, we would have liked to see all new
students do community service, but I think she will agree with me that in
this country there are moves in other departments to follow the Department
of Health to ensure community service in the rural areas in particular. I
think she should say: ``Halala!'' [Well done!] to the Department of Health.
``You have done very well, you have set the pace, we congratulate you,''
because we have proved that it can be done. I am not prescriptive. We have
consulted the students. We have even had road shows in order to consult the
students. Her proposal is indeed a contradiction in terms. She talks about
the poor and then she says we should not redistribute the resources. I find
that absolutely ridiculous.

I would like to invite her to read an article in the Mail and Guardian of
last week that was about community doctors in the rural areas, and then
decide for herself whether or not these students are indeed gaining
practical experience and whether they like it or not. The article is
contrary to what she has just told this House.

I think it would also be very ridiculous for us to always rely on
expatriates, to always rely on doctors who come to this country in terms of
a government-to-government agreement when we have people who complete their
studies in this country and can indeed be of service to our people. I think
this has also been aptly articulated by Mr Horne. What is the DP doing
about the brain drain? What would they call adequate consultation? I am
glad, in any case, that she herself conceded that the students do agree
that they were consulted. In any case, what would one expect from the DP?
Would I expect them to support the Bill? No, I would never expect them to
do so. After all, they do not know what the rural areas are like. They do
not know the suffering that takes place in the rural areas. But, thanks to
the composition of this House, I think the Bill is going to go through.

I appeal to Mrs Vilakazi to invite Mrs Gouws to go with her to the rural
areas - perhaps then she would speak a different language - and see for
herself what the suffering is like. It is not the picture that she paints
in this House. Let me thank Mrs Vilakazi for offering her free information,
education and a lecture. She is advised to join Mrs Vilakazi, in
particular, in KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape and then she can see for
herself. Maybe Mrs Gouws might win over a few members to the DP if she goes
there.

I want to tell Mr Durr that we have to start somewhere because we want to
build on our experiences. There are no categories of health workers that
are going to be excluded. I can assure him that when I briefed our
committee - and I thought he was there too - I did indicate that we are
moving and then we will go to other categories of health workers so that
they too can do community service.

I do not understand what is unconstitutional about the Bill, because it is
beginning to redress the legacy of the past. I do not agree with him.

This Bill is not about bursaries. It is about placement of pharmacists for
community service, not about bursaries. If he he wants a Bill on bursaries,
he must please propose it. [Laughter.]

He certainly also has not understood that taxpayers in this country
contribute largely to the education and training of all students, including
medical students, and he does not even know that the Department of Health
is in constant dialogue with other stakeholders around the placement of
students for community service and on how we should improve the criteria
for their placement. I invite him to please join us at next month's meeting
so that he can learn for himself.

Let me also thank all those who do assist us as we try to improve this
initiative by improving the criteria in order to make sure that the
students who do community service indeed do it in an environment that is
conducive for them to begin to assist us in redressing the legacy of the
past.

I really was very disappointed at Dr Van Zyl's input. I thought she was a
doctor and that she would indeed subscribe to the need for equity in health
care delivery in this country, but she spoke differently. I really am very
disappointed. May I invite her to come to my office so that we can discuss
this matter in depth. I sincerely mean that, so she must please come. In
any case, I thought there were also Muslims in the rural areas. So what is
her problem? [Interjections.] If there are none, maybe these students will
help to convert people to the Muslim faith. She should be happy.
[Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order!

The MINISTER: Indeed, I sat here and I could not believe what she was
saying. In my own view, she really is not concerned about the plight of the
poor. She really is not. [Interjections.]

The DP and the New NP would be the first parties to cry foul if we were to
go out and recruit foreign pharmacists. They would, wouldn't they?

Thank you very much to Mr Qokweni. His contribution does indeed indicate
that the need for community service by pharmacists is absolutely self-
evident. As I have said, we do consult and will continue to do so, because
one can only improve by consultation and building on one's experiences.

Once again, thank you very much to those who have supported the Bill, and I
hope that those who did not support it can go and sign up in support
thereof after this debate. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution (Western
Cape dissenting).

The Council adjourned at 15:26.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 1999

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:
         (i)     Financial Services Board Amendment Bill [B 62 - 99]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance
              - National Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (i)     Fire Brigade Services Amendment Bill [B 63 - 99] (National
              Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Portfolio Committee on Provincial and
              Local Government - National Assembly).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Education:


     Report of the Council on Higher Education for 1998-99.

2.    The Minister of Defence:
     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of France concerning Defence Co-
         operation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


     (2)    Agreement between the Department of Defence of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Federal Ministry of Defence of the Federal
         Republic of Germany on the Mutual Protection of Classified Defence
         related information, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Kingdom of Lesotho concerning the Status of Armed Forces
         in the Kingdom of Lesotho providing military assistance, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (4)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Singapore concerning the
         Status of the Singapore Forces deployed in the Republic of South
         Africa, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.
     (5)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania concerning
         Defence Co-operation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (6)    Memorandum of Agreement between the United Nations Office for
         Project Services and the Republic of South Africa, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (7)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the United States of America concerning
         Security Measures for the Protection of Classified Military
         Information, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (8)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Department of Defence of the United States of America
         concerning Co-operation on Military Environmental Matters, tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (9)    Administrative and Technical Status Diplomatic Note Exchange
         between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
         Government of the United States of America, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (10) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho concerning the Status
         of Armed Forces in the Republic of South Africa participating in
         Exercise Blue Crane, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Document, in terms of section 9(1) of the Promotion of National
         Unity and Reconciliation Act, 1995, regarding the remuneration,
         allowances and other employment benefits of the staff of the Truth
         and Reconciliation Commission.


     (2)    List relating to Government Notice for 5 November 1999.
4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Report of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry for 1998-99.


                         THURSDAY, 25 NOVEMBER 1999

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


          (a)     Intelligence Services Control Amendment Bill [B 46B - 99]
               - Act No 42 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on
               18 November 1999);


          (b)     Abolition of Certain Title Conditions Bill [B 40B - 99] -
               Act No 43 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18
               November 1999);


          (c)     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 44B - 99] - Act No 48 of
               1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18 November
               1999);


          (d)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 55 - 99] - Act No 51 of
               1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18 November
               1999);


          (e)     Second Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 58 - 99] - Act No
               52 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18
               November 1999);


          (f)     Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 59 - 99] - Act No 53 of
               1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18 November
               1999);


          (g)     Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 45B - 99] - Act No 55
               of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18 November
               1999); and


          (h)     National Student Financial Aid Scheme Bill [B 48B - 99] -
               Act No 56 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 18
               November 1999).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 25
         November 1999 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Limitation of Legal Proceedings against Government
              Institutions Bill [B 65 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
              (Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
              - National Assembly) [Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Gazette No 20676 of 25 November
              1999.]


     (3)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 24
         November 1999 submitted the draft Cross-Border Insolvency Bill,
         1999, and the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed
         legislation to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint
         Rule 159. The draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select Committee
         on Security and Constitutional Affairs by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).
National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter,
         dated 18 November 1999, to the Chairperson of the National Council
         of Provinces, informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996, of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in terms of section 201(2)(c) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


         REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(3) 0F THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996), ON THE
         EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN TERMS OF
         SECTION 201(2)(c) OF THE CONSTITUTION, 1996, IN THE FULFILLMENT OF
         AN INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATION IN THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE


         1. This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that on
              12 November 1999, I authorised the employment of the South
              African National Defence Force personnel and aircraft in the
              Republic of Mozambique in fulfillment of an international
              obligation. This employment was authorised in accordance with
              the provisions of section 82(4)(b)(ii) of the Constitution of
              the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act 108 of 1996), as well
              as section 201(2)(c) of the said Constitution of 1996, as read
              with section 227(1)(b) of the Constitution of 1993.


         2. This employment is in compliance with the Republic of South
              Africa's regional support to render logistical support to the
              Mozambican Government during their elections.


         3. The deployment will consist of 121 members rendering support in
              terms of logistics, communications and medical. Seven Oryx
              helicopters, of which one will be in reserve in case of
              unserviceability, will be deployed. Other support aircraft
              will be required for the pre-deployment reconnaissance,
              deployment of equipment, placing of fuel, transport of
              election officials and deployment and withdrawal of personnel.
              These include Cessna 208, Casa 212, C-130, Boeing 707, Falcon
              50 and PC-12.


         4. The costs of the operation amount to:


              a)  Flying Hour Rates and Fuel  R15 903 828-00
                  costs for Oryx, C-208, C-212,
                  C-130, B-707, PC-12, Falcon 50


              b)  Total Logistical Support    R949 920-90
                  for a Temporary Air Base


              c)  Communications Support      R34 999-98


              d)  Personnel Allowances  R227 570-88
                  (121 personnel)


              e)  Medical Support  R77 036-16


              f)  Total                 R21   193   350-00


         5. I will also communicate this report to the National Assembly
              and wish to request that you bring it to the notice of the
              Members of the National Council of Provinces.


         With kind regards




         T M MBEKI
         PRESIDENT


     (2)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter,
         dated 18 November 1999, to the Chairperson of the National Council
         of Provinces, informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996, of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in terms of section 201(2)(c) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


         REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(3) 0F THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996), ON THE
         EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN TERMS OF
         SECTION 201(2)(c) OF THE CONSTITUTION, 1996, IN THE FULFILLMENT OF
         AN INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATION IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
         1. This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that on
              18 November 1999, I authorised the employment of the South
              African National Defence Force personnel and aircraft in the
              United Republic of Tanzania in fulfillment of an international
              obligation. This employment was authorised in accordance with
              the provisions of section 82(4)(b)(ii) of the Constitution of
              the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act 200 of 1993), [which
              continues to be in force in terms of Item 24(1) of Schedule 6
              to the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act
              No 108 of 1996)], as well as section 201(2)(c) of the said
              Constitution of 1996, as read with section 227(1)(b) of the
              Constitution of 1993.


         2. This employment is in compliance with the Republic of South
              Africa's regional obligation for support. The presentation of
              this refresher diver training to members of the Tanzanian
              Peoples Defence Force over the period 10 November 1999 to 1
              December 1999 falls within the ambit of South Africa's
              regional commitments.


         3. The deployment will consist of the SANDF Diving Team, including
              a Diving Instruction, Diving Supervisor, and five Dive
              Technicians. One C-130B transport aircraft with eight
              crewmembers will be required to transport the SANDF Diving
              Team and equipment to and from Dar-Es-Salaam.


         4. The costs for the operation amount to:


              a.  Fuel costs       R130 670-00


              b.  Landing Fees and overflight R15   600-00
                  costs


              c.  Naval Group S&T  R93  744-00


              d.  Total                 R240 014-00


         5. I will also communicate this report to the National Assembly
              and wish to request that you bring it to the notice of the
              Members of the National Council of Provinces.


         With kind regards




         T M MBEKI
         PRESIDENT


     (3)    The following members have been appointed to serve on the
         Committees or Subcommittees mentioned below, viz:


         Ad Hoc Committee on Oversight and Accountability


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Suka, L    ANC
         Free State    Setona, T S      ANC
                            Nel, P J C (Alternate) New NP
         Gauteng Jacobus, L  ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Matthee, P A     New NP
         North West    Lever, L G DP
            Surty, M E (Alternate)      ANC
         Western Cape  Pandor, G N M (Alternate)   ANC
         Subcommittee on Delegated Legislation


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Suka, L    ANC
         Free State    Setona, T S (Chairperson)   ANC
            Nel, P J C (Alternate)      New
                 NP
         Gauteng Jacobus, L  ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Vilakazi, J N    IFP
         Mpumalanga    Mahlangu, J L    ANC
         Northern Cape Kgware, D M      ANC
         Northern Province Makoela, M I ANC
         North West    Lever, L G (Alternate)      DP
            Surty, M E (Alternate)      ANC
            Maloyi, P D M    ANC
         Western Cape  Pandor, G N M    ANC
            Ackermann, C     New
                 NP




         Joint Subcommittee on Delegated Legislation


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Suka, L    ANC
         Free State    Setona, T S (Co-chairperson)      ANC
            Nel, P J C New
                 NP
         Gauteng Jacobus, L  ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Matthee, P A     New
                 NP
         North West    Lever, L G DP
            Surty, M E (Alternate)      ANC
         Western Cape  Pandor, G N M    ANC




         Joint Subcommittee on Funding of Represented Political Parties


         Province      Member     Party
         Gauteng Conroy, E A New
                 NP
         KwaZulu-Natal Bhengu, M J (Alternate)     IFP
         Mpumalanga    Mahlangu, J L    ANC
            Bhabha, M (Alternate) ANC
         Northern Cape Lubidla, E N (Co-chairperson)     ANC
         Northern Province Makoela, M I ANC
         North West    Lever, L G DP
            Tlhagale, J O (Alternate)   UCDP


         Joint Subcommittee on Internal Arrangements


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Willem, B  ANC
         Free State    Nel, P J C (Alternate)      New
                 NP
         Gauteng Ndzanga, R A     ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Thomson, B ANC
         Mpumalanga    Mkhaliphi, B J (Alternate)  ANC
         Northern Cape Van Niekerk, A E New
                 NP
         Northern Province Mushwana, M L (Co-chairperson)     ANC
         Western Cape  Versfeld, A M    DP
            Ntwanambi, N D (Alternate)  ANC




         Subcommittee on Internal Arrangements


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Willem, B  ANC
         Free State    Nel, P J C (Alternate)      New
                  NP
         Gauteng Ndzanga, R A     ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Thomson, B ANC
         Mpumalanga    Mkhaliphi, B J (Alternate)  ANC
         Northern Cape Van Niekerk, A E New
                 NP
         Northern Province Mushwana, M L (Chairperson)   ANC
         Western Cape  Versfeld, A M    DP
            Ntwanambi, N D (Alternate)  ANC




         Subcommittee on International Relations


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Dlulane, B N     ANC
            Qokweni, P G     UDM
         Free State    Ntlabati, S N    ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Zulu, B Z  ANC
         Mpumalanga    Themba, M P (Alternate)     ANC
         Northern Cape Lubidla, E N (Alternate)    ANC
        Northern Province Mushwana, M L (Deputy Chairperson)  ANC
         North West    Moatshe, P (Alternate)      ANC
            Surty, M E (Alternate)      ANC
         Western Cape  Pandor, G N M (Chairperson) ANC
            Ackermann, C     New
                 NP
         Joint Subcommittee on International Relations


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Qokweni, P G     UDM
         Free State    Ntlabati, S N    ANC
         Gauteng Jacobus, L  ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Zulu, B Z  ANC
         Mpumalanga    Themba, M P (Alternate)     ANC
         Northern Cape Lubidla, E N (Alternate)    ANC
         North West    Moatshe, P (Alternate)      ANC
            Surty, M E (Alternate)      ANC
         Western Cape  Pandor, G N M (Co-chairperson)    ANC
            Ackermann, C     New
                 NP




         Joint Subcommittee on Review of Joint Rules


         Province      Member     Party
         Gauteng Moosa, M V (Co-chairperson) ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Raju, N M  DP
            Vilakazi, J N (Alternate)   IFP
         Northern Province Makoela, M I (Alternate)      ANC
         North West    Maloyi, P N D    ANC
         Western Cape  Ntwanambi, N D   ANC
            Ackermann, C     ANC




         Joint Subcommittee on Parliamentary Powers and Privileges


         Province      Member     Party
         Gauteng Moosa, M V (Co-chairperson) ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Raju, N M  DP
            Vilakazi, J N (Alternate)   IFP
         Northern Province Makoela, M I (Alternate)      ANC
         North West    Maloyi, P N D    ANC
         Western Cape  Ntwanambi, N D   ANC
            Ackermann, C     New
                 NP


         Subcommittee on Review of Council Rules and Powers and Privileges


         Province      Member     Party
         Gauteng Moosa, M V (Chairperson)    ANC
         KwaZulu-Natal Raju, M N  DP
            Vilakazi, J N (Alternate)   IFP
         Northern Province Makoela, M I (Alternate)      ANC
         North West    Maloyi, P N D    ANC
         Western Cape  Ntwanambi, N D   ANC
            Durr, K D S      ACDP


         Joint Subcommittee on Parliamentary Budget


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Majodina, P C P  ANC
         Free State    Marais, A (Chairperson)     ANC
         Gauteng Mahlangu, Q D    ANC
            Conroy, E A      New
                 NP
         Mpumalanga    Taabe, T B (Alternate)      ANC
            Krumbock, G R    DP
         Northern Cape Kgware, D M (Alternate)     ANC
         Northern Province Mokoena, M L (Alternate)      ANC
         North West    Kolweni, Z S (Alternate)    ANC


         Joint Subcommittee on Support for Members


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Majodina, P C P  ANC
         Free State    Marais, A (Co-chairperson)  ANC
         Gauteng Mahlangu, Q D    ANC
            Conroy, E A      New
                 NP
         Mpumalanga    Taabe, T B (Alternate)      ANC
            Krumbock, G R    DP
         Northern Cape Kgware, D M (Alternate)     ANC
         Northern Province Mokoena, M L (Alternate)      ANC
         North West    Kolweni, Z S (Alternate)    ANC


         Subcommittee on Council Budget and Support for Members


         Province      Member     Party
         Eastern Cape  Majodina, P C P  ANC
         Free State    Marais, A (Chairperson)     ANC
         Gauteng Mahlangu, Q D    ANC
            Conroy, E A      New
                 NP
         Mpumalanga    Krumbock, G R    DP
            Taabe, T B (Alternate)      ANC
         Northern Cape Kgware, D M (Alternate)     ANC
         Northern Province Mokoena, M L (Alternate)      ANC
         North West    Kolweni, Z S (Alternate)    ANC,
                          FRIDAY, 17 DECEMBER 1999

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


          (a)    Sentech Amendment Bill [B 52 - 99] - Act No 44 of 1999
                 (assented to and signed by President on 9 December 1999);


          (b)    National Water Amendment Bill [B 53B - 99] - Act No 45 of
                 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 2 December
                 1999);


          (c)    World Heritage Convention Bill [B 42D - 99] - Act No 49 of
                 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 3 December
                 1999);


          (d)    Rental Housing Bill [B 29D - 99] - Act No 50 of 1999
                 (assented to and signed by President on 9 December 1999);


          (e)    Mutual Banks Amendment Bill [B 47 - 99] - Act No 54 of
                 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 9 December
                 1999);


          (f)    South African Sports Commission Second Amendment Bill [B
                 61 - 99] - Act No 57 of 1999 (assented to and signed by
                 President on 2 December 1999);


          (g)    Disestablishment of the Local Government Affairs Council
                 Bill [B 54 - 99] - Act No 59 of 1999 (assented to and
                 signed by President on 2 December 1999); and


          (h)    Housing Second Amendment Bill [B 49 - 99] - Act No 60 of
                 1999 (assented to and signed by President on 9 December
                 1999).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 29
         November 1999 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill [B 66 - 99]
              (National Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Joint Committee on
              Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill) [Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Gazette No 20657
              of 22 November 1999.]


     (3)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (i)     Land Affairs General Amendment Bill [B 64 - 99] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and
              Land Affairs - National Assembly).


     (4)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant portfolio committees as mentioned below:


         (a)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Home Affairs and the Select Committee on Social
              Services for consideration and report. The papers are also
              referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
              Quality of Life and Status of Women:


              (i) Convention on the Nationality of Married Women, tabled in
                  terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


              (ii)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.


         (b)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Labour and the Select Committee on Labour and
              Public Enterprises:


              (i) Report of the Compensation Fund for 1997-98.


              (ii)     Report of the Unemployment Insurance Fund for 1998.
              (iii)    Report of the National Training Board for 1998.


         (c)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
              Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs for
              consideration and report:


              (i) Document, in terms of section 9(1) of the Promotion of the
                  National Unity and Reconciliation Act, 1995, regarding
                  the remuneration, allowances and other employment
                  benefits of the staff of the Truth and Reconciliation
                  Commission.

                           MONDAY, 10 JANUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (i)     Limitation of Legal Proceedings against Government
              Institutions Bill [B 65 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
              (Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
              - National Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM), in terms of Joint Rule
         160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (i)     Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill [B 66 - 99]
              (National Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Joint Committee on
              Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill).


     (3)    The Minister of Finance on 21 December 1999 and 28 December
         1999, respectively, submitted drafts of the Financial Institutions
         (Investment of Funds) Bill, 2000, and the SAA Unallocatable Debt
         Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandums explaining the objects of
         the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in
         terms of Joint Rule 159. The drafts have been referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Finance
         by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in accordance
         with Joint Rule 159(2).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter,
         dated 13 December 1999, to the Chairperson of the National Council
         of Provinces, informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996, of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in terms of section 82(4)(b)(ii), read with
         section 227(1)(d), of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1993 (Act No. 200 of 1993).


         REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(2) 0F THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996) ON THE EMPLOYMENT
         OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR SERVICE IN THE
         PROVISION OR MAINTENANCE OF ESSENTIAL SERVICES RELATED TO THE Y2K
         PHENOMENON


         1. This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
              authorised the employment of the South African National
              Defence Force (SANDF) personnel and equipment in the Republic
              of South Africa for the provision and maintenance of essential
              services in the event of unforeseeable breakdown related to
              non-compliance with Y2K compatibility. This employment
              commenced from 10 December 1999 to 16 January 2000. This
              employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
              section 82(4)(b)(ii), read with section 227(1)(d), of the
              Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act No.
              200 of 1993), [which sections continue to be in force in terms
              of item 24(1) of Schedule 6 to the Constitution of the
              Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No. 108 of 1996)], read
              further with section 3(2)(a)(v) of the Defence Act, 1957 (Act
              No. 44 of 1957) for service in the provision or maintenance of
              essential services.


         2. The deployment consisted of 3 Battalions (1200 personnel) that
              were placed on standby and were authorised to be deployed to
              the extent necessary in the provision or maintenance of
              essential services such as the water supply,
              telecommunications, medical facilities and ensuring that
              essential state infrastructure was provided for and
              maintained. The operation was known as OPERATION CASTENET.


         3. The SANDF funded the operation from within its current budget
              allocation.


         4. I will also communicate this report to the National Assembly
              and wish to request that you bring it to the notice of the
              Members of the National Council of Provinces.


         Regards




         T M MBEKI
         PRESIDENT


     Referred to the Joint Standing Committee on Defence.

                          THURSDAY, 20 JANUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (a)     Nuclear Energy Bill [B 10B - 99] (National Assembly - sec
              75) - Act No 46 of 1999 (assented to and signed by President
              on 20 December 1999);


         (b)     National Nuclear Regulator Bill [B 11B - 99] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - Act No 47 of 1999 (assented to and signed
              by President on 20 December 1999); and


         (c)     Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B
              60B - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75) - Act No 58 of 1999
              (assented to and signed by President on 12 January 2000).


         Note: The President has now assented to and signed all the Acts
         (60 in total) passed by Parliament in 1999.


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 20
         January 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     South African Airways Unallocatable Debt Bill [B 1 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance
              - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              20800 of 7 January 2000.]

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Committee on Preferential Procurement Policy
     Framework Bill on the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill [B
     66 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 18 January 2000, as
     follows:


         The Joint Committee on Preferential Procurement Policy Framework
         Bill, having considered the subject of the Preferential
         Procurement Policy Framework Bill [B 66 - 99] (National Assembly -
         sec 76), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a section 76
         Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 66A - 99].

                           FRIDAY, 21 JANUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:
     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 21 January 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (1)    Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill [B 66B - 99]
         (National Assembly - sec 76(1)).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Bills:

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    uMthethosivivinywa wokuQhubekisa ukuLingana nokuVimbela
         uBandlululo Olungalungile [B 57 - 99].


         The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
         Bill [B 57 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75) was introduced by
         the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 27
         October 1999 and referred to the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on
         Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
         Bill.

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


     (1)    Financial Statements of the University of the North West for
         1997 [RP 164-99;


     (2)    Foundation for Education, Science and Technology for 1997-98 [RP
         168-99];


     (3)    Financial Statements of the Council for Mineral Technology for
         1998-99 [RP 188-99;


     (4)    Financial Statement of Vote 16 - Health for 1998-99 [RP 140-99];


     (5)    Accounts of the Rustenburg-Marico Regional Services Council for
         1993-94 [RP 145-95];


     (6)    Financial Statements of the President's Fund for 1997-98 [RP 165-
         99];


     (7)    Group Financial Statements of Syncat (Pty) Ltd for 1997-98 [RP
         184-99].

2.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs:


     (1)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Reorientation and Development of Agricultural
         Advisory Services in the Northern Province", tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Promotion of Participative Development Planning in
         the Eastern Cape Province", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
         the Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Provincial Administration Capacity Building Programme
         Mpumalanga", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (4)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Small Business Promotion/Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
         Agency (NEPA)", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (5)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
         the project "Teacher Training (President's Education Initiative)",
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

3.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Annual Report and the Financial Statements of the Public
         Investment Commissioners for 1998-99, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the Public
         Investment Commissioners for 1998-99 [RP 167-99].


     (2)    Fourteenth Report of the Public Investment Commissioners for
         1997-98, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the Public Investment Commissioners for
         1997-98.

                           MONDAY, 24 JANUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister for Welfare and Population Development on 21
         January 2000 submitted drafts of the Nonprofit Organisations
         Amendment Bill, 2000, and the Developmental Welfare Governance
         Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandums explaining the objects of
         the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in
         terms of Joint Rule 159. The drafts have been referred by the
         Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio Committee on Welfare
         and Population Development and the Select Committee on Social
         Services, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Open Democracy Bill on the
     Open Democracy Bill [B 67 - 98] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 24
     January 2000, as follows:


     The Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Open Democracy Bill, having considered
     the subject of the Open Democracy Bill [B 67 - 98] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a section 75 Bill,
     presents the Promotion of Access to Information Bill [B 67B - 98].
     The Committee further wishes to report as follows:


     1.     This Bill, resulting from the constitutional obligation to enact
         legislation giving effect to the right referred to in section 32
         of the Constitution, amongst others, promotes transparency and
         accountability of public bodies by providing the people of South
         Africa with timely, accessible and accurate information.


         The Committee is of the opinion that proper record-keeping by all
         public bodies will contribute to the efficiency of public bodies
         in relation to their obligations in terms of the Bill. The
         National Archives of South Africa Act, 1996 (Act No. 43 of 1996),
         as a standard-setting piece of legislation for the proper
         management and care of records held by governmental bodies,
         standardises and regulates the operations of public bodies with
         regard to control over records. An efficient system of
         identification, arrangement, storage and retrieval of records will
         enhance the ability of public bodies to provide the public with
         timely and accurate information.
         Various submissions were received that public bodies were more
         often than not in breach of the National Archives of South Africa
         Act, 1996, not always acting in accordance with the provisions of
         the Act. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
         is, therefore, requested to inform all public bodies of the
         importance and necessity of proper record-keeping, to request them
         to once again take note of the provisions of the National Archives
         of South Africa Act, 1996, and to take the necessary steps to
         ensure that its provisions are closely followed by all public
         bodies to which the Act applies. Furthermore, the Minister is
         requested to undertake an audit as to the feasibility and
         desirability of existing legislation dealing with record-keeping,
         and to suggest appropriate remedial action.


     2.     Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Bill does not prevent the
         giving of access to records of public or private bodies in terms
         of any other legislation listed in the Schedule to the Bill.


         Clause 86 of the Bill requires that the Schedule to the Bill
         should be amended to include the provisions of legislation which
         provides for or promotes access to records of public and private
         bodies. A schedule of this nature will provide an individual who
         wishes to request access to a record held by a public or private
         body but is faced with a choice between utilising this Bill or
         another piece of legislation, with an efficient form of reference
         to enable him or her to make use of both options.


         The Committee, therefore, draws the attention of the Minister for
         Justice and Constitutional Development to the provisions of Clause
         86, which require the relevant amending legislation to be
         introduced in Parliament within 12 months after the commencement
         of Clause 6, and requests the Minister to initiate an audit
         amongst all public bodies as soon as possible in preparation of
         the relevant amending legislation.


     3.     Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Bill applies to the
         exclusion of any other legislation that prohibits or restricts the
         disclosure of a record of a public or private body which is
         materially inconsistent with an object, or a provision, of the
         Bill. No audit appears to have been done in order to establish how
         this legislation will effect existing legislation, and vice versa.
         In the interim, this Clause has been provided for to reflect the
         intention of the legislature that this Bill applies to the
         exclusion of any other legislation that prohibits or restricts the
         disclosure of a record of a public or private body.


         The Committee still finds it advisable to request the Minister for
         Justice and Constitutional Development to do a comprehensive audit
         and, if necessary, to propose appropriate remedial action. The
         Committee requests the Minister to interact with all departments
         whilst undertaking this audit.


     4.     This Bill, amongst others, deals with access to personal
         information in the public and the private sector to the extent
         that it includes provisions regarding the mandatory protection of
         the privacy of third parties.
         This Bill only deals with the aspect of access to private
         information of an individual, be it access by that individual or
         another person, and does not regulate other aspects of the right
         to privacy, such as the correction of and control over personal
         information and so forth. Foreign jurisdictions with freedom of
         information regimes enacted separate legislation which, as an
         important component of democracy legislation, regulates aspects,
         inter alia, such as the correction of and control over personal
         information. Privacy legislation generally provides for more
         detailed mechanisms and provisions dealing with personal
         information in the hands of another person by empowering that
         individual to, amongst others, demand the correction of incorrect
         information. The part in the Bill that dealt with these matters,
         was removed, as the Committee felt that it would be dealing with
         the right to privacy in section 14 of the Constitution in an ad
         hoc and undesirable manner. Clause 88 of the Bill provides for an
         interim measure regarding the correction of personal information,
         and it is intended that South Africa, in following the
         international trend, should enact separate privacy legislation.


         The Committee, therefore, requests the Minister for Justice and
         Constitutional Development to introduce Privacy and Data
         Protection legislation, after thorough research of the matter, as
         soon as reasonably possible. Furthermore, it may be noted that,
         when the Privacy and Data Protection legislation is passed, this
         Bill may have to be amended, if necessary, in accordance with that
         legislation.


     5.     Clause 51 of the Bill provides that the heads of private bodies
         must compile manuals within six months after the commencement of
         that Clause.


         The manual referred to in Clause 51 must contain information which
         will facilitate a request for access to a record held by a private
         body. Provision is further made for the Minister, on receipt of a
         request or on the Minister's own accord, to exempt any private
         body or category of private bodies from any provision of the
         Clause for such period as the Minister thinks fit. The Committee
         is aware of and sensitive towards the fact that Clause 51, read
         with the definition of "private body" in Clause 1, might place an
         undue burden on certain private bodies to meet the requirements of
         Clause 51.


         The Committee, therefore, requests the Minister for Justice and
         Constitutional Development to consider exempting certain private
         bodies in accordance with Clause 51(4) simultaneously with the
         implementation of Clause 51.


     6.     The Committee has once again become acutely aware of the various
         shortcomings of the Interpretation Act, 1957 (Act No. 33 of 1957),
         during its deliberations on the Bill. This Act was drafted during
         an era when we had a system of unfettered parliamentary
         sovereignty and regulated matters of interpretation during the
         height of the Apartheid era. This Act is highly anacronistic and
         in no way is it in line with the principles of constitutional
         democracy. The Committee therefore urges the Minister to consider
         the amendment of the Interpretation Act, 1957, to bring it in line
         with the principles and ethos of constitutionalism and the new
         principles and practices of interpretation which Parliament and
         the courts have used since 1994.


     7.     The enforcement mechanism provided for in terms of the Bill
         includes internal appeals against the decisions of information
         officers of certain public bodies, whereafter an individual may
         remedy the matter in a court of law by lodging an application.
         Application may, on the other hand, be lodged with a court by a
         person who is aggrieved by the outcome of a request for access to
         a public or private body where an internal appeal procedure is not
         available to that person.


         The Committee is aware that it is adding further matters to the
         jurisdiction of Magistrate's Courts. Clause 79 of the Bill
         provides that the Rules Board for Courts of Law must within 12
         months after the commencement of that Clause make and implement
         rules of procedure for a court in respect of applications in terms
         of Clauses 78 and 80(3)(a) of the Bill. Clause 79 further provides
         that applications should be lodged with the High Court or another
         court of similar status before the implementation of the relevant
         rules of procedure for Magistrate's Courts. Therefore, in the
         first year after the commencement of this Bill, all applications
         must be lodged in the High Courts, until the appropriate Rules
         have been drafted and approved by Parliament.


         The Committee has, however, noted that other jurisdictions created
         an enforcement mechanism, namely an Information Commissioner,
         which is characterised by an accessible and inexpensive form of
         dispute resolution aimed at mediating disputes on an informal and
         speedy basis between interested parties, with the ability to
         adjudicate on disputes between parties. The Committee has noted
         further that the system enjoys great success in those
         jurisdictions in the sense that they have created an enforcement
         mechanism which tends to be widely accepted by members of the
         public and the relevant public authorities. However, the Committee
         is aware of the lack of financial and other resources, and it is
         not intended or advisable to allow for a proliferation of
         commissions, despite the desirability of such alternative less
         adverserial type of enforcement mechanisms in our nascent
         democracy. The existing court structures with its formal
         procedures will not be conducive to settling informal disputes of
         this kind between parties in our society.


         The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development is
         requested to investigate the feasibility of establishing an
         enforcement mechanism like the Information Commissioner and to
         report back to the Committee within 12 months after the Bill has
         been put into operation. The Committee is considering a proposal
         in this regard at this moment and will forward it to the
         Department in due course.


     8.     The Committee has spent much time in looking at the
         implementation of the Bill in a phased manner. It is an attractive
         and novel concept, but the phased implementation of the Bill is
         problematic. On 4 February 2000, section 32(1)(a) and (b) of the
         Constitution will come into operation in its unrestricted form,
         until the Bill is put into operation. This could last for a few
         months whilst the regulations are being drafted. The courts will
         have to enforce the right without any guidelines from the
         legislature contained in this Act now being passed. Against this
         background, the Committee suggests that the Bill should be
         implemented in all haste. Clause 87 of the Bill is flexible and
         will have to be used against the background that each public body
         has to create an information regime afresh and, therefore,
         provision is made that public bodies will be allowed to deal with
         requests for access within a period of 90 days within the first 12
         months after the commencement of the Bill, a period of 60 days
         within the next 12 months, and a period of 30 days within the
         third year.


     9.     The original Bill provided a chapter on the protection of
         whistle blowers. All parties were unanimous in their views that
         this legislation is vital for the fight against crime. The
         Committee was of the view that it is not apposite to include a
         chapter on whistle blower protection in legislation dealing with
         the right of access to information. Parliament has embarked on a
         process of redrafting the chapter into separate legislation. The
         whistle blower legislation will be the next priority of the
         Committee, and this task must be finalised by not later than the
         end of February 2000.


     10.    Provision was made in Clause 8 of the original Bill for a duty
         to disclose records of governmental bodies that reveal a serious
         public safety or environmental risk. However, information regimes,
         including our own, are request-based and, therefore, it was held
         to be undesirable to retain this Clause in the Bill. It was
         decided that it was best dealt with in those departments which
         administer legislation dealing with environmental and public
         safety issues. The Committee suggests that the various departments
         should review the relevant existing legislation, and those
         departments without such legislation should provide for a similar
         mechanism in new legislation to provide for this very important
         issue.
     Report to be considered.


                          TUESDAY, 25 JANUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bills passed by National Assembly on 25 January 2000 and transmitted
     for concurrence:


     (a)    Promotion of Access to Information Bill [B 67B - 98] (National
         Assembly - sec 75)(introduced as Open Democracy Bill [B 67 - 98]
         (National Assembly - sec 75)).


     (b)    Promotion of Administrative Justice Bill [B 56B - 99] (National
         Assembly - sec 75)(introduced as Administrative Justice Bill [B 56
         - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75)) - (Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs - National Council of
         Provinces).

2.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant committees as mentioned below:


         (i)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee
              on Finance:


              (a) Annual Report of the Public Investment Commissioners for
                  1998-99.


              (b) Fourteenth Report of the Public Investment Commissioners
                  for 1997-98.


         (ii)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
              Land and Environmental Affairs.


              (a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                  Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
                  Germany concerning the project "Reorientation and
                  Development of Agricultural Advisory Services in the
                  Northern Province", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
                  the Constitution, 1996.


         (iii)The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
              Local Government and Administration.


              (a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                  Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
                  Germany concerning the project "Promotion of
                  Participative Development Planning in the Eastern Cape
                  Province", tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                  Constitution, 1996.


              (b) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                  Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
                  Germany concerning the project "Provincial Administration
                  Capacity Building Programme Mpumalanga", tabled in terms
                  of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (iv)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
              Economic Affairs.


              (a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                  Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
                  Germany concerning the project "Small Business
                  Promotion/Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency (NEPA)",
                  tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
                  1996.


         (v)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
              Education and Recreation.


              (a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                  Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
                  Germany concerning the project "Teacher Training
                  (President's Education Initiative)", tabled in terms of
                  section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Promotion of Equality and
     Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill on the Promotion of Equality
     and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill [B 57 - 99] (National
     Assembly - sec 75), dated 21 January 2000, as follows:


     The Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Promotion of Equality and Prevention of
     Unfair Discrimination Bill, having considered the subject of the
     Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill [B
     57 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by
     the JTM as a section 75 Bill, presents the Promotion of Equality and
     Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill [B 57B - 99].


     The Committee further reports as follows:


     The Bill was tabled in Parliament in late October 1999. Parliament is
     required to enact a law in terms of section 9(4) of the Constitution by
     4 February 2000. Despite the limited time and the very difficult nature
     of the issues canvassed by this Bill, we received more than 100 written
     submissions. The Committee also held extensive and well publicised
     public hearings, at which a wide range of views were tabled for
     consideration by the Committee during its deliberations. The Committee
     has managed to successfully complete the difficult task it was given in
     respect of this important law.


     There are, however, some outstanding issues that need to be taken
     further, as detailed below:


     1.     Additional prohibiting grounds


         Based on the extensive written and oral submissions received,
         there is overwhelming evidence of the importance, impact on
         society and link to systemic disadvantage of discrimination based
         on the grounds of HIV/AIDS status, socio-economic status,
         nationality, family status and family responsibility. The Minister
         for Justice and Constitutional Development has been required to
         give special consideration to the inclusion of these as additional
         prohibited grounds. In this respect, the Bill requires the
         Minister, immediately upon enactment, to establish an Equality
         Review Committee which must, inter alia, make recommendations to
         the Minister regarding the inclusion of these grounds as listed
         prohibited grounds within one year.


     2.     Unfair discrimination against elderly persons


         Based on submissions to the Committee by specialised lobby groups,
         there is also evidence of a need to address specific forms of
         unfair discrimination against elderly persons. The Committee
         therefore requests the Minister for Welfare and Population
         Development to investigate this area of unfair discrimination and,
         where necessary, to adopt appropriate measures. A concerted and
         pro-active effort also needs to be made to sensitise society about
         this problem.


     3.     Hate speech
         In addition to section 16 of the Constitution, this Bill
         specifically prohibits and prevents hate speech from being
         uttered, except in the form of artistic creativity, academic and
         scientific inquiry and fair and accurate reporting in the public
         interest. There is a  view generally held that, in the light of
         our apartheid, colonial and patriarchal past, the Minister for
         Justice and Constitutional Development is requested to give
         special consideration to the following:


         (a)     Tabling legislation in Parliament which deals with the
              criminalisation of hate speech. Such measures must be
              consistent with section 16 of the Constitution and the
              Convention on the Prevention and Elimination of all forms of
              Racial Discrimination. In addition, such legislation, needless
              to say, will also be required to create offences relating to
              hate speech.


         (b)     Taking any other measures that may be necessary to give
              effect to the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of
              Racial Discrimination and the Convention on the Elimination of
              all forms of Discrimination against Women, to the extent that
              these have not been dealt with in this or other relevant
              legislation.


     4.     Establishment of Equality Review Committee


         The Committee urges the Minister to establish the Equality Review
         Committee contemplated in the Bill as speedily as possible, and to
         resource that committee adequately so as to ensure that the useful
         role it may play in deepening our understanding of equality
         legislation and its impact on our society is reinforced.


     5.     Establishment of equality courts


         The Committee further urges the Minister to initiate the
         establishment of the equality courts as soon as possible. A long
         delay in the training of presiding officers and clerks and the
         establishment of these courts will seriously hamper the
         achievement of the objects of the Bill. Furthermore, the areas of
         our society that require the remedies afforded by the Bill are
         primarily the rural areas and people who are disempowered. The
         Minister has been given the power to make regulations to allow for
         people other than attorneys and advocates to appear in court on
         behalf of complainants, in order to represent them. It is vital
         that these and other regulations in respect of access to justice
         are promulgated urgently.


     6.     Ad Hoc Parliamentary Committee on Promotion of Equality


         Parliament is requested to consider the establishment of an ad hoc
         parliamentary committee to oversee the implementation of the Act.
         The role of the committee should be to monitor the progress made
         in implementing the Act and the regulations, and to assess the
         general impact that its implementation has had in various sectors
         of our society. The committee need not meet on an ongoing basis,
         nor should it be a permanent committee of Parliament. It is
         suggested that the committee should meet annually for a short
         period of three to four weeks in order to do its work.


     7.     Audit of laws


         The Cabinet is requested to direct a process of departmental
         auditing of legislation so as to identify laws which may impact on
         equality, in order to eliminate inconsistency, to introduce
         measures which reinforce fairness and equality, and with a view to
         giving effect to the strong pro-active measures to be taken by the
         State and all persons to promote and achieve equality.


     Report to be considered.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Pharmacy
     Amendment Bill [B 51 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 25
     January 2000, as follows:


         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the Pharmacy Amendment Bill [B 51 - 99] (National
         Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a
         section 76 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

                         WEDNESDAY, 26 JANUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 26 January 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (1)    Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
         Bill [B 57B - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75).

TABLINGS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Welfare and Population Development:


     Report of the Department of Welfare for 1998-99 [RP 179-99].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
     on the Promotion of Administrative Justice Bill [B 56B - 99] (National
     Assembly - sec 75), dated 26 January 2000, as follows:


The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
considered the subject of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Bill [B
56B - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has
agreed to the Bill.

