---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 20 June 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-06-20
---

TUESDAY, 20 JUNE 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs A M VERSVELD: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at
the next sitting:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the seizure of R1,5 million worth of abalone at Johannesburg
       International Airport;


  (2) welcomes this breakthrough of the national task team formed to clamp
       down on abalone smugglers; and


  (3) calls on the Government -


       (a)  to ensure that those guilty of abalone poaching are not allowed
           to tender for confiscated abalone;


       (b)  to use the profits made from the sale of confiscated abalone for
           the task team fighting this crime; and


       (c)  as a matter of urgency, to make use of legislation providing for
           the seizure of the assets of those responsible for poaching and
           smuggling of abalone.

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chairperson, I shall move at the next sitting of this
House:


  That the Council calls upon the Government to -


  (1) deal with the fact that President Robert Mugabe is threatening to
       nationalise South African and other mining and business assets in
       addition to South African owned commercial farms in Zimbabwe; and


  (2) make it known in the strongest possible terms that it will take all
       necessary steps to, if necessary, protect South African lives and
       property, including retaliatory action.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the House:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with appreciation the work done at G F Jooste Hospital in
       Manenberg for saving lives at a hospital surrounded by crime;


  (2) also notes that in October and November last year 18 people were
       admitted with stab wounds to the heart, but 15 of those patients
       survived as a result of the staff's dedicated commitment to saving
       lives;


  (3) commends this hospital's good work in catering for the poorest of the
       poor in the Western Cape, where many of these communities are
       affected by deprivation, unemployment and overcrowding;


  (4) further notes the setting aside of a special room for grieving family
       members visiting terminally ill patients; and


  (5) calls on the Department of Health to show its appreciation in
       whatever form possible for the good work done by staff at this
       hospital and in so doing to promote good doctor-nurse-patient
       relationships.

                 VIOLENCE AGAINST BUS DRIVERS IN KHAYELITSHA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev M CHABAKU: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the violence perpetrated against bus drivers in Khayelitsha;
  (2) recognises the need to protect the drivers of buses and the public at
       large;


  (3) further recognises the right of commuters to exercise their free
       choice in selecting a mode of transport;


  (4) calls on the Western Cape Government to take appropriate political
       steps in resolving the conflict in the Western Cape; and


  (5) also calls on the above government to adopt a more proactive and
       urgent approach in resolving this crisis and to establish a stable
       environment which will ensure the safety of commuters and the public
       in general.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

       50th COMMEMORATION OF BANNING OF SOUTH AFRICAN COMMUNIST PARTY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  today, 20 June 2000, marks the 50th year since the introduction
           of the Suppression of Communism Act;


       (b)  on 26 June 2000 it will be the 50th commemoration of a strike
           which cost the lives of several workers who protested at the
           banning of the CPSA;


       (c)  20 June 1950 marked the beginning of over 40 years of intense
           repression of all political forces opposed to the heinous
           apartheid system, declared by the UN to be a crime against
           humanity;


       (d)  despite the banning of the CPSA and subsequently the ANC and
           other liberation organisations, political activity continued and
           leaders of the CPSA and the ANC liberation remained in the
           forefront of the struggle;


       (e)  communists such as Joe Slovo, Chris Hani, Yusuf Dadoo, Dora
           Tamana, Ray Alexander, J B Marks, Moses Mabida and others too
           numerous to mention dedicated their lives to a democratic South
           Africa; and


       (f)  despite the implementation of this Act and the intense
           repression and the sacrifices of the members of the South
           African Communist Party and others, they saw their sacrifices
           come to fruition on 27 April 1994;


  (2) believes that the basic tenets of democracy are freedom of
       association and free political activity; and


  (3) resolves -


       (a)  that it commits itself to ensuring that never again will
           political parties be banned in the interests of maintaining
           power; and
       (b)  to pay tribute to all those who suffered as a consequence of
           political repression.

[Applause.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   CONDEMNATION OF MATCH-FIXING IN CRICKET

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, I give notice without motion:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with disappointment and disgust the role of certain South
       African cricketers in match-fixing;


  (2) recognises that this evil practice tarnishes the image of South
       African cricket in particular and South African sport in general;


  (3) is of the opinion that such action undermines the efforts of the
       Government to eradicate corruption in all spheres of activity; and


  (4) unequivocally condemns the immoral conduct of the fallen heroes of
       South African cricket and urges the United Cricket Board to take
       strong and appropriate measures against those who violate the code of
       conduct of international cricket.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection against the
motion?

Mr M E SURTY: Chairperson, there is no such thing as a notice without
motion.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I beg your pardon?

Mr M E SURTY: Chairperson, the member moved a notice without motion.
[Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I noticed that he was standing very still.
[Laughter.] That may have been the reason for there being no motion. Is
there any objection to this motion without notice? There is no objection.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  USE OF MATERIAL FROM ASBESTOS MINE HEAPS TO REPAIR ROADS IN THE NORTHERN
                                  PROVINCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr E A CONROY: Voorsitter, na aanleiding van 'n berig in die pers vandag
stel ek sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem van 'n berig in die pers vandag, dat daar in die
       Noordelike Provinsie van die materiaal van asbesmynhope gebruik
       gemaak word om paaie te herstel wat in die onlangse oorstromings
       beskadig is en dat padgebruikers en mense wat in die omgewing woon
       sodoende onwetend aan die gevaar van asbesvergiftiging blootgestel
       word; en


  (2) 'n dringende beroep op die provinsiale regering van die Noordelike
       Provinsie doen om ondersoek hierna in te stel en opdrag te gee dat
       hierdie gebruik, hoewel goed bedoel, onverwyld gestaak word.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Dr E A CONROY: Chairperson, on account of an article which appeared in the
newspaper today, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes a report in the press today that material from asbestos mine
       heaps is being used in the Northern Province to repair roads damaged
       in the recent floods and that, as a result of that road users and
       people living in the area are unknowingly being exposed to the danger
       of asbestos poisoning; and


  (2) makes an urgent appeal to the provincial government of the Northern
       Province to investigate this matter and direct that this practice,
       although well intentioned, be suspended immediately.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

               SOUTHERN AFRICAN ELECTION FORUM HELD IN NAMIBIA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Me E C GOUWS: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad kennis neem -


  (1) van die geslaagde ``Southern African Election Forum'' wat vanaf 11
       tot 14 Junie 2000 in Namibië gehou is;


  (2) van die groot getal afgevaardigdes wat bestaan het uit
       verkiesingbeamptes, verkiesingdeskundiges, gemeenskapsleiers en
       parlementariërs van alle SAOG-lande wat byeengekom het om te besin
       oor vry en regverdige verkiesings in die streek;


  (3) dat die forum 'n eenparige besluit geneem het dat die ontwikkeling
       van norme en standaarde voorrang moet geniet om demokrasie in Suider-
       Afrika te konsolideer; en
  (4) dat die belangrikheid van demokrasie tydens verkiesings aan alle
       regerings, kommissies en persone gemoeid met verkiesings oorgedra
       word.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Ms E C GOUWS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


     That the Council notes -


     (1)    the successful Southern African Election Forum which was held in
         Namibia from 11 to 14 June 2000;


     (2)    the large number of delegates, consisting of election officials,
         election experts, community leaders and parliamentarians from all
         SADC countries, who came together to reflect on free and fair
         elections in the region;


     (3)    that the forum unanimously agreed that the development of norms
         and standards must receive priority in order to consolidate
         democracy in Southern Africa; and


     (4)    that the importance of democracy during elections must be
         conveyed to all governments, commissions and persons involved with
         elections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr M V MOOSA: Yes, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! The motion has been objected to. It
therefore becomes a notice of motion.

  PRAISE FOR THE PRESIDENT'S EFFORTS TO PROMOTE DIALOGUE BETWEEN DEVELOPED
                       COUNTRIES AND AFRICAN CONTINENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) commends the President of the Republic of South Africa for his
       tireless efforts to set in motion a dialogue between developed
       countries and the African continent;


  (2) recognises the importance of such a dialogue for the elimination of
       global inequalities among states;


  (3) notes that the President's efforts are steadily being rewarded by
       expressions of greater commitment towards the developing world such
       as the Declaration of Commitment made by the heads of the Nordic
       countries; and


  (4) is confident that the President will succeed in getting the same kind
       of commitment during today's meeting with European heads of state.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                   (The late Chief Justice Ismael Mahomed)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with sadness the passing away of the Chief Justice of the
       Republic of South Africa, Chief Justice Ismael Mahomed;


  (2) recognises that not only has he made an invaluable contribution to
       the transformation and development of our own legal system, but his
       contribution to legal development extended far beyond the boundaries
       of his country of birth;


  (3) wishes to convey its deepest sympathy to the family and friends of
       Chief Justice Mahomed; and


  (4) wants to assure his family and friends that -


       (a)  not only have they lost a family member and dear friend, but the
           country and indeed the African continent will feel the void left
           by his premature departure;
       (b)  he will be fondly remembered for his legal genius and the
           passion with which he embraced human rights; and


       (c)  his legacy will forever be remembered and will live on in those
           whose hearts and minds he touched during a long and
           distinguished legal career.

Mnr P A MATTHEE: Voorsitter, ek steun heelhartig die mosie van roubeklag
van die Hoofsweep. Ek kan net sê dat ek Hoofregter Mahomed persoonlik geken
het. Ons het in my jong dae selfs in 'n stadium teen mekaar in die hof
verskyn. Suid-Afrika verloor hier werklik een van die grootste
regsgeleerdes en skerpste regsbreine van ons tyd.

Bo en behalwe die feit dat Hoofregter Mahomed 'n uitstaande regsgeleerde
was, het ek hom ook op 'n persoonlike vlak geken as iemand wat werklik die
land groot diens bewys het gedurende die onderhandelings wat die nuwe Suid-
Afrika voorafgegaan het, iemand wat werklik een van die groot seuns van
hierdie land was. Ons aan hierdie kant eer sy nagedagtenis en ons wil ons
diepste meegevoel met sy naasbestaandes uitspreek. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I wholeheartedly support the motion of
condolence of the Chief Whip. I just want to say that I knew Chief Justice
Mahomed personally. When I was younger, we even were opposing counsels in a
court case at one stage. South Africa has really lost one of the greatest
lawyers and sharpest legal brains of our time.

In addition to the fact that Chief Justice Mahomed was an outstanding
lawyer, I also knew him on a personal level as someone who really rendered
the country a great service during the negotiations which preceded the new
South Africa, someone who was really one of the great sons of this country.
We on this side honour his memory and we want to convey our deepest
sympathy to his next of kin.]

Mr L G LEVER: Madam Chair, I wish to associate myself with the sentiments
expressed by the Chief Whip and also to convey to the family of the late
Chief Justice the sympathy and condolences of both myself and the DP.

I wish to share with this House that the late Chief Justice was an
inspiration to me personally during my studies of law in Grahamstown. At
Rhodes University I had the privilege of observing him perform his art in
challenging the infamous laws relating to detention without trial. I
acknowledge him as a personal inspiration to me in my study of law, and I
believe he was an inspiration to many other law students, both long before
my time and probably long after my time.

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chairperson, Judge Mahomed was, above all, a man of
principle, who mobilised his huge intellect, ability and skill in playing a
vital foundational role in the history of this country at a critical time.
We honour his name and will remember him with pride. We extend our deepest
sympathies and condolences to his family.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, the IFP expresses its deepest sympathy on
the loss of one of the country's outstanding leaders. His work and
contribution towards nation-building will remain for generations to come.
Together with his relatives, friends and the whole country, we feel a great
loss.

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Madam Chairperson, I wish to support the motion moved by
the Chief Whip in respect of the death of Chief Justice Mahomed. I did not
personally know him, but I have read about his astounding work after 1994.
My condolences go to his family.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                     COURT APPEARANCE OF ELIAS MAYIMELE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with regret that Elias Mayimele, ousted Hartebeespoort local
       councillor and ANC organiser, incurred the wrath of the Brits
       magistrates' court on Monday, 15 June 2000, when he arrived at court
       in an ANC T-shirt with a picture of former President Nelson Mandela
       on it;


  (2) further notes that Mayimele, who appeared in court on a charge of
       organising a political gathering without permission last year in
       Hartebeespoort, was treated as a criminal and appeared in court with
       his legs chained;


  (3) further notes that during the court session on Monday magistrate
       Lenie Smith said that she did not think it appropriate for the
       picture of Mandela's face to be on the accused's person and gave
       Mayimele's advocate, Nick Potgieter, the opportunity to tell Mayimele
       to change his shirt, which Mayimele refused ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Are we not back at the point of order
that was raised at a sitting two weeks ago, which concerned a case on which
a judicial decision was pending? Has this case been finalised or is there a
decision pending? We cannot reflect on the merits or otherwise of a case on
which there is a judicial decision pending.

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I was referring to the fact that this man was
chained. His legs were chained, and the magistrate told him to change the
shirt he was wearing. Those are the issues I feel this House should
condemn. Mayimele was put in jail because he said to the magistrate, ``you
accused me when we were outside, so I do not allow you to pass judgment on
me''. The magistrate then said that this was contempt of court. He was
given three months, and when he went on, he was given another three months.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! The question I posed was whether we are
dealing with a case on which a judicial decision is pending. If there is
still a decision pending, the matter is in conflict with the sub judice
rule and I therefore cannot allow it to be discussed. I think I am correct
in that regard.

                           COMRADES MARATHON 2000

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D M KGWARE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) wishes to express its heartfelt condolences to the Swanepoel family,
       in the Northern Province, on the loss of Mr Swanepoel during the
       Comrades Marathon;


  (2) notes that the Comrades Marathon was well-organised;


  (3) wishes to congratulate KwaZulu-Natal Athletics Club,  KZNAC; Comrades
       Marathon Organisers, CMO; and Athletics South Africa, ASA, on their
       excellent work;


  (4) notes that they succeeded in registering the highest number of
       participants in the history of the Comrades Marathon; and


  (5) wishes to congratulate Poland-based Russian Vladimir Kotov for
       setting a new record time of 05:25:33, and to encourage South African
       participants to follow his outstanding performance and to attain gold
       medals for South Africa.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

             LAND SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT FOR DYSSELSDORP COMMUNITY
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, Thoko Didiza,
           signed a settlement agreement with the Dysselsdorp community in
           the Western Cape;


       (b)  the settlement, amounting to R25 million, will directly benefit
           more than 13 000 people comprising the current community;


       (c)  the community lost their property, including 2 158 hectares of
           fertile land, through dispossession by the apartheid
           government's Group Areas Act in 1966; and


       (d)  as was the practice then, members of the community and their
           families were confined to less productive areas while their land
           was declared white; and


  (2) salutes the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs for her efforts
       regarding land restitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                INTEGRATED LAND DISTRIBUTION AND AGRICULTURAL
                            DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, I must say that it is indeed interesting that today
we have many opportunities as a department to discuss this subject for
discussion in this Chamber this afternoon. It is an important question,
because it does indeed deal with one of our strategic objectives as
Government, namely, that of agricultural reform.

It is important for us, as we start this debate, to look at where we come
from. Why was there a need for land reform and agricultural development?
Looking back at the past five years when we were discussing and debating,
as a country, how we were going to restructure and reconstruct South
Africa, one of the fundamental questions we had to deal with was the issue
of land dispossession, its impact on our society and how one could address
the imbalances of the past.

Indeed, as a country, we were mindful of the fact that we would not be able
to completely deal with the loss and the pain that many of the indigenous
people of this country suffered under the previous colonial and apartheid
governments. However, as a sign of reconciliation and as a sign of moving
forward, we agreed that it was necessary that we close that chapter. Within
the Constitution, we allowed ourselves an opportunity to deal with the
matter of land dispossession in South Africa. We put in place a land reform
programme which, as we know, has three elements: land restitution, land
redistribution and tenure reform. The past five years have given us the
basis on which we could put into place mechanisms that would allow us to
achieve the land reform programme in South Africa. As members would know,
we have moved at a particular pace which may not have been very acceptable
to all of us, but indeed, dealing with such a challenge has been an
enormous task.

One of our strategic objectives with the land reform programme and with
agricultural restructuring was to deal with the skewed ownership of land in
South Africa. It was also to ensure that we deracialised the agricultural
sector so that it could, indeed, represent the demographics of the country.
What we have done over the past five years, in terms of the various
programmes that have been put in place, is that we have ensured that we
redistributed land to the landless communities through support from the
state by working together with the landowners in order to achieve that
objective.

We have also been able to deal with land restitution, by bringing back
those communities whose land was taken away from them, in areas such as
Bloupunt in Dysselsdorp, in Schmidtsdrif in the Northern Cape and many
others around the country, such as West Bank KwaNongongo, Payneville and
Sophiatown. We are able to say that, even though we might not be able to
completely redress what they have lost, we are extending a hand in
reconciliation to say that we recognise the pain and the loss, and that we
will try and do better.

Through our land redistribution programme, we have also been able to ensure
that we assist those communities, both in urban settings and rural towns,
to get access to land to enable their livestock to graze, and to enable
them to plant their crops for sustenance through our commonage programme,
in which we work together with provinces and local councils as well as
municipalities. Working together with landowners, we were able to couch a
joint partnership between farmworkers and their employers. There are many
such initiatives, particularly around this area in the Western Cape, where
we have seen a lot of partnerships between farmers and their farmworkers.
This has not just been a way of trying to deal with landownership, but also
with agricultural enterprise in South Africa.

The question is: Where do we go after five years of implementing our land
reform and agricultural development programmes in South Africa? As the
political leadership of the agricultural sector, I, as Minister, the Deputy
Minister and the members of the executive council met last year and
reviewed where we were with land reform, and agricultural development. We
agreed that we were still no further in terms of our programme of
deracialising the agricultural industry in South Africa. We also
acknowledged that we had not made enough dents, in terms of our land
redistribution programme, with regard to those who were previously
disenfranchised.

Out of that analysis and review, we conceived a joint programme that was
compiled by land and agricultural departments. First, there would be a
working together of the two departments to target our communities. Second,
this would ensure that those people who have always had an aspiration to go
into agriculture as an enterprise, would have an opportunity to do so. This
programme would help agricultural entrepreneurs from the previously
disadvantaged communities get access to land, in addition to receiving
support services from the agricultural sector to ensure that they succeed.
At the same time, it would allow us, as a state, to diversify our ownership
of land to those communities who were previously disadvantaged. It also
creates opportunities for us to find a way in which we can promote
agriculture in those communities who have been displaced from the land for
a number of years. Therefore, this programme offers us an opportunity
around which we can bring in various stakeholders, both within Government
as well as in our society, to have a focused agenda on agrarian reform in
South Africa.

Questions have been asked as to whether Government has the resources to
support such a programme. Our answer to that question has been that it is
in Government's interest to ensure that we reconstruct South Africa for the
better, and therefore, issues of resources will be looked into in
accordance with the programme, as we consider it. Secondly, we acknowledge
that it is not only Government resources that will put this programme in
place, but also the beneficiaries themselves who, as entrepreneurs, will
actually contribute to leverage more support.

State parastatals such as the Land Bank and other partners who are in the
industry, such as Capespan, Grain SA and many others would find a way in
which they can participate and become partners, as we have seen through our
share equity ownership scheme before. Therefore the issues of resources
should not only be looked at in relation to finance, but also in relation
to human resources which are required in order to make agriculture
sustainable.
There are key questions that we have to deal with. One is the
identification of land that will be made available for settlement. State
land, though minimal, will be made available for this programme, and we
will be able to deliberately acquire existing farm land for such a
programme. We are also open to donations that some of the landowners may
want to put into this programme so that it can succeed. In this regard, I
would like to thank, in front of hon members, a Dr Hilton of Heidelberg in
Gauteng, who is quite old and therefore felt he did not need his farm any
more, and who approached us to say that he was willing to donate his farm
in order to encourage the success of land reform in South Africa.
[Applause.]

I would like to challenge farmers in other provinces to get at least one
farmer to make a contribution of this nature, even if it is not more than
200 hectares. I am saying this because land reform and agricultural
development are not only an agenda for the state, but also for all South
Africans, if we want to deal with the legacy of our past.

Also, if we want to ensure that, as South Africans, we are able to
participate competitively with other agricultural producers in the world,
we need to increase our production base and therefore, we need to bring in
new people into the mainstream.

One of the interesting things that have come up as a result of this
programme is the need to have targeted support through training, for those
people who will be beneficiaries. First, there has to be training of our
own Government officials in order for them to respond to the needs of the
beneficiaries, as well as training for beneficiaries themselves so that
they can acquire skills as they enter into this programme.

It has also become apparent that we need to ensure that we have good
monitoring systems so that we can rest assured that those who enter into
this programme will actually succeed, and that we will be able to address
difficulties timeously, so that where correction is required, it can indeed
happen.

The other matter we have set ourselves is critical in order to ensure that
this programme succeeds. This is the issue of financial support.

For the past five years, we have tried to put some mechanisms in place in
order to reorientate the Land Bank to address the needs of the entrants.
However, we acknowledge that a lot still needs to be done.

We are also encouraged by work that is done by other financial
intermediaries such as the village banks in areas such as the North West
and elsewhere in the country where communities, on their own, have created
financial institutions that can support development at local level, more
particularly, agricultural development within their midst.

As a department, we say that for this programme to succeed, we will require
beneficiaries to choose, on their own, whether they want to come to this
programme as groups or as individuals. In this way, indeed, they can
actually raise some contributions that can assist them to leverage state
support that will assist in their agricultural development.

Another important element is that for any agricultural venture to succeed,
it will have to be supported by infrastructure. To this end, we have been
discussing with the Ministry of Public Works how we can find a way through
which we will be able to deal with issues of infrastructure in rural
communities and bridges which would assist in the marketing of produce for
those people who would like to go into agricultural development.

We also say that it is important for us as a Ministry to fast-track the
whole issue of tenure reform, particularly so that we can deal with
communal land as well as the situation of farmworkers. We are aware that
farmworkers and labour tenants in our country are of those vulnerable
groups whose security of tenure is not assured. We say that, through this
programme, we must find a way of bringing those people as participants into
this new programme, firstly through dealing with their security of tenure
problem, but, secondly, by supporting them to become farmers in their own
right.

We also say that there is a need not to forget that there are those people
in our midst who still participate in agriculture at subsistence level. We
are aware that it is not as situation of our communities' making that they
continue subsisting, and we are aware that they would actually like to
grow. By looking at where they are in the interim, what is it that
Government can do?
We say we do have a food security programme which is targeted at supporting
those communities who may want to improve their production capacity and
sometimes even have a surplus that they can sell for income.

Partnership between national and provincial Government on this programme is
also necessary. To facilitate particularly the disposal of state land which
will assist in this programme, we have actually delegated powers of
attorney to provincial MECs. This will be done in accordance with policy,
ensuring that targeted beneficiaries are reached and ensuring that this
authority is not used for party-political gain. It is therefore important
that, when we engage in this programme, we are mindful of who our target
beneficiaries are - those who have been previously disadvantaged, the poor
and those who are willing to be entrepreneurs.

As a department and Ministry, we are ready to get views from the members
but we are also ready to roll out this programme as soon as possible. We
take this debate as a forum where the members will be able to sharpen our
thoughts on what those critical issues are that we need to be mindful of as
we enter into this programme. [Applause.]
Rev P MOATSHE: Madam Chair, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, members of
the department present here and hon members, our Government has been
confronted with the challenge of acquiring land for the purpose of
restitution and redistribution. This occurred in terms of the Expropriation
Act which relies on the principle of willing buyer-willing seller and
relies on the dominant market value.

Section 25 of the Constitution, which is enshrined in the Bill of Rights,
guarantees the protection of property against arbitrary deprivation of
property. It does, however, permit expropriation in terms of the law of
general application for public purpose or public interest.

Public interest in section 25(4) includes the nation's commitment to land
reform and reforms to bring about equitable access to all South Africa's
natural resources.

Section 25(5) informs the state to take legislative and other measures
within its available resources to speed up conditions which will enable
citizens to gain access to land on an equitable basis. This provision
places a positive duty on the state to take such steps to reduce the
inequitable ownership distribution of land under the apartheid regime.
While land has been acquired in the past on the basis of reasonable
negotiations, there are many instances of an unreasonable reluctance on the
part of certain property owners to alienate their land or portions thereof
at reasonable and equitable prices, which impedes land reform.

The time has perhaps arrived when Government should give due consideration
to implementing the provision of section 25(3) of the Constitution which
allows for expropriation in the public interest, and which must be fast and
equitable. It does so by departing from the principle of a market-related
value and the often initiated willing buyer-willing seller principle by
creating a balance between the public interest and the interest of the
affected landowners by having due regard to the following factors: firstly,
current use of property; secondly, the history of the acquisition and use
of the property; thirdly, the market value of the property; fourthly, the
extent of direct estate investment and subsidy in the acquisition and
beneficial capital improvement of the property; and lastly, the purpose of
the expropriation.

This will, in effect, mean that the market value of the property does not
become the dominant factor, but one of a range of factors. This will
effectively mean that, where land was acquired at a nominal and unrealistic
value, is not currently in use and the affected party has made no direct
investment in the property, it would effectively reduce the purchase
consideration on a just and equitable basis and make the acquisition more
just, fair and reasonable.

This will enable the state to move swiftly on land reform. A possible
consideration may be to set out these factors as guidelines for
negotiations. If there are good factors the existing legislation must be
amended in order to bring it in line with the provisions of the
Constitution. I think we are dealing with a key problem in South Africa
which can bring reconciliation between the nations of South Africa that
come from two worlds in order for them to live in one world.

Regarding the question of the landless and landowners, this Government
talks of sharing, something which can bring about stability in South
Africa. People who are prepared to share what they have can go a long way
in creating harmonious coexistence. Landowners who are prepared to share
what they have will concretise reconciliation in this world or this country
which we love so much. Why must we have market-related prices if this land
is unutilised? Why do we not reach a position whereby there can be some
kind of sharing so that, together, we are able to move forward as one
nation, one people, in one country?

I want to thank the Minister and tell her that she is the right Minister at
the right time. Her heart is very close to the land question. I think she
is the appropriate person to lead us in this process, especially because so
many people in this country are yearning and crying for land. Many people
still seem to be living in the past. They have not come to grips with the
dynamics of our history.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon member, your time has
expired. You can give more praises next time. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, agricultural reform in South Africa must
be fast-tracked. Land reform through land redistribution must be fast-
tracked. The imbalances of the past must be addressed. But these two
actions cannot be separated. They can only be successful if sustainability
is the focus, and this can only be achieved with sufficient support at
various levels.

As the hon the Minister knows very well, land reform demands thorough
planning, or it can do more harm than good. Land reform was boosted in
Chile in 1962 and again in 1967. Production plunged by 22,5% and some areas
and cities suffered food shortages. Peru's first phase of land reform
started in 1964 and peaked in 1969. Unoccupied farms were simply
expropriated, agricultural outputs slumped by 20%, and food imports cost
R1,3 billion. In 1970, 80% of Mexico's traditional ranches were converted
into small agricultural units, and conflict and mediocre production became
widespread.

I am aware that the hon the Minister has committed herself to accelerated
land and agricultural reform. I attended her briefing this morning and felt
very privileged to sit there. I think the hon chairperson of my committee
should have been there as well. I do not know why it was not a joint
sitting at all. I wish the hon the Minister and her department luck with
this process. But considering the examples I have quoted, I also want to
caution the hon the Minister never to forfeit sufficiency merely for the
sake of transformation. Such success would be of very short standing. Food
security must never suffer because of agricultural insufficiency or
insecurity in the industry.

In the 1920s - my communist friends will appreciate this - Stalin destroyed
the kulaks in a bloody massacre to stabilise food security. Land
redistribution and sustainable agriculture in South Africa are too
important for the people working in the industry and the South African
economy for us to play party politics with them. I hope we will not
experience that today in this Chamber.

Agriculture in South Africa suffers from a very bad image, and politicians
contribute daily towards that. There might still be a ``dop stelsel''
[liquor wage system] on some farms, there might still be unlawful evictions
on others, there might still be some farmers who make use of child labour,
and there might still be racism on certain farms. However, now is the time
to identify those farms and farmers who do these things and let the law
take its course. But, it is unfair to label all farmers with this bad name
and, by so doing, create an atmosphere which makes it impossible for black
farmers to participate in joint ventures with commercial farmers on the one
hand and create an atmosphere in which commercial farmers are skeptical to
get involved in joint ventures with black farmers on the other hand.

Worst of all, we create a climate for criminals to murder and rob on farms.
This is intolerable and must stop. A total of 800 murders on farms since
1994 is 800 too many. According to the hon the Minister's programme to
create a black commercial farming class as part of the overall strategy of
land reform and redistribution, she is promoting public-private partnership
projects in which the Government enters into an agreement with agribusiness
to establish a number of black commercial farmers, where the Government
will provide the necessary budget or an alternative arrangement in which a
commercial farmer acts as a mentor to assist her or his farmworkers to
acquire a nearby piece of land and manage it as a farm.

The hon the Minister included this in her programme because she knows that
there are many willing and positive commercial farmers and organisations
that will participate, such as Capespan, Grain SA, the National Wool
Growers' Association and the meat industry. They are all willing and
prepared to build South Africa in this way. We as politicians have a
responsibility to promote the contributions of our white and black
commercial farmers towards a sustainable agriculture through which we can
create the circumstances and climate conducive for them to enter into joint
ventures.

Threats of the Zimbabwean model for South Africa should be scorned because
this would mean economic collapse. That is exactly what started the
Zimbabwean situation which has led to the 70% inflation, 50% unemployment,
fuel shortages and electricity supply disruptions. The Zimbabwean model in
South Africa will result in the bloodshed that was avoided in 1994.
[Interjections.]

The hon the Minister has everything it takes to make a success of land
redistribution and agriculture in South Africa on her side. She has the
Constitution; the Land Settlement Amendment Act which empowers her to give
financial assistance; the Prevention of Illegal Eviction from Unlawful
Occupation of Land Act which protects those who live on farms; and the Land
Restitution and Reform Laws Amendment Act which accelerates the reform
process. Above all, there are many people out there who are waiting for
land and for assistance in order to become commercial farmers and a large
group of commercial farmers who are ready to assist her. She has enough
land for the near future in the hands of the Government. She has funds
available, and South Africa with all its people is waiting for her to move
this process forward. [Time expired.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues, this debate deals with
agricultural development and not urban development or the provision of
housing. While urban development and the provision of housing are both
important topics, they should not be allowed to cloud the present debate.
We need to distinguish between those who simply want land to live on, and
those who want land on which to practise productive agriculture.

There are essentially three considerations that cannot be avoided in the
context of this debate. Firstly, the systematic dispossession of black
farmers and landowners through the Land Act of 1913, the Group Areas Act
and a host of other repressive laws is the single greatest cause of poverty
and land hunger that we see today.

Secondly, property rights and the rule of law are fundamental principles
that underwrite not only the Constitution, but the very basis of South
Africa's international reputation and economic prospects. Finally, the
productive capacity of the land must be protected.

It is within the context of these considerations that any policy for the
redistribution of commercially viable farmland must be framed. Implicit in
the debate on land redistribution and agricultural development is the need
to establish a black commercial farming class. The DP welcomes the
Minister's acceptance of the need to establish such a class, and agrees
that land redistribution must be addressed in a meaningful way.

Having agreed in principle that redistribution of land must take place, we
need to consider where the required land can be obtained. In order to
answer this question, land needs to be placed in one of four categories
which are, firstly, state land;  secondly, commercial farmland; thirdly,
tribal and trust land;  and fourthly, urban, industrial and other land
which falls outside the scope of this debate.

When dealing with state land, according to the Department of Land Affairs,
there is an area of approximately 24 333 000 hectares that can be
designated as state land. This includes land from the ex-TBVC and self-
governing states. We are advised by the Department of Land Affairs that, in
its opinion, some 5% to 7% of this land is suitable for agricultural
purposes. This suggests that there is an area of approximately 1,5 million
hectares which is immediately available for redistribution. This is a
significant amount of land, and is certainly sufficient to start the
process. Once this land has been identified, a full land use audit will
have to be conducted to determine what the land can be used for as well as
what will constitute a viable unit for a particular type of land.

As regards the second category, ie commercial farmland, the DP believes
that land in this category should only be acquired for redistribution on
the basis of the willing seller-willing buyer principle, and that market
value should not be tampered with. This source should only be resorted to
once all available state and trust land which is suitable for commercial
agriculture has been redistributed.

Dealing with the third category, that of tribal and trust land, we feel
this is a sensitive issue because it involves peoples' customs and
traditions. But, we need to place on the table and debate whether this form
of land tenure serves the best interests of the people who live in
traditional communities as well as whether this tenure serves the long-term
interest of the country in a changing world. Aside from this form of
sensitive issue, which will form a debate in its own right, we are advised
that there are 1,18 million hectares of ex-SA Development Trust Land
currently held by the national Department of Land Affairs  and that much of
this land has not yet been allocated to new owners. This land would also be
available for immediate redistribution.

The DP believes that the process of land redistribution should be one
whereby effective strategies are developed to transfer available farmland
to new owners from disadvantaged communities in such a way that the new
owners can continue to farm effectively. The DP recognises the important
role commercial farming plays in our economy and it recognises the need to
produce sufficient food in a cost-efficient manner in order to feed our
people and, to this end, the new unit should be economically viable, the
unit should be affordable for those who acquire it, the new owner should be
suitably qualified in terms of training and/or potential, the productive
capacity of the land must be protected, appropriate training and technical
support must be made available, at least in the early stages of this
project, and appropriate measures should be taken to keep land speculators
out of any redistribution scheme, but provision should be made for
successful farmers to buy out the unsuccessful farmers where they fail in
their enterprise. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Rev Chabaku,
it is your turn to speak.

Rev M CHABAKU: Mr Chairperson, I have not prepared a speech.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Sorry, hon member. It
is not your fault. It is perhaps the fault of the Whips who have a
different list to the one which I have here. According to the new list, the
next speaker is Ms B Thomson.

Ms B THOMSON: Chairperson and hon members, the success of the historical
struggle against landlessness is long overdue. It is now some six years
since the dawning of a democratic South Africa, and the land question is
yet to be resolved. Enormous challenges have been faced by the Department
of Agriculture and Land Affairs, rural poverty is rife and the progress of
emerging and commercial black farmers remains static. This is in spite of
the endeavours of our Government.

How, then, do we move forward? It is in this context that we see the
emergence of an integrated programme of land redistribution and
agricultural development in South Africa. It is the brainchild of the
Ministry for Agriculture and Land Affairs. This programme seeks to address
the inadequacies of the current land reform programme as envisaged in the
White Paper on South African Land Policy.

The task, enormous as it is, has not been failed by the proposal in the
White Paper, but rather by a seeming lack of co-operation on the part of
some stakeholders. As we must have heard, people such as Mr Lever still
talk about market-related prices. I would like to say to Mr Lever that that
is the problem we are experiencing. As with all democratic South African
policies, a reconciliatory balance has to be struck. On the one hand, we
have wealthy commercial white farmers whilst on the other, there are the
black rural poor. However, within the rural community, there is a small
proportion of the people who are promising farmers who strive to make
farming their business, although they have not been given the opportunity
to do so. The opportunity now arises with the integrated programme on land
redistribution and agricultural development. Like other developmental
programmes, it is faced with constraints of resources, particularly that of
finance. It has therefore become necessary for the grant recipients under
the programme to make some form of contribution.

Land is a resource or asset which appreciates in value. With South Africa
facing double digit inflation rates, this exacerbates the situation because
land value will keep rising, yet the new programme seeks to address the
needs of the previously disadvantaged. A sliding scale of grant has been
proposed, and this is understandable within the constraints of finance. It
is flexible, offering opportunities, namely, for a food safety net, equity
schemes and production for markets.
Applicants have to make their contribution of R5 000 in the form of cash,
labour or material in order to access a grant of R20 000. An opportunity
also exists for farmworkers who may enter into equity schemes by buying
shares in the farm business. This is where I see white commercial farmers
coming in, assisting and reconciling with their workers by educating them
about schemes and encouraging workers to enter the schemes. This may go a
long way in easing labour unrest as workers would then become co-owners.

Although the new programme is particularly intended for beneficiaries under
the redistribution component of land reform, it is an exciting idea that
will, however, cater for the restitution and tenure security components.
This offers a golden opportunity for beneficiaries of restitution, as the
restored land or compensation can form part of their own contribution.
Approximately 40% of the land area in KwaZulu-Natal falls under the
amakhosi. According to Walter Ntuli, vice-president of Kwanalu, that is,
KwaZulu-Natal's agricultural union, the KwaZulu-Natal Land Affairs Act
falls short of the sweeping changes that will see the realisation of the
full potential of these lands. If the communities in the amakhosi areas
show an intention to farm, then the programme offers prospects of providing
a marketable surplus.

At present, commercial farming activities are dominated by whites who were
offered various forms of protection under the apartheid regime. With the
deregulation of markets and the abolition of protective marketing schemes
through control boards, these have fallen away.

During the past two months we have seen a rapid increase in the price of
potatoes, onions and tomatoes. This is owing to a shortage of produce,
partly as a result of adverse weather conditions experienced in certain
parts of our country. This has a serious implication for inflation, because
it has the ripple effect of pushing up prices, especially of products made
from these vegetables. Obviously, if more farmers enter the commercial
field, such a situation of food shortages and high prices can be reversed.
If food supplies increase, competition increases and prices become
affordable for the consumer.

This does not necessarily mean a detrimental squeeze on prices for the
farmer, as innovative farmers are able to exploit the economics of scale.
However, the farmers who are able to think progressively are the ones who
make it in the marketplace.

Farming requires large capital outlays and is a risky business. Emerging
farmers will have to be able to manage risks. [Time expired.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Chairperson, the magnitude of damage done to the rural
communities by the previous agricultural policy of the former apartheid
government must not be overemphasised. There were instances in which blacks
were forcibly removed from fertile lands and resettled on lands that were
semidesert in nature or malaria-infested. The vacated lands were later
demarcated into farms and allocated to whites only for agricultural
purposes. Blacks had stayed on the land because of the land's fertility and
great agricultural potential. It is for this reason that we sit today with
the formidable problems of land restitution and redistribution.

The policy of willing seller, willing buyer is viable because of its bottom-
up approach. However, the process becomes abused as exorbitant prices are
attached to the land. The willing seller's knowledge of the Land Bank's
loan facility is another exacerbating factor. The price of the farm has to
be equated with its annual yield, especially its turnover. Knowledge of the
farm's performance over the past five years has to be had as well. The Land
Bank must not be seen to be facilitating a process in which the buck is
passed to the next person. It is for this reason that state intervention is
called for.

Concerning the emerging farmers or resource-limited farmers, the current
agricultural policy does accommodate and recognise this group. However,
there are still inhibiting factors encountered by emerging farmers which
need to be addressed upfront, such as the difficulty in accessing
production input, eg mechanisation, fertilisers, electricity, etc.

I purposefully depict these factors in order to demonstrate the environment
within which emerging farmers operate. In some areas in the Northern
Province, farming has come to a halt as a result of some of these problems.

With regard to building competitiveness and growth in agriculture, to
achieve this we must create an environment in which there is competition in
farming. This can be achieved through, among other things, the introduction
of district shows for the display of agricultural products, the
establishment of community-based agricultural co-operatives which would
provide agricultural inputs at reasonable cost, ready access to
mechanisation, etc.

I am also aware of the role of the Agricultural Research Council in our
country. We commend them for the services they render. I am aware of an ARC
branch in Nelspruit, Mpumalanga. However, the worrying problem is that this
particular branch of the institution is still in its embryonic stage. We
request that the activities of these institutions stretch their tentacles
to reach the peripheral areas. A lot can be achieved from this, taking into
account what Infrutec and Buisplaas have already achieved. [Applause.]

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I received a directive, which later became
a mandate, to say that our ANC-led Government has always been a responsible
government and will continue to ensure that the inequities of the past are
redressed within the shortest period of time possible.

The redistribution of land is one of the key areas which needs urgent
attention. As the Government for the people, the ANC has committed itself
to systematically putting in place policies that will ensure that this
redistribution of land is done in a cohesive manner.

Without preaching to the converted, we have all read in the newspapers
about the difficulties that Zimbabwe is experiencing with land
redistribution. This is precisely what we want to avoid in our country.
Because Zimbabwe did not, immediately after independence, seek to
systematically draft and implement land reform policies that would free
those deprived of their birthright by unjust laws in order to finally get
what is justly theirs, they now have a crisis on their hands.

Taking the land back ruthlessly is not an option for South Africa, nor
should it be an option anywhere else in the world. We must be guided by the
needs of our people, especially those who, since the Land Act of 1913, have
had their properties forcibly taken away by satanic people.

This integrated programme has been in the pipeline for a very long time.
This Government had already done the groundwork for an integrated programme
of land redistribution and agricultural development in South Africa in a
report entitled, ``Encouraging Sustainable Smallholder Agriculture in South
Africa'' released in June 1998.

We are not content with this programme just to increase access to
agricultural land for previously disadvantaged people, but we also believe
that we should be empowering these emerging farmers to work the land and
earn a decent living through training.

I have some questions for the Minister. Firstly, in the opinion of the hon
the Minister, why was the previous government not keen to assist our black
emerging farmers from the disadvantaged areas? Secondly, why did only
certain groups get assistance from the previous government? Thirdly, in the
Minister's opinion, why are some people who benefited from the previous
government now saying that the present Government would be wasting money if
it assisted the black emerging farmers? Those are my only questions.

One of the tasks of the department was to do an audit of land and land
users. Obviously, this is a necessary exercise to determine how much land
we have for redistribution. Unfortunately, this process has not been
completed yet, but I hope and believe that the department is well on its
way to finalising this enormous task. This should not be seen as a setback
to redistribution, because other processes can continue concurrently, such
as the ``how'' of land redistribution.

The article that appeared in the Mail & Guardian on 9 June describes the
process better than I am now doing. It talks about a revolutionary plan to
transfer a third of all farmland to black people in the coming years.
Beneficiaries can purchase land from as little as R5 000 up to as much as
R400 000. Tens of thousands of disadvantaged farmers are set to benefit
from this plan. Beneficiaries can choose, either on the basis of economical
constraints or because of needs, which farming enterprise they wish to
embark upon. Some will have the option of commercial farming which is
geared towards large-scale projects for large markets. Others, such as
emerging farmers, will have the opportunity to cater for the sustenance of
the household or small community in the area. However, even if the emerging
farmer wishes to venture into large-scale farming, operating facilities
will always have to be secured.

The ANC sees this new integrated programme of land redistribution and
agricultural development every bit as revolutionary as the newspaper
described it. Together with the department, we can endeavour to iron out
all the problems of implementation and focus consistently on close
monitoring of this programme. I cannot help but thank and congratulate this
dedicated, energetic, focused, decisive and very, very humble Minister on a
job well done. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Sihlalo ohloniphekile, malungu ahloniphekile,
boNgqongqoshe abakhona phakathi kwethu kanye nomKhandlu wonke, udaba
esiphezu kwalo namhlanje lubalulekile empilweni yawo wonke umuntu, futhi
lumayelana nemvelo yethu. Ngisho ezolimo phela. Abantu kuyimvelo yabo
nendlela yokuziphilisa ukusebenzisa inhlabathi. Laba nje ababephuca umhlaba
wokhokho babo babayisa ezindaweni eziwugwadule, ezinganothile, babagqema
udume lwengozi engeqiwa ntwala futhi abangasoze bayikhohlwa nanini.

Inhlabathi ukuze isiphilise kahle, sidinga ulwazi ngayo ukuze isilethele
isivuno esihle. Ulwazi lwezolimo ludinga ukuthuthukiswa. Umuntu angaba nawo
umhlaba kodwa uma engakwazi ukuwusebenzisa, lokho akuthi shu. Uxhaso
siyaludinga ukuze sithuthukise ulwazi esinalo. Abanye abadingi umhlaba
omkhulu kodwa badinga indawo abazokwazi ukuziphilisa kuyo. Abanye
abanolwazi badinga umhlaba omkhulu abazowusebenzisa. Kodwa-ke, kudingeka
imali yokusebenza kahle kubuye futhi kudingeke izimakethe ukuze phela
bathole inzuzo, kukhule umnotho wabo kanye nowezwe futhi. (Translation of
Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon members, hon Ministers who are in this
House and the House at large, the issue that we are discussing today is
important to the lives of all people. It is also important to our
environment. By environment I am referring to agriculture. Naturally,
people cultivate the soil in order to make a living. Those who deprived our
people of their land and forced them to settle in dry and infertile areas
did a terrible and indelible thing in their lives.

We need to know about soil if we want to get the best out of it. Knowledge
on agriculture needs to be improved. One can own land but if one cannot use
it, it is useless to have it. We need sponsors so that we will be able to
increase our knowledge. Some people do not need hectares of land, but a
small portion that they can use for subsistence farming. Others who have
knowledge need plenty of land. However, there is a need for money to enable
farmers to work. There is also a need for a market where they can sell
their products at a profit so that their economy and that of the country
can grow.]

Farmers who grow maize, soya beans, and farm with cattle, milk, sheep and
other perishable crops in order to develop and prosper, will have to form
co-operatives. In KwaZulu-Natal we have succeeded in getting the power of
attorney to trade on state land. This is not too early, because the people
are growing increasingly impatient with the ponderous methods of land
restitution which exist.

In the past the IFP in the kingdom of KwaZulu-Natal has put forward schemes
in order to address the need to own a piece of land. Once again the concept
of satisfying the need to own a piece of land is presented. The provision
of land purely for farming purposes will be woefully insufficient and will
have to be augmented by privately owned land in order to satisfy the needs
of both small commercial farmers and the small land holder.

It is proposed that land should be acquired as commonage for the grazing of
livestock for the use of people who have bought a plot in an agrivillage
adjacent to it. A prerequisite for such an arrangement would be that this
village should be on a main road, so that people's livelihood would depend
upon work found in the main centres, unless light industry could be
attracted to the agrivillage.

There is a dire need for land reform to become a reality. Now is the time
to see things happening at a greater pace, since Zimbabwe certainly must
have woken us all up. Let us stop talking and proceed to do good work.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Rev Chabaku,
you must be ready now. It is your turn.

Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, hon Minister, and this very august House, first
allow me to respond to a poster on which I saw written the following:


  ANC without opposition is equal to Zimbabwe.

[Interjections.] This poster was very offensive and racist, and it
tarnishes the image of the party which put up such a poster.
[Interjections.] Such small-party thinking shames some of its fine members.
[Laughter.] How can we project such a statement when South Africa and
Zimbabwe are both agonising over a painful transition and changes? The land
question is not only an issue in Zimbabwe. We have the same land question
in South Africa, and if we do not watch out, we may have an even worse
situation than Zimbabwe! [Interjections.]

However, we are here to agonise together with Zimbabweans, because they are
our brothers and sisters, and we have to learn from them so that we do not
make the same mistakes. We should thank God that we have an organisation
like the ANC that turns enemies into friends, that accommodates those who
have robbed and exploited us, and given them Cabinet posts. If we did not
have an accommodating spirit towards all people, and if we returned evil
for evil, imagine where we would be.

This is what we stand for. We will not stoop so low as to present other
organisations in that way or label other parties like that. It is a shame
that in this day and age people take advantage of the agony and pain of
other people. [Interjections.] I hope that those who belong to that party
will question that and put it right, because I know that there are some
decent people in those parties who would not have made up such a negative
poster. [Interjections.] This is not the time for that. It is time to work
together, help each other and grow.

I am also very thankful that we have such an hon Minister who has such
great ideals and concerns about the land question in South Africa. She has
brought about some radical changes in the programme of integration of those
who need land. The Government is not going to simply dole out land, but
people are going to get training. Not everybody is going to get land. Those
who want land will need to undergo training and get tutorial guidance which
will be very helpful in order to ensure that this does not happen at the
expense of our economy. This is a very progressive way of dealing with the
land issue. We commend our Minister, and we want to say that this is very a
worthwhile exercise.

The hon Minister has also gone further to ensure that agriculture is not
only a rural affair, but an affair that concerns all people everywhere. We
are therefore going to encourage men and women, boys and girls, in
colleges, schools and universities, to be involved in providing sustenance
as well.  They must learn how to grow food and plant crops that will
provide for them, not only for consumption, but also for profit. Schools,
colleges, universities and institutions of learning and religion must be
encouraged to begin to see agriculture as the growing of food, and even
revolutionising our gardens. Our gardens have lovely ornamental flowers
that we cannot eat even when we are starving. People must be taught to grow
food and other crops in their gardens so that they can have something to
eat, and not just something to admire.

We also look forward to the opportunity that our Minister is giving all the
local and provincial governments to go out and encourage colleges, schools
and other institutions of learning to train everybody to be involved in
agricultural development. We need this, not just for tests, but the people
must know that the land belongs to them. They have to nurture it, look
after it and protect it.

With this kind of vision that we have, it is everybody's job. It is not
just the job of those people who are in the rural areas on whom we depend,
because agriculture affects everybody's life.  If one looks at the economy
of any country or at any aspect of life, it is connected to agriculture.
Therefore, if we cannot nurse agriculture, we will not survive. All of us
are what we are because of agriculture. Let us multiply it. Let us nurture
it. Let us make our kids begin to earn a living and respect the land, and
not spoil it and poison it. Agriculture is not just for growing food and
raising pets, but should also be nurtured for tomorrow.

With these few words I thank the hon the Minister. May the Minister move
forward with this wonderful programme of hers. She has our endorsement and
our support. Amen! [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I would like to
say thank you to the members who have participated in the debate. Indeed,
it has raised some of the very critical questions around the issues that we
are debating today, namely that of integrated land reform and agricultural
development. I think all of us who took part in the debate agree that this
is the way in which we have to proceed. Issues and concerns were raised,
with hon members saying that we need to do careful planning, and we agree
with that.

However, I think it is also important that when we raise such questions, we
do not use them as a way to avoid dealing with the problems head-on. There
will surely be difficulties. We all agree that there may be unintended
consequences, but we have to minimise those. That is why we are allowing
for debate and input on this programme. We are also saying that in order to
avoid some of the pitfalls which have occurred in Chile, Peru and Mexico,
as Mr Van Niekerk highlighted, we will have to work together to find a
better way in which we can ensure that we avoid some of those unintended
consequences. Clearly that can only happen when there is a broad buy-in
into the programme, and that we give clear proposals of what needs to be
done. I would welcome that.

Regarding what the hon Mr Lever said, I think that we all agree that the
redistributing of state land as a way of redistribution, particularly for
agricultural purposes, is the beginning, but not the end. As he himself has
said, out of the 24 million hectares of state land available, only 5% to 7%
is available for agricultural production. This means that it is very
minimal. Our own count tells us that it could be more or less 2 million
hectares in all, or 1,9 million hectares, to be more exact. Therefore, it
means that we would have to acquire land deliberately which is on the
market, and also induce the release of more land onto the market.

There are some proposals that have been made by hon members, such as
looking at the Expropriation Amendment Act which is provided for in our own
Constitution, and as hon Rev Moatshe indicated, if one looks at section 25
of our Constitution, particularly where we deal with issues relating to
property, we acknowledge the fact that we need to balance this with the
need for land reform. Therefore, it is very clear that the issue of
expropriation must not be handled out of context, but in a manner that
satisfies our public interests and in accordance with the law. There are
regulations on how that can be done, so that is not an issue for debate.

With regard to the issue of market value for expropriation as a criterion,
I also want to say that it is one of the many factors. However, if one
looks at the Constitution carefully, it does not even deal with market
value. It just refers to equitable redress. That is what it says. In terms
of our policy, we then proposed the market value. Now, I think that hon
members have raised some of the key questions. How does one value
agricultural land? Does one only look at the market value, or does one also
factor in the production value? This is the debate that we have to continue
having so as to find a better way of dealing with this issue, so that it
does not become a hindrance to our land reform objective, but assists us in
dealing with the matter in a way that is balanced.

The other very important issue that a number of hon members have touched on
is the need for proper extension support, or support services to those
people who will enter into the programme. We agree with them that that is
necessary. That is why we are saying that, as part of the criteria, our own
officials will have to undergo some kind of reorientation, so that the way
in which they support the beneficiaries is done in a manner that actually
empowers those who want to get into the programme.

Clearly, there are many issues that we need to deal with in terms of how we
actually work in partnership within Government and also with other people
in the private sector, in order to ensure that as South Africans we
undertake our land reform and agricultural development in a way that will
make us proud to be South Africans.

I would like to thank hon members for this debate. I am sure that it is not
the end. I am sure that we will be able to engage in the portfolio
committees, and also in the various fora where hon members themselves can
participate. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! That concludes
the discussion. [Interjections.] Order, hon Ministers. [Laughter.]

Allow me to take this opportunity to thank the hon the Minister for
engaging this Chamber in this lively debate on an important matter. On that
note, if you have no questions on the Supplementary Estimate, then you may
be excused, hon Minister.

[Order! The following Budget Votes have been amended in the Supplementary
Estimate: Votes Nos 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 13, 19, 22, 34 and 35. I have been
informed that there are questions to Ministers regarding their Votes as
they appear on the Schedule to the Bill. Members will have the opportunity
to ask questions of the Ministers responsible regarding their Votes, and I
would prefer that each question be asked and answered separately instead of
questions being lumped together.

                   CONSIDERATION OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATE

Vote No 4 - Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:

Mr A MARAIS: Chairperson, hon Minister, the national Department of Arts,
Culture, Science and Technology will be utilising a proportion of its
Supplementary Estimate to stimulate our cultural industries. The department
uses the phrase ``Buy South African'' in its campaign to promote cultural
industries. My questions are as follows. Firstly, to what extent is the
``Buy South African'' campaign in conflict with the free-trade dogma of the
WTO, and, secondly, what monitoring mechanisms are instituted by the
department to ensure that the objectives of poverty relief and job creation
are realised?

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, the
``Buy South African'' campaign is about the branding of South African
products and services that we provide to the rest of the world. It is like
the stars and stripes of the United States of America, or the Union Jack
when it comes to British industry. It is what countries do in order to
create a niche for their products in the international market. It is in no
way excluding trade or creating nontariff barriers such as those which
happen with labour and environmental standards. It is a marketing tool, and
we are involved in this with the DTI, the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism, and as I said, it is imaging our country.

As far as the issue of ensuring that this poverty relief money goes to the
people is concerned, we are not focusing here on research or pilot studies,
but we are supporting those efforts that are ongoing in creating jobs,
particularly in the crafts industry and the music industry. The recording
industry here is a powerful tool for bringing new talent into the market
and for creating jobs. So far, it has not been handled to the benefit of
the people, so we are reforming the music industry through the legislative
programme that we are embarking on. Also, in terms of crafts, there are
huge possibilities. Already, there are many markets being opened up to our
craftspeople. As I am talking here, there has been an order from Seattle to
send some young Ndebele women to go and paint murals there and to produce
many other craft products. So, we will use this money to assist those
processes.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I want to address the issue of cultural
tourism development, as this is a very important developmental area. In the
light of the fact that the State Theatre is going to be closed down because
of the mismanagement of millions of rands by the board members, I want to
know two things from the Minister. The first one needs a little bit of
motivation. It is totally heartbreaking that the State Theatre needs to be
closed down, and it is not going to be so easy to reopen it after such a
dramatic step.

The State Theatre hosted, in one year, more people than did  Loftus
Versveld, the rugby stadium, in the same city, in the same year.
[Interjections.] Yes, the hon member is right. [Laughter.] That was when
they could still play rugby.

I want to know from the hon the Minister what steps he is going to take to
prevent this from happening again, and, secondly, and  more importantly,
has he allocated enough money for business management skills development
under cultural tourism development?

The MINISTER: As far as training in cultural tourism is concerned, we are
establishing a sector education and training agency position for the
cultural industries under which we include cultural tourism. We are working
very closely with the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism on
all the programmes relating to the promotion of tourism. So, it is not just
a single-department effort. It is a combined effort which is joined
together with the Spatial Development Initiatives which are run and chaired
by my colleagues, Minister Valli Moosa and Minister Alec Erwin. There is a
broad programme in that respect, and we are making progress.

As far as the issue of the State Theatre is concerned, it is a tragic
happening for all of us. It was with a very heavy heart that I took a
recommendation to Cabinet to consider this option.  We allocated R33
million to the State Theatre, but this year,  they would not have been able
to have productions up till the end of the year unless we provided another
R43 million over and above that R33 million. Now, the question is: Where
were we going to draw this money from? Would we close other sections of our
department to provide the money? It was an impossible situation.

The mismanagement is related to the arms-length handling of arts in the
country. During the Actag process in 1995-6, there was a clear policy
recommendation, which we accepted, that there would be an arms-length
management of the arts which meant that we would give them the money, they
would give us a financial report at the end of the year, and that that
would be the relationship. We could not send in inspectors to check their
books and their productions in terms of cost and relevance. It was all up
to them. Unfortunately, we have seen the results of this policy, but
nevertheless, we are working to improve it, and we are setting up a special
directorate in the Ministry to deal with the performing arts. We cannot
have productions this year, but we are putting together a new board to
prepare for the year 2001-2002.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Any follow-up
question? Remember, there can only be one follow-up question.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Thank you. With two subsections or ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): No subsections.
[Laughter.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I just want to know something from the
Minister. I know that I am misusing the State Theatre issue a bit by
putting it on the table. Was it the arms-length policy that failed or was
it the board members that failed?

The MINISTER: It was the board members who failed. One cannot tell me that
in a department such as wardrobe, one would have a deficit of R4 million.
How many costumes can one buy for that amount of money? In every other
department in the state theatre, there were deficits of over a R1 million.
Where was the board? Where was the management? I am saying that had we
obviously been more involved, we would have been warned much earlier. So,
we need to revise the nature of the arms-length policy so that there is
some oversight and an early warning system in future.

Vote No 8 - Education:

Mr N M RAJU: Chair, my question to the hon the Minister is in respect of
the programmes sector - general and further education and training in the
Supplementary Estimate. The sector of general and further education and
training sees an increase of some R31,295 million from R361,55 to
R392,45 million, which is an increase of some 8,67%. My question is: Does
this increase cover any special upgrading or in-service training of
professional qualifications of those educators who, though inadequately
qualified, are nevertheless handling the teaching of subjects such as
mathematics and science, and which gives cause for concern when we look at
matric results?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: The answer is no. It does not cover all these
areas. The R31,295 million was a special allocation by the Minister of
Finance in pursuit of the Government's policy that we must take the issue
of HIV/Aids seriously. But, in the absence of a medical vaccine, we must
provide the vaccine through education and training. It is entirely meant
for this purpose. About R71 million was made available by a special
allocation by the Minister, and out of this, the Department of Education
has a large part of it - R31,2 million. An amount of R4,3 million is
earmarked for the department for the central direction, the training of
trainers and R26,9 million is a conditional grant to the provincial
education departments. An equitable share is the usual equitable allocation
basis, and the amounts allocated to provinces I will supply to Mr Raju.

The other issue is that Government has allocated more than R270 million
this year for management training and for training in the whole school
performance aspect. Regrettably, last year, the provinces were not able to
put up their projects, and therefore, we could not roll over that amount of
money, so it went back to the fiscus and was about 50% of the allocation
for this year.

This year, we are paying much closer attention to the project proposals and
the release of money, provided the projects have been worked out clearly by
the provinces. This is a matter on which, this morning, in the debate on
the Sace Bill, we emphasised very much that teacher development, teacher
upgrading and teacher retraining is at the heart of progress and
development. The Government is very conscious of this need. But, in the
end, it is the provinces that have to implement the allocation of
resources. That itself raises questions as to the capacity of provinces to
do so. It is very much a central part of the development of teaching in our
country.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Any follow-up
question?

Mr N M RAJU: Yes, sir. However, it does not entirely pertain to that
subject.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): I would rather have a
follow-up question, hon member.

Mr N M RAJU: I am not going to discuss anything, just raise that particular
area of concern.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Yes?

Mr N M RAJU: What I would like to know, through you, Mr Chair, from the
Minister, now that Curriculum 2005 has been substituted with Curriculum 21,
does this involve any reprioritising of the Minister's programmes for the
year ahead?

The MINISTER: Chairperson, the trouble with the DP is that it subscribes to
the ancient principle of uno voce, uno duce [one leader, one voice] ...
[Laughter] ... and they trot out all these extraordinary fusions which are
totally unrelated to the matter under discussion. The fact of the matter is
that all democratic countries review their policies, for example. The
United Kingdom - not a perfect exemplar, I think we do better than the
United Kingdom - in fact started a review process two years after the new
curriculum was introduced.

Obviously, we must learn from what has happened. For the first time here or
in any of the other countries that I know of, we have set up an independent
body, which is totally independent of the provinces and of the Government,
to review our outcomes-based education. Very important recommendations were
made, which we adopted except for one. Obviously, there will be a
rearrangement of different matters. The most important rearrangement is
that we will give up the 66 outcomes, which are frankly very difficult to
understand, and replace them with the national curriculum statement. Prof
Linda Chisholm, who was the chair of this committee, is now being brought
into the department, paid for by Billiton, with the status of deputy
director-general, to deal with this issue of the national curriculum
statement. That will result in a simplification of the process.

I hope the DP will pay close attention, and particularly their spokesperson
in the National Assembly, to what is actually happening on the ground
rather than fighting the tattered battles of 1996 all over again.

Mev J WITBOOI: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil graag die agb Minister vra om die
toekenning van 'n bedrag van meer as R3 miljoen in die
Aansuiweringsbegroting, wat geoormerk is vir konsultante, te  verduidelik.
Hoe en vir watter doel is die Minister voornemens om die dienste van
hierdie konsultante te gebruik? Sal die agb Minister 'n verklaring oor die
aangeleentheid doen? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mrs J WITBOOI: Mr Chairman, I would like to ask the hon the Minister to
explain the allocation of an amount exceeding R3 million in the
Supplementary Estimate which has been earmarked for consultants. How and
for what purpose does the Minister intend using the services of these
consultants? Will the hon the Minister make a statement about the matter?]

The MINISTER: Chairperson, that was the very same question that the
spokesperson of the New NP asked in the National Assembly. [Interjections.]
[Laughter.] This is quite clearly a socialisation of information, a kind of
nationalisation of information. [Laughter.] I like this kind of sharing of
information in the two Houses. [Interjections.]

The answer is that my department and I have very little time for
consultants. This is a heading, because consultants do not add value. They
do not leave anything behind. We know about the Auditor-General's report of
last year pertaining to the dependence of Government departments on
consultants. These are not consultants in that sense. They are the
implementors of the programmes. A 30-page document outlines exactly how
this programme for HIV/Aids will be implemented. We have to treat this with
the utmost seriousness, because practice in other countries has shown us
that the most vulnerable group is the 15 to 25 year olds. They are the most
productive people we are going to have, and I regret to say that the
teaching profession, which should not be a vulnerable group, also falls in
this category.

Therefore, the programme, as worked out, is a programme which will be
centrally directed. These people will be experts, specialists who will help
to work out the implementation. We are going to train trainers, and for
that one needs trainers to train those trainers. One can call them
consultants, one can call them representatives of Beelzebub, but they are
necessary to carry out the programme that we have worked out jointly with
the provinces. I can assure hon members that we will not waste a single
rand on this. There will be value added, nationally and, in particular, in
developing capacity in the provinces. In the end, it will be the teachers,
the children and the parents who will be reached by this programme. We
therefore need people who will carry out the intentions of the Government,
which has allocated R31 million for this programme.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Thank you, I
take it there is no follow-up question. We come to Vote No 9.

Vote No 9 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

Mrs A M VERSVELD: Chairperson, the sins of omission are as bad as the sins
of commission.

Die DP is daarom teleurgesteld dat daar geen melding gemaak word van
mariene en kusbestuur in die Aansuiweringsbegroting nie, alhoewel daar
verwys word na armoedeverligting en werkskepping. Daarom wil die DP graag
van die Minister weet: aanvaar sy departement verantwoordelikheid vir die
twaalf hawens buite die gebied van Portnet, soos vermeld in die Minister se
departementele verslag? Watter stappe beplan die Minister? Dink die
Minister die bedrag wat in die aanvanklike begroting begroot is, is
voldoende vir die herstel van twaalf hawens? (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The DP is therefore disappointed that no mention is being made of marine
and coastal management in the Supplementary Estimate, although reference is
made to poverty relief and job creation. That is why the DP would like to
know from the Minister: Does his department accept responsibility for the
12 harbours that fall outside Portnet's jurisdiction, as mentioned in the
Minister's departmental report? Which steps are the Minister planning? Does
the Minister think that the amount budgeted for in the initial budget is
sufficient for the repair of 12 harbours?]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, I do not
know if I am under a misconception as to what the matter before the House
is, but I thought the matter before the House was the Supplementary
Estimate for 2000-01. We could start discussing matters totally unrelated
to this, but I really do not see how this arises out of this matter. If
this were a general discussion about any matter, as members know, I would
be ready to talk. But it is quite unrelated to this matter.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon member, will
you please take your seat. Could you please clarify whether or not the
question you are asking relates to the Supplementary Estimate.

Mrs A M VERSVELD: Chairperson, as I said, the sins of omission are as bad
as the sins of commission. Marine and coastal management have been totally
left out of the Supplementary Estimate, although they talk about poverty
relief and job creation. Therefore, I am asking why there is nothing for
marine and coastal management in the Supplementary Estimate.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon Minister,
you may use your discretion as to whether you want to respond to that
question.

The MINISTER: Mr Chairperson, the manner in which this particular
allocation works is that there are allocations from the Poverty Relief Fund
which are allocated to various departments, and which go specifically
towards job creation projects and projects which are a result of decisions
that arose out of the Jobs Summit which took place some time ago.

All of the projects to which we are allocating funds from this particular
money that is before us arise out of proposals which we receive from the
nine provinces. All nine provinces were asked to submit proposals for
projects which could be funded from the funds which are before the House
today. We have received about 850 proposals for poverty relief projects
from all nine provinces. After the project management unit in the
department had put in a lot of work scrutinising them, about 150 projects
were short-listed. This week the department, in consultation with the
provinces, will finalise the short list.

That is the process of consultation through which allocations are made, and
we have not excluded any particular project as such. However, I must say
that we do not simply take the poverty relief money and then say that
because the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism deals with a
particular subject, therefore a certain percentage must go to that subject.

We look at what will make maximum impact on the alleviation of poverty -
that is what we look at - and it goes right across the board. We take into
account priority areas throughout the country. Certainly those areas which
depend on the coast or on fishing, etc, for their income and livelihood are
not excluded from the poverty relief projects that we have.

One of the important elements one would see here is a very heavy emphasis
on tourism, because we all know that there are quite a large number of
communities that have traditionally depended on fishing as a resource and
as a source of income. Part of the problem faced by this industry has been
the absence of diversification, and we are trying to overcome that problem
by creating a diversified local economy in those areas and particularly in
coastal towns. Tourism provides us with a wonderful opportunity to create
that diversification. Therefore I would like to assure the hon member that
no part of South Africa is being left out. We take into account poverty and
demographic considerations very carefully when choosing the projects.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Are there any
follow-up questions? The DP should please bear in mind that their three
minutes are almost over, but I will give the hon member an opportunity to
ask a follow-up question.

Mev A M VERSVELD: Dankie, mnr die Voorsitter. Ek sal graag van die Minister
wil weet of hy saamstem dat die herstel van hawens 'n geweldige hoeveelheid
armoedeverligting sal teweeg bring, asook werkskepping. Deur werkskepping
volg armoedeverligting. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mrs A M VERSVELD: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to know from the
Minister whether he agrees that the repair of harbours will bring about a
tremendous amount of poverty relief, also job creation. Through job
creation, poverty relief follows.]

The MINISTER: Mr Chairperson, there is no question about the fact that a
number of harbours, particularly small harbours, need urgent repair and
upgrading work in this country. We do not think that we would be able to do
that simply through the poverty relief money that we have here.

We are in a process of consultation with other Government Departments,
particularly the Department of Public Works, in order to ensure that we can
rehabilitate the harbours as much as possible. We are also investigating
public-private partnerships for a number of these harbour areas, so as to
consider things like waterfront developments, so that we could create
diversified use of existing harbours, rather than simply have them for one
particular use, which does not make the harbour itself commercially viable.


Dr E A CONROY: Mr Chairperson, part of the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism's Supplementary Estimate is to be used for poverty
relief. Irregularities in the department, such as possible corruption,
would obviously deplete any and most of the funds available for this
laudable purpose.

My question to the Minister is whether he can please indicate when the
Trytsman report about alleged irregularities in marine and coastal
management will be released, and if the department is not planning to
release the report, why not.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, that matter is currently under investigation by
the department, and when the investigation is complete, that is when the
report has been tabled before me by the department, we will then be able to
consider the question of whether to release it or not, etc.

The general approach that this Government has pursued is to release
whatever reports of investigations that are conducted, but certainly that
matter is being investigated. I must say here, though, that the Mr Trytsman
that is being referred to does not work for the department, is not part of
the department, and the department has absolutely no relationship with him
at this point in time. So any impression that may exist that there is an
investigation that is currently being conducted about current possible
corruption in the department must be dispelled.

We are not conducting any such investigation, and I am reasonably confident
that we have an excellent team of officials in the department who are quite
dedicated to the work before them.

Vote No 13 - Health:

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, Minister of Health, I would like to say that
the NCOP's plenary was informed on Tuesday 13 June 2000 that about 60% of
hospital beds are occupied by patients with HIV-related infections. The
epidemic affects both the young and the economically active populations of
the country.

My questions, therefore, are as follows: Firstly, has the Department of
Health or Finance done a cost benefit analysis on the investment in HIV
education? Secondly, should more financial resources be allocated to
research on HIV and Aids vaccines?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, no, neither the Department of Health
nor the Department of Finance has done a cost benefit analysis on the
investment in HIV/Aids education. But it is generally accepted
internationally that prevention remains the key strategy in the fight
against the epidemic. It leads to public awareness and to behaviour change,
particularly sexual and social behaviour. Both these elements depend on
appropriate messages which are clear, easy to understand and very sensitive
to the cultures of the people, and which particularly target the youth.

With regard to the question of a vaccine, I thought we had already reported
to this House that indeed funds have been allocated by Government to
finance research into and the development of a vaccine. These funds are
from the Department of Health and the Department of Arts, Culture, Science
and Technology, and they are managed by the Medical Research Council.
Obviously we also have support from the private sector, for example Eskom.
We also have support from the international community, as well as our co-
operating partners. Yes, we are engaged in research into and the
development of a vaccine in this country.

Dr P J C NEL: Chairperson, the New NP is pleased that the funds
appropriated in the Supplementary Estimate will be used to implement the
national integrated plan for children infected with and affected by
HIV/Aids. This plan consists of four programmes. I would like to refer to
the VCT programme - voluntary counselling and testing programme - which
aims to make more counselling and testing facilities available to patients.


I would like to ask the Minister whether the test results, which I presume
will be kept confidential and private, will be preserved and processed into
statistics which could be used in future in the battle against the monster
HIV/Aids?

The MINISTER: Chairperson, just by way of information, I have just come
back from the World Health Assembly and I reported about this in this
House. The World Health Assembly was in May and we took a resolution there
that we would no longer call it VCT, but would refer to it as counselling
and voluntary testing. So, could we change that nomenclature? But, yes, we
are already doing that. We are using the results that we get for planning,
so this is not something for the future, it is happening right now.

Mr I M MAKOELA: Chairperson, a substantial amount of the department's
Supplementary Estimate will be focused on community-based care and support.
We are also informed that community-based programmes are to be instituted
in six provinces. Therefore the questions I would like to put are: Firstly,
which pilot projects in the six provinces will benefit from these
programmes? Secondly, what are the key features of community-based care and
support? Thirdly, what would the estimated benefits to the department's
budget be if these programmes are introduced? Fourthly, what monitoring
mechanisms have been put in place to ensure the success of these projects?

The MINISTER: Chairperson, that was a mouthful, but I will attempt to go
through all the questions. The first one was about the pilot projects. As I
understand it, the national working group, which consists of the three
departments, that is the Departments of Health, of Welfare and of
Education, agreed amongst themselves to identify six provinces in which we
would run the pilot projects. These six provinces are: the Eastern Cape and
its region C East London area and region D Umtata area; the Northern Cape,
sited in De Aar; the North West sited in Klerksdorp; the Free State, sited
in Thaba-Nchu and Qwaqwa; the Northern Province, sited in Tzaneen; and
Mpumalanga, sited in Tonga. Those will be the pilot projects in the six
provinces that will benefit from these resources that were generously made
available to us by the Minister of Finance.

The next question was about the key features of community-based care and
support. There are quite a number of them. Obviously it must have a
holistic approach and this must include the emotional, social, economic and
spiritual needs of the targeted population. It must be people-centred. It
must be sensitive to culture, religion and value systems and respect
privacy and dignity. In other words it has to be community-driven.

It must also be very comprehensive and multisectoral in approach,
encompassing preventive, promotive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.
It must also empower, build, capacitate and promote the autonomy and
functioning of the independence of the individual, as well as the family
and the community. It should also ensure access to comprehensive support
services.

As I said, it is an integrated programme in which the Departments of
Health, Welfare, and Education are involved. I guess one of the outstanding
benefits would indeed be community involvement, because community-based
care and home-based care are certainly going to take place within the
families and communities. So one is talking about people taking care of
their own health and also of communities being involved in health care
services.

However, I also think another important area here is decreasing the
stigmatisation of HIV/Aids sufferers, because if people begin to attend to
the needs of those who are infected and affected and see them as human
beings who should not be discriminated against, the levels of
stigmatisation would certainly be brought down.

The last question is about monitoring. The national working committee has
agreed that they would develop indicators. They have not developed
indicators yet. They are in the process of doing that so that they have
these indicators for monitoring and evaluation. It is hoped that the
project will be evaluated after three years, but in the meantime, we have,
in all the provinces, advertised the posts for co-ordinators who would be
responsible for co-ordinating the activities amongst the three departments.


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! That concludes the questions I have
been notified on with respect to Vote No 13. There are no questions on Vote
No 19. We therefore come to Vote No 22 of the Supplementary Estimate!

Vote No 22 - Provincial and Local Government:

Mr C ACKERMANN: Madam Chairperson, in the Supplementary Estimate the
Minister made provision for a local economic development fund.

First of all, why is the amount for professional and special services so
high in comparison to the personnel expenditure and the administrative
expenditure? Then, with regard to the transfer payments, to whom will those
transfer payments be made? Will they be made to local authorities? What
criteria is the Minister going to use to pay over those transfer payments,
if they are going to be paid to local authorities, and when is the hon
Minister going to pay those transfer costs?

I see in the Supplementary Estimates that no provision has been made for
disaster management. No provision has been made for the coming local
elections and no provision has been made for the amalgamation of
municipalities and staff transfers and so forth. Where has that been
reflected and why is there no Supplementary Estimate for those questions?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Chairperson, I will
start with the last part of the question. This allocation is intended to
facilitate the implementation of projects which would contribute to the
implementation of Government's poverty alleviation programme. Therefore it
cannot be for miscellaneous use - elections, disaster management,
amalgamation, etc. It has to be targeted.

What we have done in the past financial year, when we received an
allocation of R42 million, was to invite municipalities to give us business
plans for projects which have the effect, in a long-term and sustainable
way, of generating job creation, and those business plans would then be
evaluated. This is going to be the approach even in the current financial
year. Municipalities will be funded on the strength of the business plans
which they submit, which must meet set criteria.

The amount which we are looking at, for professional and special services,
is really negligible relative to the total amount of R75 million which has
been allocated for this purpose. We do estimate that a lot of consultancy
work will have to take place. As municipalities draw up these business
plans, they need a lot of professional advice and unfortunately, good
quality professional advice does not come cheaply.

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Could I just inform hon members that I
consider NCOP News to be a newspaper and, therefore, those members who are
reading it in the Chamber are infringing the Rules of the NCOP. I will not
mention them by name because I shall avoid making them uncomfortable in the
Council. However, if I observe further reading of this very interesting
journal, I am afraid I will have to name the members.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

              (Consideration of Votes of and Schedule to Bill)

Vote No 1 - Presidency, put.

Declaration of vote:

Mr B WILLEM: Chairperson, informed by the massive challenges faced by this
Office, we as the ANC wish to support the Vote of the Presidency.

It is our firm belief that this Budget Vote will greatly enhance the work
of the President's Office and ensure its effectiveness in carrying out its
constitutional objectives. These challenges are as follows.

Firstly, co-ordinating the overall work of governance to ensure an
integrated approach to reconstruction and development of our society;
secondly, the formulation and implementation of an integrated rural
development strategy. These are important tasks which would assist in the
eradication of poverty prevalent amongst our rural masses; thirdly, the
pursuance of the ...
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! On what point are you rising, hon
member?

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, could you give your ruling on this matter. If
a party supports a Vote, is it allowed to make a declaration of vote? Is
the declaration not made when a party does not support a Vote?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, there is no distinction drawn in the
Rules. A declaration is a statement as provided for in the Rules. You may
proceed, Mr Willem.

Mr B WILLEM: May I continue, Chairperson?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Yes, you may.

Mr B WILLEM: The third challenge is the pursuance of the African
renaissance. The declaration of the 21st century as the African century is
an important challenge facing the Presidency. Fourthly, the leadership of
the Aids Council and the campaign to find an appropriate resolution to the
Aids pandemic is a continuous challenge facing the Presidency. Fifthly, the
location of the Youth Commission, the Gender Commission and other important
statutory bodies within the President's Office is meant to address the
fundamental challenges confronting these respective sectors in meeting
their mandates.

These and other responsibilities located within the President's Office are
a mammoth task which require all of us to give our necessary support to the
highest office in our country. Therefore, the ANC as a carrying
organisation with an overwhelming mandate from the majority of South
Africans, supports this Vote without any reservation in the interest of a
better life for all.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 2 - Parliament, put and agreed to in accordance with section 75 of
the Constitution.

Vote No 3 - Agriculture, put and agreed to.

Vote No 4 - Arts, Culture, Science and Technology, put and agreed to in
accordance with section 75 of the Constitution   (Democratic Party and New
National Party dissenting).

Vote No 5 - Communications, put.

Declaration of vote:

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, daar is honderde wit en swart akteurs van
Suid-Afrika wat werk gedoen het, en steeds doen, vir die SAUK. Die films en
videos is intussen hervertoon, en party is binnelands en party buitelands
verkoop. Dit het 'n noemenswaardige inkomste vir die SAUK gegenereer. Die
akteurs word egter nie hiervoor betaal nie.

Hulle moet nou hof toe gaan om hulle kontraktueel ooreengekome fooi te
beding. Die bedrag word reeds op R30 miljoen bereken en dit groei daagliks,
en die akteurs kry by die dag swaarder weens die dubbele standaarde van die
departement. Hierdie praktyk is onbillik en grens aan kriminaliteit.

Met bogenoemde in gedagte, as die een rede, sou dit vir my onmoontlik wees
om hierdie begrotingspos te steun. Doen ek dit egter nie, sal daar nog
minder kans wees dat hierdie kunstenaars betaal word. Daarom steun ek
hierdie begrotingspos onder protes en hoop ek dat dit 'n bydrae sal lewer
om hierdie kwessie spoedig op te los. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairman, there are hundreds of white and black actors
of South Africa who have worked, and still work, for the SABC. The films
and videos have in the meanwhile been rebroadcast, and some were sold on
the domestic market and some overseas. This generated a remarkable income
for the SABC. The actors were not paid for this, however.

Now they have to go to court to negotiate their contractually agreed fees.
The amount has already been calculated at R30 million and it is increasing
daily, and the actors are suffering more by the day owing to the double
standards of the department. This practice is unfair and borders on
criminality.

With the aforementioned in mind, as one reason, it would be impossible for
me to support this Vote. If I do not do so, however, there would be an even
smaller chance that the actors would be paid. That is why I support this
Vote under protest and I hope that it would contribute to resolving this
issue expeditiously.]
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 6 - Correctional Services, put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, on behalf of the ANC, we would like to
indicate that we have witnessed a remarkable progress in dealing with,
among other things, the overcrowding in our prisons, the reduction of
escapes from prisons, the identifying of and dealing with the blockages,
and devising solutions to the problems relating to awaiting-trial
prisoners! The strategy is to come up with an alternative to imprisonment
which involves serving a sentence within the community under the
supervision of that community. Fortunately, this is not what we witnessed
last weekend where ET was allowed to spend 12 hours outside.

The fast-tracking of prison construction projects currently under way and
the use of public/private partnership initiatives for the provision of
additional prison accommodation should also address this problem. We
therefore support this Vote.
Dr E A CONROY: Mevrou die Voorsitter, korrupsie, swak bestuur en die
wanaanwending van fondse het die Departement van Korrektiewe Dienste
geskud. Die Nuwe NP het president Mbeki versoek om in te gryp. Ons is bly
om te kan sê dat die agb President en agb minister Skosana nie dinge
probeer toesmeer het nie, en aan ons versoek om van korrupte en onbevoegde
personeel ontslae te raak, gehoor gegee het. Besoeke aan sekere
gevangenisse het getoon dat daar reeds merkbare verbeterings is. Daar is
egter nog groot probleme in ons gevangenisse, veral ten opsigte van
oorbevolking.

Die akkommodasie-kapasiteit van ons gevangenisse is, as ronde getal, 100
000 gevangenes, en volgens die mees onlangse inligting tot ons beskikking
is daar, weer eens as ronde getal, 172 000 gevangenes in ons gevangenisse;
met ander woorde, 'n oorbevolking van 72%. Van die 172 000 gevangenes is 64
000 verhoorafwagtend. Hoewel verhoorafwagtende gevangenes 'n
bestuursprobleem van die Departement van Justisie is, is die Departement
van Korrektiewe Dienste ook vir hulle fisieke welsyn verantwoordelik.
Daarom moet die departement 'n duidelike plan van aksie hê om hierdie
probleem vas te vat aangesien die aantal verhoorafwagtendes ongelukkig nie
oornag drasties gaan verminder nie.
As die polisie voortgaan met hulle suksesse ten opsigte van Operation
Crackdown, gaan hierdie getal trouens drasties verhoog. Ons is bereid om,
soos aangetoon, in hierdie stadium die begroting te steun in die lig van
die ingryping van die agb President en Minister. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Dr E A CONROY: Madam Chairperson, corruption, poor management and the
misappropriation of funds have rocked the Department of Correctional
Services. The New NP asked President Mbeki to intervene. We are glad to be
able to say that the hon the President and hon Minister Skosana have not
tried to cover things up, and have heeded our request to get rid of corrupt
and inefficient staff. Visits to certain prisons have shown that noticeable
improvements have already taken place. However, there are still big
problems in our prisons, particularly with regard to overcrowding.

Rounded off, the accommodation capacity of our prisons is 100 000
prisoners, and according to the most recent information at our disposal
there are, once again rounded off, 172 000 prisoners in our prisons; in
other words, overpopulation of 72%. Of the 172 000 prisoners, 64 000 are
awaiting trial. Although awaiting-trial prisoners are a management problem
of the Department of Justice, the Department of Correctional Services is
also responsible for their physical wellbeing. Therefore the department
must have a clear plan of action to tackle this problem, as the number of
awaiting-trial prisoners unfortunately is not going to be reduced
drastically overnight.

If the police continue with their successes with regard to Operation
Crackdown, this number will in fact increase drastically. As indicated, at
this stage we are prepared to support the budget in the light of the
intervention by the hon the President and Minister.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, the budget provides for the incarceration of 150
000 prisoners, and there is already a 17 000 shortfall on the existing
number of prisoners, therefore leaving a deficit that is not being catered
for in the budget. I would also like to refer to the management audit of
the Department of Correctional Services, which levelled major criticism at
the department due to lack of proper planning and budgeting, and the
overcentralisation of many of its functions. The lack of any official
service delivery improvement plan, the overcentralisation of control and
the deeply felt sense of unfairness throughout the organisation, which is
thought to be riddled with favouritism, cronyism and corruption, were also
identified by the audit. In these circumstances we cannot support this
Budget Vote.

Vote No 6 agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 7 - Defence, put and agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution (Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 8 - Education, put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr D M KGWARE: Chairperson, we support Vote 8 - Education. A defining
feature in policy development over the past six years of this Government
has been its stated aim of transformation in education. One policy
initiative which strengthens our resolve to change the way in which our
children are developed into responsible adulthood, is Tirisano. It urges
all people in this country to work together towards our stated aim of an
equitable, efficient and quality schooling system.

Provincial education budgets include allocations for schooling.

Schooling is a focus area of our nation's transformation. Support for Vote
No 8 of the Appropriation Bill should be based on an analysis of how funds
have been allocated to aspects of schooling.

Allow me to refer to some of these aspects briefly. In line with our aim,
provincial education budgets are projected to increase slightly over the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period to allow for an equitable
schooling system. The data generally expresses mixed views in that some of
the poorer provinces should experience growth over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework period. For instance, the Eastern Cape shows a real
growth of 4%, while some of the better-off provinces actually show a small
decline over the corresponding period. For instance, the Western Cape has
shown a decline of .05%. The North West has shown the greatest decline of
11.7% over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period. Examination of all
other provincial budgets suggests that, apart from the 5.5% real growth for
Gauteng and the sharp decline for the North West province, most budgets are
projected to remain relatively constant over the next three years.

The Education budget thus clearly attempts to lay a consistent, stable
financial foundation for provinces to gather all stakeholders together in
the spirit of Tirisano so that they can work together and build strong
school governing bodies so that our schools become proud centres in our
communities.

It is for this reason that, in the spirit of Tirisano, the ANC supports
Vote No 8 of the Appropriation Bill.

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, there are various reasons why the DP cannot
support the Budget Vote on Education. Some of these are: Firstly, the
textbook debacle in most of our schools is still far from being
satisfactorily resolved. There are many schools which, as yet, have not
gotten their full complement of textbooks and other facilities. Secondly,
we have, of course, the withdrawal of Curriculum 2005. While the step is
welcome, this really heralds the waste of the taxpayer's money. Thirdly,
discipline among teachers has deteriorated. We hope however that the South
African Council of Educators Bill will address this, and bring some sanity
to this area of concern. Fourthly, the governance and management of schools
is an area of concern to the DP. School discipline and the handling of
instances of indiscipline by principals and school governing bodies has
become serious. Fights and shootings, some resulting in killings, seem to
continue unabated. Educators and learners need a more tranquil and placid
environment that is conducive to better education and better learning.
[Interjections.]

Mr M BHABHA: Madam Chair, on a point of order: What has this declaration to
do with the budget?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Bhabha is saying that the
declaration may not be relevant to the budget. Is that so, Mr Raju?

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, we are just declaring our objection to this Vote.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I will allow you to proceed, but could
you keep it brief? You have just a few seconds left.

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, I was talking about the concept of school
governing bodies which are an innovation in our schools, yet they seem to
be floundering in a sea of uncertainty and lack of proper guidance.

Accusations of favouritism and nepotism in appointments and promotions seem
to be the order of the day. When principals are alleged to be colluding
with the school governing bodies ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Raju, I shall now stop you because
you are now reflecting on various policy matters which you could raise in a
debate on education. You are not speaking to the national Education budget.
I shall therefore stop you at this point, because what you are saying is
not relevant to the budget.

I have, in fact, hardly heard members refer to the actual national Budget
in the declarations that they have made. I am concerned as to whether we
are addressing the subject matter that we should be, which is the national
Budget.

We move on. We seem to have had an indication from Mrs Witbooi.

Mev J WITBOOI: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die Nuwe NP het besluit om die
begrotingspos nie te steun nie, en wel om die volgende redes wat ek
kortliks sal noem.

Die Regering het Kurrikulum 2005, nieteenstaande die waarskuwings van die
Nuwe NP dat dit nie kán werk nie, op ons kinders en leerders afgeforseer.
Duisende onskuldige kinders in ons skole was die prooi van 'n genadelose
maatskaplike eksperiment wat nie geslaag het nie. Miljoene rande van die
belastingbetalers se geld in hierdie begroting sal steeds in hierdie
bodemlose put verdwyn, want daar is geen sekerheid wanneer die mislukte
Kurrikulum 2005 met Kurrikulum 21 vervang gaan word nie.

Ons kan hierdie begrotingspos dus om hierdie en nog ander redes nie steun
nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs J WITBOOI: Madam Chair, the New NP has decided not to support the
Vote, for the following reasons, which I shall briefly mention.

The Government forced Curriculum 2005 on our children and learners, despite
the warnings of the New NP that it simply could not work. Thousands of
innocent children in our schools fell victim to a merciless social
experiment which did not succeed. Millions of rands of taxpayers' money in
this budget will still disappear into this bottomless pit, because there is
no certainty when the unsuccessful Curriculum 2005 is going to be replaced
by Curriculum 21.

For this and other reasons, we can therefore not support this Vote.]

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party and New National Party dissenting).

Vote No 9 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism, put.

Declaration of vote:

Mev A M VERSVELD: Mevrou die Voorsitter, alhoewel die DP hierdie
begrotingspos steun omdat ons glo die Minister het 'n goeie taak verrig,
wil ons graag ons teenkanting uitspreek ten opsigte van program 3 in
hierdie begrotingspos, naamlik Mariene en Kusbestuur, en wel om die
volgende redes.

Alhoewel daar eerstens geen korrupsie in hierdie departement gevind is met
betrekking tot die finansiële bestuur nie, is wel gevind dat daar
wanbesteding van ongeveer R24 miljoen in die departement was. Dit is die
een rede. Tweedens is die uitreiking van twee verslae wat gedoen is, die
een intern, en die ander deur die Kantoor vir Ernstige Ekonomiese Misdrywe,
oftewel Keem, nie aan ons bekend gemaak nie, asook die Trytsman-verslag,
wat R558 000 beloop. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs A M VERSVELD: Madam Chairperson, although the DP supports this Vote
because we believe the Minister has done a good job, we would like to
express our opposition with regard to programme 3 in this Vote, namely
Marine and Coastal Management, and for the following reasons.

Although, firstly, no corruption was found in this department with regard
to financial management, it was indeed found that misappropriation of
approximately R24 million had taken place in the department. That is one
reason. Secondly, the publication of two reports which were produced, one
internal and the other by the Office for Serious Economic Offences, or
OSEO, was not made known to us, as well as the Trytsman report, which
amounted to R558 000.]

Thirdly, we are unhappy with the fact that the operation and maintenance of
three research vessels and four patrol vessels, outsourced since 1 April to
Smith-Pentow, are still highlighted under the expenditure in the programme
of the Marine Living Resource Fund.

Vir my lyk dit asof sake 'n bietjie deurmekaar is, en daarom wil ek net
graag my teenkanting teen program 3 van hierdie begrotingspos uitspreek.
[It seems to me that matters are a bit muddled, and I would therefore like
to express my opposition to programme 3 of this Vote.]

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party dissenting).
Vote No 10 - Finance, put.

Declaration of vote:

Mr A MARAIS: Chairperson, my declaration is on Vote 10.  This department
has delivered to the nation and that is an indisputable fact. It has
departed from the orthodox mindset in the area of public finances and has
taken us into a new era of transparent, accountable and stable management
of the nation's financial resources. The department has turned the often
conflicting objectives of tax liability, investment growth and expansion of
consumer purchasing power into mutually reinforcing objectives. It begs the
question, how did the department achieve such a daunting task?

It is set out by, inter alia, reducing the burden of tax and simultaneously
increasing the population of taxpayers. It has put into the back pocket of
taxpayers approximately R10 billion by reducing the tax rate of low and
middle-income citizens, thereby enhancing the purchasing power of
consumers.

It has further increased the interest exemptions to R3 000 per year for
taxpayers under the age of 65. This initiative demonstrates the
Government's intention to stimulate household savings. Ordinarily, higher
savings should result in higher domestic investments.

The department has also achieved parity with international norms in the
following areas: The South African income tax system will be transformed to
a residence-based system whereby dividends accruing to local residents from
sources outside South Africa will be taxed as normal income. Secondly, the
levying of capital gains tax is also commensurate with international norms
if one notes that many of South Africa's trading partners elected to go
this route decades ago. The capital gains tax will be introduced from 1
April 2001.

Since the department has timeously informed us of this tax before its
implementation, taxpayers are in a position to restructure their financial
matters ahead of the impending new tax regime. The early warning signalled
by the Department of Finance should be viewed as an extension of courtesy
to taxpayers. How more democratic! [Interjections.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! You are also making a policy speech.
You are not speaking to the budget. Therefore, I am going to stop you. I
would want you to address the budget.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 11 - Foreign Affairs, put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make a brief comment on
Vote No 11 to express my reservations and objection. On the Foreign Affairs
Vote, may I say, at once, that I must not be misunderstood. We are not
against transformation, empowerment or upliftment at all. But we find it
disturbing that the director-general of the department seems to have
declared war upon the distinguished and well-qualified officers of the
foreign service by saying that he is forming six task teams to work on
their replacement.

Even our President, in his normal mild way, rebuked the director-general.
The most important expenditure item on the account of the Department of
Foreign Affairs is that of personnel and travel. If one demoralises, the
results will be bad. The only way one gets value for money for one's budget
expenditure, is for one's public servants to be working well, confidently
and efficiently. If one has a director-general saying that he is going to
replace them, because they are white, and forming task teams to replace
them, the results cannot be good.

Then we have the Minister adding insult to injury by casting aspersions
upon their experience and upon the skills of the entire staff, speaking in
Spain. This threatens to demoralise them even further. The comments of the
Minister were neither true, nor wise, nor productive, nor motivating, nor
necessary. We will not vote against the item purely because we do not want
to frustrate the good efforts of the President who is effectively happily
and fortunately, our de facto Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Mr M V MOOSA: Mr Chairperson, I wish to address the manner in which the
budget for the Department of Foreign Affairs has been designed. This
department, and this Budget Vote, represent probably one of the most
significant Budget Votes that we will ever pass since our election into the
democratic Government in 1994. It is a Budget Vote that is designed, and
its programmes are designed, to take our country into a global environment
where economic affairs and foreign policy are becoming key issues.

The six committees that the hon member Mr Durr referred to are committees
that are designed to ensure that our foreign missions and foreign offices
become conversant with the new trends internationally and with
transformation inside our own country and on the ground. For the ACDP to
require the department not to do such things is for the ACDP to ...
[Interjections.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Madam Chairperson, on a point of order: This is
becoming a debate and not a declaration on the vote.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I would think that it is much more of a
dialogue, and I am about to stop it. I am aware. [Laughter.] Mr Moosa,
could you confine yourself to the Budget Vote.

Mr M V MOOSA: Madam Chairperson, the issue is that the department has a
number of programmes in place to ensure that it spends money in a way that
makes its mission abroad a mission that is necessary for the economic
challenges we face in this country. It has 40-odd foreign offices that are
concentrating only on economic missions. It is trying to attract investment
into this country. So the programmes of the Foreign Affairs office and the
way in which it has designed its budget, currently, for the 2000-2001
financial year, are very relevant and very appropriate.

Over and above that, this department, apart from the big expenditure it has
on personnel and so forth, has to do a whole range of other things. This
department has to spend money to ensure that we are doing the right things
in sport internationally. The Department of Foreign Affairs had to get
involved in something like the ``Hansiegate'' affair. The Department of
Foreign Affairs is involved in attracting technology to this country, so it
uses its budget on the whole range of things and not only on personnel. The
ANC supports this budget. [Time expired.]

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.
Vote No 12 - Government Communication and Information System, put and
agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 13 - Health, put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, I wish to make a statement on Vote 13, but in
the light of what you said earlier on, what I want to say will perhaps be
out of order. I am going to say it anyway, and you can rule me out of
order, if you think that is the case. [Laughter.]

On behalf of the ANC, I rise to support Budget Vote No 13. In supporting
this Vote, I would like to highlight the following. What I am about to
highlight, I think, impacts directly on the budget, and that is why we
thought we should highlight a few of these things. These are: The
continuing work in the important areas of women's health, violence against
women and the contribution in ensuring that, as a country, we meet the
obligations of the Beijing Platform; the introduction of the patient's
charter to give expression to the principle of Batho Pele and the
restoration of human dignity to all South Africans in the delivery of
health care services, the building of a truly integrated and unitary health
system based on a comprehensive primary health care approach, the
commitment and vigour of the department and the various initiatives
embarked upon in the fight against HIV/Aids; and, lastly, the formulation
of our strategic framework, also known as the Ten-point Plan, in
collaboration with the nine provinces, that will guide the work of this
department for the next four years.

Mr K D S DURR: On Vote No 13 - Health, we simply want to make two points.
One is that the cost of medicine has been much in the news and much
debated, and is a major item in the budget. I would suggest that the
actions of the Minister  are such as to drive up the cost of medicine up
and not drive it down. If one has a situation where people are poorly
clothed, one does not then put the burden of clothing them upon the textile
industry. If people are badly housed, one does not put the burden of the
lack of housing upon the housing industry. So, when people are ill and
medicines are expensive, one does not try and shift that burden on to the
purveyors or the manufacturers of medicines. The impact of the hostile
attitude of this Minister and the previous Minister, which is misdirected
to the pharmaceutical industry ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: How is that expressed in the budget?

Mr K D S DURR: It has a direct impact on the budget. It is the reason we
are opposing the budget.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Which aspect of the budget?

Mr K D S DURR: The Minister's salary. [Laughter.] So the impact of the
Minister's actions has caused 30 of the major who's who pharmaceutical
industry in South Africa to stop manufacturing in South Africa. We are
losing skills, exports and jobs.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Durr, you have exhausted your time.
You are, in fact repeating a subject that has been debated in the House,
and using the very words you used during that debate.

My concern and my intervention, hon members, relate to the fact that I do
not see you addressing the various budgets and what the budgets intend to
do in our provinces. I would have anticipated that in the National Council
of Provinces this is what we would be doing when we declare, that we would
have looked carefully at what the intentions are, perhaps even what the
allocations are with respect to the provinces, and what plans those
allocations relate to.

That is what I would think you would support or express concern about where
plans are not addressed, but we are not hearing that. Hence, the uncalled-
for interventions by the presiding officer, which are very unusual. I would
like to express concern as to whether we are relevant to the task that we
have before us.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party and African Christian Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 14 - Home Affairs, put and agreed to in accordance with section 75
of the Constitution (Democratic Party and New National Party dissenting).

Vote No 15 - Housing, put.

Declaration of vote:

Dr P J C NEL: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die Nuwe NP is bekommerd oor die feit
dat daar nie behoorlik kontrole deur die departement uitgeoefen word oor
die toekenning van huissubsidies nie. [Madam Chairperson, the New NP is
concerned about the fact that the department does not exercise sufficient
control over the allocation of housing subsidies.]

In the report of the Auditor-General on the accounts of the Free State
provincial housing board, it is stated, regarding the approval and payment
of subsidies, that the requirements of the implementation manual with
regard to housing subsidy schemes have not been complied with.

Strydig met die vereistes van hierdie handleiding is groot bedrae vir
behuisingsubsidieskemas deur die behuisingsraad aan die betrokke
ontwikkelaars uitbetaal sodra die skema deur die raad goedgekeur is. In
baie gevalle is sertifikate waarin die betrokke begunstigdes sertifiseer
dat die projek tot hul bevrediging voltooi is, nie aan die raad voorgelê
nie. Sommige van die sertifikate is selfs geteken voordat die projek begin
is, waarná die bouer dan net eenvoudig verdwyn het.

Voorts beskou die Nuwe NP die Regering se aankondiging in Januarie 2000 dat
subsidies vir huisvestingsprojekte in stedelike gebiede besnoei gaan word
en dié geld aangewend gaan word om projekte in die platteland te bevorder,
as onregverdig. Provinsies wat in die afgelope boekjaar daarin geslaag het
om nie te onderbestee nie, naamlik die Wes-Kaap, die Noord-Kaap en Gauteng,
word hierdeur benadeel.

Verstedeliking vind voortdurend plaas omdat daar meer werkgeleenthede in
die stedelike gebiede is. As daar nie huise is nie, word mense gedwing om
in plakkerskampe te woon, terwyl huise op plekke gebou word waar mense nie
wíl of kán woon nie, weens die swak ekonomiese vooruitsigte. Die Nuwe NP
kan dus nie vir dié begrotingspos stem nie, omdat te veel geld wat vir
behuising bedoel is, nog steeds as gevolg van swak kontrole en korrupsie in
die verkeerde hande beland, en omdat die voorsiening van behuising nie
gepaard gaan met die nodige ekonomiese ontwikkeling en grondhervorming op
die platteland nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In contravention of the requirements of this manual, large amounts were
paid out by the housing board to the relevant developers for housing
subsidy schemes as soon as the scheme was approved by the board. In many
instances certificates in which the relevant beneficiaries certify that the
project has been completed to their satisfaction, were not submitted to the
board. Some of the certificates were even signed before the project began,
after which the builder simply disappeared.

In addition the New NP views as unfair the Government's announcement in
January 2000 that subsidies for housing projects in urban areas will be cut
and this money utilised to promote projects in rural areas. Provinces which
have succeeded in not underspending during the past financial year, namely
the Western Cape, the Northern Cape and Gauteng, are detrimentally affected
by this.

Urbanisation takes place constantly because there are more job
opportunities in the urban areas. If there are no houses, people are forced
to live in squatter camps, while houses are built in places where people do
not want to live, or cannot live, as a result of the poor economic
prospects. The New NP can therefore not vote in favour of this Vote,
because too much money which is intended for housing still ends up in the
wrong hands as a result of poor controls and corruption, and because the
provision of housing does not go hand in hand with the necessary economic
development and land reform in rural areas.]

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party and New National Party dissenting).

Vote No 17 - Independent Complaints Directorate - put and agreed to in
accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 18 - Justice and Constitutional Development, put and agreed to in
accordance with section 75 of the Constitution (African Christian
Democratic Party and Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 19 - Labour, put.

Declaration of vote:

Dr P J C NEL: Mevrou die Voorsitter, dit is 'n algemeen aanvaarde feit dat
werkloosheid die vernaamste oorsaak van armoede is in ons land. Die hoë
misdaadsyfer kan ook grootliks toegeskryf word aan die hoë
werkloosheidsyfer. Die rigiede bepalings van die arbeidswetgewing wat
geskep is deur hierdie departement is een van die oorsake van werkloosheid.
In 1999 alleen het meer as 120 000 werkgeleenthede verlore gegaan. Geen
wonder dat die agb Minister van Finansies onlangs in 'n onderhoud gesê het
dat die Regering se beleid tot op hede nie werk geskep het nie en dat 'n
beleidsverandering nodig is. 'n Mens kan maar net hoop dat die agb Minister
van Arbeid hiervan kennis geneem het.

Tot dusver wil dit egter nie so voorkom nie, want die agb Minister hou vol
dat die probleem nie die arbeidsbeleid is nie, maar dat dit bloot 'n
persepsieprobleem is. Die feit dat nie net die private werkgewers nie, maar
ook die staat, al hoe meer ernstige probleme ondervind met die toepassing
van die arbeidswetgewing, is 'n bewys van die departement se onvermoë om
die werkloosheidsprobleme van ons land aan te spreek. Solank as wat die
werkloosheidsyfer so onaanvaarbaar hoog is, kan die Nuwe NP nie vir hierdie
begrotingspos stem nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P J C NEL: Madam Chairperson, it is a generally accepted fact that
unemployment is the main cause of poverty in our country. The high crime
rate can also largely be attributed to the high unemployment rate. The
rigid provisions of the labour legislation created by this department
constitute one of the causes of unemployment. In 1999 alone more than 120
000 job opportunities were lost. No wonder the hon the Minister of Finance
recently said in an interview that the Government's policy up to now had
not created jobs and that a change of policy was needed. One only hopes
that the hon the Minister of Labour has taken cognisance of this.

To date this does not seem to have been the case, since the hon the
Minister maintains that the problem is not the labour policy as such, but
that it is merely a problem of perception. The fact that not only private
employers, but also the state, are, to an increasing extent, experiencing
serious problems with the implementation of the labour legislation is proof
of the department's inability to address the unemployment problems in our
country. As long as the unemployment rate remains unacceptably high, the
New NP will not be able to support this Vote.]

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party and New National Party dissenting).

Vote No 20 - Land Affairs, put.

Declaration of vote:

Dr E A CONROY: Chairperson, the New NP agrees with the Minister that the
people who should benefit from an organised and well-managed system of land
distribution, and especially from the disposal of state land, are the
people who, through their being previously disadvantaged, suffered socially
and economically, and that the disposal of state land should be the key to
the improvement of their quality of life.

The New NP therefore urges the Minister to do everything in her power to
speed up a well-organised and strategically managed system of sustainable
land redistribution. It would appear that sufficient state-owned land is
still available for this purpose and that it would be the more affordable
option when making land available for redistribution.

Restitution still causes a great deal of uncertainty and concern to
claimants and those landowners against whose land claims have been
registered. More than 63 000 claim forms had been lodged with the
Commission on Restitution of Land Rights by 31 December 1998, and
approximately 4 000 claims, with a total of close to 81 000 restitution
beneficiaries at a total restitution award cost of R180 million, had been
settled as of 7 March this year.

Although the pace may seem very slow, the Minister and the department are
to be commended for the thorough and efficient research utilised in the
process of claims investigation to eliminate duplicated and unfounded
claims. It is nevertheless our considered opinion that the department
should apply the resources and measures at its disposal and any new ones,
if necessary, to hasten the process.

I do not think that the land issue in Zimbabwe will manifest itself in the
same way in South Africa as it did in Zimbabwe, because I do not believe
that our President will expropriate farms and take 30 of those for himself,
give 15 to our Deputy President, some to his Cabinet Ministers and,
finally, take only a few and divide them up between a few thousand
previously disadvantaged persons. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Manuel, would you want the President
to give you a farm? [Laughter.]

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 21 - Minerals and Energy, in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution put and agreed to (Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 22 - Provincial and Local Government, put.

Declarations of vote:

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Mevrou die Voorsitter, hierdie begrotingspos speel 'n
uiters belangrike en leidende rol om ons land se staatkunde oor twee sfere
van regering te orden en te ontwikkel. Die begrotingspos is meer
beleidsgerig, naamlik oor hoe dienslewering op provinsiale en plaaslike
vlak moet geskied. Dus val die klem op die beleidsraamwerke wat dan
noodwendig die sienings en die visies van die regerende party weerspieël.

Die Regering is ten gunste van meer sentralisasie en minder devolusie van
mag na die provinsiale en plaaslike vlak, en hierdie kernuitgangspunte word
gemanifesteer in hierdie pos se begroting. In die praktyk het dit gestalte
gekry in, onder andere, die Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill, die
Local Government: Municipal Structures Bill, die Transfer of Staff to
Municipalities Amendment Bill, die Local Government: Municipal Demarcation
Act en die voorgestelde Property Rates Bill, wat bestaan en ook nog nie
bestaan nie, aldus die voorsitter van ons komitee.

As 'n mens al hierdie wette in ag neem, wat voortspruit uit die begroting
van dié pos, dan kan die Nuwe NP nie hierdie pos ondersteun nie. Hierdie
wette het 'n geweldige impak op die hele Suid-Afrika en op wat vir ons
voorlê - veral ook die wetgewing oor eiendomsbelasting, wat eenvoudig in 'n
donker wolk gehul is en by Salga in werkswinkels bespreek word. Dit sal
eindelik daartoe lei dat die demokratiese proses in Suid-Afrika misken
word. Verskeie van hierdie wette is heeltemal ongrondwetlik, en derhalwe
sal ons nie hierdie pos kan ondersteun nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr C ACKERMANN: Madam Speaker, this Vote plays an extremely important and
leading role in arranging and developing our country's statecraft across
two spheres of government. The Vote is more policy-directed, namely the way
that service delivery should take place at the provincial and local levels.
Emphasis is therefore placed on the policy frameworks that necessarily
reflect the views and visions of the governing party.

The Government is in favour of more centralisation and less devolution of
power to the provincial and local levels, and these key points of departure
manifest themselves in the budget of this Vote. In practice this has found
substance in, inter alia, the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill, the
Local Government: Municipal Structures Bill, the Transfer of Staff to
Municipalities Amendment Bill, the Local Government: Municipal Demarcation
Act and the proposed Property Rates Bill, which exists, but at the same
time does not exist yet, in the words of the chairperson of our committee.
When one takes into consideration all these Acts, which emanate from the
budget of this Vote, then the New NP cannot support it. These Acts have a
tremendous impact on the whole of South Africa and what is waiting on us -
in particular with regard to the legislation pertaining to property tax -
is simply a dark cloud and is coming under discussion at Salga's workshops.
It will eventually lead the democratic process in South Africa being
disregarded. Various of these Acts are entirely unconstitutional, and as a
result we will not be able to support this Vote.]

Mr M BHABHA: Chairperson, the ANC believes that the Vote is designed to
sustain what is perhaps the most transformatory legislation to come out of
this Government since the Constitution was passed. It is also designed to
sustain what is perhaps the most extensive restructuring of any sphere. The
ANC is quite encouraged to see that the budget has been appropriately
allocated to try and maintain this.

Secondly, the budget also has factored into it an allocation which takes
into account and allows for organic development between provincial and
local government and the different spheres of government. The ANC supports
this Vote.
Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party and New National Party dissenting).

Vote No 23 - Public Enterprises, put and agreed to in accordance with
section 75 of the Constitution (Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 24 - Public Service and Administration, put and agreed to in
accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 25 - Public Service Commission, put and agreed to in accordance
with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 26 - Public Works, put.

Declaration of vote:

Dr P J C NEL: Voorsitter, ek verwys na begrotingspos 26. Daar is 'n
duidelike gebrek aan verantwoordbaarheid in verskeie bestuurstrukture van
die Departement van Openbare Werke. Die nuwe direkteur-generaal het onlangs
erken daar is 'n gebrek aan toesig en beheermaatreëls ten opsigte van
projekte. Dit is ook nie aanvaarbaar dat die gebrek aan interne
beheermaatreëls soms as verskoning vir die tekortkominge in die departement
aangebied word nie. Die totale onkunde wat die bestuur van die departement
openbaar ten opsigte van die staatstenderraadprosedures, is verstommend.
Dit is dan ook geen wonder dat die Komitee oor Openbare Rekenings besluit
het om voortaan nie meer te wag op die volgende verslag van die Ouditeur-
generaal nie, maar om op 'n gereelde basis interne inspeksies te hou om te
bepaal of die departement se bestuursmaatreëls wel in gebruik is.

Indien soortgelyke optrede deur die Komitee oor Openbare Rekenings alreeds
in die afgelope boekjaar uitgevoer is, sou dit dalk voorkom het dat die
bedrag van R226 miljoen, wat bestem was vir armoedeverligting, nie deur die
betrokke direktoraat van die departement bestee is nie. Dit was 'n growwe
en onvergeeflike fout. Dit dui alles op algehele onbekwaamheid by die
bestuurskader van die departement in die afgelope boekjaar. Die Nuwe NP sal
om dié rede teen die begrotingspos stem. Ons hoop dat die nuwe Minister
baie beter sal vaar in die huidige boekjaar. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P J C NEL: Chairman, I want to make reference to Vote No 26. There is
clearly a lack of accountability in various management structures of the
Department of Public Works. The new director-general recently admitted
there was also a lack of supervision and control measures in respect of
projects. Nor is it acceptable that the lack of internal control measures
is sometimes used as an excuse for the shortcomings of the department. The
complete ignorance displayed by the management of the department in respect
of the state tender procedures is amazing. It is then no wonder that the
Committee on Public Accounts has decided in future not to wait for the next
report of the Auditor-General, but to hold regular internal inspections to
determine whether the department's management measures are in fact in use.

If the Committee on Public Accounts had already taken similar action during
the past financial year, it might have prevented R226 million that was
intended for poverty relief from being spent by the directorate of the
department. That was a grave and unforgivable mistake. All this points to
complete incompetence on the part of the management cadre of the department
during the past financial year. The New NP, for this reason, will vote
against this Vote. We hope that the new Minister will perform much better
in the current financial year.]

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution (New
National Party and Democratic Party dissenting.

Vote No 27 - SA Management Development Institute, put and agreed to in
accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 28 - SA Police Service, put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, the ANC votes in favour of this Vote, since
we have all witnessed that this department has been able to deploy the
resources placed at its disposal at strategic places. We have also
witnessed that, as a result of the deployment of resources, we have been
able to bring down the level of violence in our country.

I agree with the hon member here, who said that Correctional Services has
been overcrowded as a result of this department having utilised its
resources appropriately. We therefore support this Vote.

Mnr J HORNE: Mnr die Voorsitter, die begroting dui daarop dat die
beskerming van die veiligheid en sekuriteit van 'n land se inwoners die
mees fundamentele plig van enige demokratiese regering behoort te wees. Dit
behoort daarom die hoogste prioriteit van die Regering te wees. Die
ernstige tekort aan behoorlik opgeleide personeel, voertuie en ander
toerusting het egter 'n baie belemmerende uitwerking op die polisie se
stryd teen misdaad. Hierdie begroting is, onses insiens, geheel en al
onvoldoende om die tekorte van ten minste 700 opgeleide personeellede, 7
860 voertuie en ander toerusting ter waarde van R885,2 miljoen aan te
spreek. Die R928 miljoen wat hiervoor benodig word, behoort, onses insiens,
onmiddellik beskikbaar gestel word. Die gevolge word ook in die Noord-Kaap
ervaar.

Hierdie begroting maak ook nie genoegsaam voorsiening vir die verhoging van
ons polisielede se salarisse en die verbetering van ander diensvoorwaardes
nie. Ons kan dit nie goedkeur dat daar onder hierdie omstandighede miljoene
rande begroot word vir die nuwe wet op die beheer van vuurwapens, wat nie
nodig sou gewees het indien die polisie in staat gestel word om die
bestaande wetgewing behoorlik toe te pas nie. Onder hierdie omstandighede
kan ons ongelukkig nie hierdie begroting ondersteun nie, omdat dit, soos
reeds aangetoon, onvoldoende is. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J HORNE: Mr Chairperson, the budget indicates that the safeguarding of
the safety and security of the citizens of a country should be the most
fundamental duty of any democratic government. Therefore, this should be
the highest priority of the Government. However, the serious lack of
properly trained staff, vehicles and other equipment has a very obstructive
effect on the fight against crime by the police. This budget is, in our
opinion, totally inadequate to address the shortfalls of at least 700
trained staff members, 7 860 vehicles and other equipment to the value of
R885,2 million. The R928 million which is necessary for this should, in our
opinion, be made available immediately. The effects are also being
experienced in the Northern Cape.

This budget also does not make sufficient provision for an increase in the
salaries of our police members and the improvement of other service
conditions. We cannot approve of the fact that under these circumstances
millions of rands are being budgeted for the new Firearms Control Act,
which would not have been necessary if the police had been enabled to
properly enforce the current legislation. Under these circumstances we
unfortunately cannot support this budget because, as has already been
indicated, it is inadequate.]

Mr J L THERON: Chairperson, the reason why the DP cannot support the SAPS
budget is that while we are talking about the empowering of people, due to
manpower and resource shortages we are disempowering the very people that
must keep us safe - the bobby on the beat.

At every police station, we hear the same story: at least 50% understaffed,
vehicle shortages and a lack of other resources. The budget makes provision
for 300 new personnel for the gun Control Bill and millions of rands for
the administrative implementation of the Bill, but does not address its
enforcement at all. Where are the police officers to go around ensuring
compliance? The DP, therefore, cannot support this Vote.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party and New National Party dissenting).

Vote No 29 - Sport and Recreation, put and agreed to in accordance with
section 75 of the Constitution (Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 30 - State Expenditure, put and agreed to in accordance with
section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 31 - Statistics South Africa, put and agreed to in accordance with
section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry, put.

Declaration of vote:

Mr J L THERON: Chairperson, on Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry, the
Democratic Party knows that the Department of Trade and Industry is
undergoing restructuring because of inefficiency. We will only be able to
support the work of this department if the restructuring is proving to be
fruitful and starting to deliver more positive results. We therefore cannot
support this Vote.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party dissenting).

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I feel and sound like an auctioneer at
this point. [Interjections.]

Vote No 33 - Transport, put.

Declaration of vote:

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, I wanted to make a declaration, but I do not wish
to incur the admonition of the Chair, considering that my declaration might
fall outside the confines of the budget. I therefore kindly request that
you note the objection of the DP.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Thank you, Mr Raju. I did not want to
intimidate anybody. If there is an aspect of the budget of Vote No 33 that
you want to object to, support, etc, certainly that declaration must be
tabled. But if it is a policy speech, we do have other opportunities for
that. So this is really the matter I am attempting to clarify.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry, put and agreed to in accordance
with section 75 of the Constitution.

Vote No 35 - Welfare, put.

Declarations of vote:

Mev E C GOUWS: Mevrou die Voorsitter, my stemverklaring sal seker ook nie
die begroting direk bespreek nie, maar die DP kan nie vir die
Welsynbegrotingspos stem nie, want daar is nog te veel geld geoormerk vir
die armes, wat deur swak administrasie en geen konstruktiewe beplanning nie
by die noodlydendes uitkom nie. Die verantwoordelike departement moet meer
verantwoordbaar wees vir hulle begroting. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mrs E C GOUWS: Madam Speaker, my declaration of vote will probably not
discuss the budget directly, but the DP cannot vote in favour of the
Welfare Vote, because there is still too much money which has been
allocated to the poor that is not reaching the indigent owing to poor
administration and no constructive planning. The responsible department
must be more accountable for their budget.]

Mev J WITBOOI: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die Nuwe NP kan hierdie begrotingspos
nie steun nie, om die volgende redes. In die vorige boekjaar is R203
miljoen wat bedoel is vir armoedeverligting nie bestee nie. Dit beteken dat
R516 miljoen van die departement se geld weens swak administrasie nie
bestee is nie. As die departement dus 78% van sy totale begroting nie
gebruik nie, is dit onlogies om meer geld aan die departement te gee. Die
Nuwe NP steun dus nie die begrotingspos nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mrs J WITBOOI: Madam Chairperson, the New NP cannot support this Vote, for
the following reasons. During the previous financial year R203 million,
which was intended for poverty relief, was not spent. This means that R516
million of the department's money was not spent owing to poor
administration. If the department has therefore not used 78% of its total
budget, it is not logical to allocate more money to it. The New NP
therefore does not support the Vote.]

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chairperson, because of the dismal distribution and
delivery record of this department, we have no option but to oppose the
Vote.

Ms L JACOBUS: Madam Chairperson, on behalf of the ANC, I once more rise in
support of Budget Vote No 35. In doing so, I would like to point out the
following, and I might as well say that we also adopted the same approach
with Vote 13 where we decided to highlight issues that impact on the budget
and that speak to transformation.

Firstly, we have the introduction of policies and legislative changes as
embodied in the White Paper on Social Welfare; secondly, the systematic
approach of the department to uproot inefficiency, corruption and fraud;
thirdly, the continued pursuance of the implementation of an integrated
poverty eradication strategy with a view to sustainable development;
fourthly, the provision of social assistance to the most needy and
especially the grant to children under the age of seven which has more
beneficiaries now than its predecessor, the maintenance grant, which
benefited only a few; fifthly, the establishment of a committee of inquiry
into the abuse of the elderly and the collaboration between the department
and the Department of Safety and Security to ensure the protection of
elders at pension paypoints and, lastly, the response of the department, in
collaboration with other departments and NGOs, towards children infected
with and affected by HIV/Aids.

Vote agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution (African
Christian Democratic Party, Democratic Party and New National Party
dissenting).

Schedule agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Question put.

Declaration of vote:

Mr J L THERON: Madam Chairperson, the DP objects to this Bill because,
firstly, we asked for growth rates of up to six per cent, which we cannot
get from the ANC. Secondly, we asked that South Africa be made attractive
for both domestic and foreign investments, and we are not getting this.
Thirdly, we asked for rapid privatisation, and we are not getting this.
Fourthly, we need a deliberate campaign to increase the supply of skilled
people and we are not getting this. Fifthly, we asked for greater labour
market flexibility and we are not getting this. Therefore, we oppose this
Bill.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                         PROTECTED DISCLOSURES BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, it is said that one ought to believe in
something in life, and believe in it so fervently that one would stand up
for it to the end of one's days.

We are also told by the men of old that when evil men plot, good men must
plan; when evil men burn and bomb, good men must build and bind; when evil
men shout ugly words of hatred, good men must commit themselves to the
glories of love; when evil men would seek to perpetuate an unjust status
quo, good men must seek to bring about a real order of justice.

Indeed, the Bill serving before this House seeks to bring a real order of
justice and change the status quo. This is a product of our initiative to
transform both our society and our institutions, because of our belief in
transformation. This is, indeed, a ground-breaking initiative in the area
of open society.

When we passed the public disclosures Bill, popularly known as the Open
Democracy Bill, in January this year, we indicated that we had omitted part
5 of the Bill, which sought to provide protection against victimisation of
employees in both the private and the public sector, that is employees who
disclose information with regard to unlawful and irregular conduct on the
part of the employer or any other employee of the employer.

All the parties represented in the Open Democracy Bill were unanimous in
the view that given the vital nature of this legislation in the fight
against crime, it was not appropriate to include a chapter on the
protection of whistle-blowers in the legislation dealing with access to
information. We were also unanimous in our intention to enact this part as
legislation very soon. Today we present to this House a Bill that has been
passed by the National Assembly and has been amended by the National
Council of Provinces.

This Bill seeks to make provision for the procedures in terms of which
employees, in both the private and the public sector, may disclose
information regarding unlawful or irregular conduct by their employers or
other employees. It also provides for the protection of employees who make
a disclosure which is protected in terms of this Bill.

This Bill, amongst other things, recognises that criminal and other
irregular conduct in government and private bodies is detrimental to good,
effective, accountable and transparent governance and can endanger the
economic stability of the Republic, and also has the potential to cause
social damage.
All laws passed previously and currently, including our common laws, do not
make provision for mechanisms or procedures in terms of which employees
may, without fear of reprisal, disclose information relating to suspected
or alleged criminal or other irregular conduct by their employers.

Many employees have witnessed a lot of misbehaviour, including criminal
behaviour, by their employers, their seniors or their colleagues. However,
because of fear of victimisation - as there is no protection provided for
in legislation - they have decided to keep silent. We hope that those with
information about irregularities will, from now on, come forward with
information and disclose such information to the relevant bodies as
envisaged by this Bill.

I believe that if this country had had this kind of law, we would not have
bred people-turned-monsters like the De Kocks and Bassons, who used, or
continue to use, either state or private resources to engage in
irregularities, including criminal activities.

The Bill, as it was passed by the National Assembly, made a presumption
that labour legislation provided for a general remedy for a variety of
unfair employment practices, which it does not. For instance, labour
legislation does not provide remedies in areas such as the unfair conduct
of employers relating to promotion, demotion or training of employees, the
unfair suspension of employees, etc.

With this amendment we believe that we have tied up the loose ends, and
that our people will benefit from this legislative product. We believe that
we have been able to provide an accessible mechanism that ensures fair and
justifiable practices.

In conclusion, I would like to indicate that the parties have given an
undertaking that they will not misbehave during this debate, and I hope
that they will keep their word. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Was that a protected disclosure, Mr
Mahlangu?

Mr J L MAHLANGU: It was very transparent, Chair.

Mr L G LEVER: Madam Chair, colleagues, this is an important weapon in the
fight against corruption and there is a lot of confusion amongst people as
to what this Bill actually entails. Its focus is on protecting the employee
in his or her employment relationship with his or her employer. It does not
go any further than that at this stage. This Bill protects state employees
as well as employees in the private sector who come forward and blow the
whistle on corrupt practices.

There are five categories of persons to whom disclosures can be made. Each
category has its own requirements for the disclosure to qualify as a
protected disclosure. A disclosure made to a legal adviser for the purpose
of obtaining advice is a protected disclosure and this has the least
onerous requirement to establish it as a protected disclosure. The
requirements get more onerous for each successive class of persons to whom
a disclosure may be made.

There was a great deal of debate as to whether the Bill should go further
than just protecting the employee in so far as his or her job is concerned.
Although the DP pushed for the extension of the Bill to protect other
relationships or persons, such as a pensioner reporting a corrupt official
who seeks a bribe or a company reporting a member of the tender board who
also seeks a bribe, we accept that some research still needs to be done in
this regard because as the department had done some substantive research
the international best practice has not yet gone that far and we would be
breaking new ground if we did seek to extend it beyond the scope that it
has presently attained.

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, die Nuwe NP wil die hoop uitspreek dat die
beskerming van werknemers wat bekendmakings doen, wat in gevolge hierdie
wetsontwerp beskerm word, grootliks sal bydra om die euwel van korrupsie in
beide die private en openbare sektor uit te roei. Die Nuwe NP ondersteun
hierdie wetsontwerp, asook die wysigings wat aangebring is. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, the New NP wishes to express the hope
that the protection of employees who make a disclosure; and who are
protected in terms of this Bill, will contribute significantly to the
eradication of the misdeed of corruption in both the private and public
sectors. The New NP supports this Bill, as well as the amendments made.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, the ACDP supports the Bill. We supported the
draft whistle-blower provisions in the select committee, but we recommended
that they be removed from the then Freedom of Information Bill, to be taken
up as a stand-alone measure to be renamed to dignify the Bill. We do not
think that distinguished public servants would like to be known as whistle-
blowers. It is reminiscent of stoolpigeons or singing like canaries and the
like. But protecting the public interest by protected disclosure, as I have
said, lends the proper tone to an honourable action.

We often hear others say: ``If only they would do something, or ``Why do
they not do something?'' Now, if we hear of corruption or of a serious
misdemeanour, we can no longer join that chorus. This Bill should thus be
called the I-can-do-something-about-it Bill, because it gives a shield of
protection to employees against possible reprisal after disclosing
information relating to alleged criminal or other irregular conduct whether
in the public or the private sector.

The Bill is also a deterrent to those who would commit wrong, and we
believe will promote confidence in Government and in business alike. A role
model for the future perhaps should be Mr Christopher Mile, a Swiss
security guard, who made public the shredding of Swiss archive documents
relating to holocaust victims. He was dismissed and condemned for his act.
His selfless act did not relate to having any prior Jewish or holocaust
connections. He was simply motivated by a shared horror all decent people
feel and by the public interest.

We therefore trust that this Bill will empower the public to play an active
role in ridding our society of creeping corruption and crime. We have
pleasure in supporting this Bill. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Rev Chabaku, that was very enthusiastic
applause. [Laughter.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 17:29.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           WEDNESDAY, 14 JUNE 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 14 June 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a money Bill:


         (i)     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 38 - 2000] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance -
              National Assembly).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     Explanatory Memorandum on the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill, 2000 [WP 1-
     2000].

                           THURSDAY, 15 JUNE 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and to the Select Committee on Education and Recreation:


         (a)     Government Notice No 207 published in Government Gazette
              No 20945 dated 1 March 2000, National Policy for designing
              school calenders for ordinary public schools in South Africa,
              made in terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act
              No 27 of 1996).


         (b)     Government Notice No 208 published in Government Gazette
              No 20945 dated 1 March 2000, School calender for public
              schools for the 2001, made in terms of the National Education
              Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (c)     Government Notice No 252 published in Government Gazette
              No 20994 dated 24 March 2000, Appointment of a replacement to
              serve as a member of the South African Qualifications
              Authority, made in terms of the South African Qualifications
              Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of 1995).


         (d)     Government Notice No 400 published in Government Gazette
              No 21093 dated 20 April 2000, Revision of the policy document:
              Norms and standards for instructional programmes and
              examination and certification thereof in technical colleges,
              Report 190 (92/04), made in terms of the National Education
              Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (e)     Governmenmt Notice No 401 published in Government Gazette
              No 21093 dated 20 April 2000, Provisos for the Senior
              Certificate programme, made in terms of the National Education
              Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (f)     Government Notice No 402 published in Government Gazette
              No 21093 dated 20 April 2000, The deletion of the category
              providing for foreign candidates as contained in the policy
              document, a Résumé of instructional programmes in public
              schools, Report 550 (97/06), made in terms of the National
              Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (g)     Government Notice No 449 published in Government Gazette
              No 21143 dated 4 May 2000, Appointment of persons to serve as
              members of the Review Committee to review the National
              Outcomes-based Curriculum and Progress with its
              implementation, made in terms of the National Education Policy
              Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (h)     Government Notice No 404 published in Government Gazette
              No 21093 dated 20 April 2000, The inclusion of a continuous
              assessment component in the final Senior Certificate
              examination at Grade 12, made in terms of the National
              Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and to the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.
         It is also referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on
         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women for comment:


         Government Notice No 448 published in Government Gazette No 21143
         dated 4 May 2000, Call for comments on the draft document -
         National Curriculum Framework for further Education and Training,
         made in terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No
         27 of 1996).


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and to the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.
         It is also referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on
         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
         Disbaled Persons:


         Government Notice No 403 published in Government Gazette No 21093
         dated 20 April 2000, Approval of an extension of the Gauteng Youth
         College Programme, made in terms of the National Education Policy
         Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications and to the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises:


         Report of the Government Communication and Information System for
         1999 [RP 58-2000].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and to Security and
         Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Regulation No R.14 published in Government Gazette No
              20997 dated 24 March 2000, Establishment of Investigating
              Directorate: Corruption, made in terms of the National
              Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998 (Act No 32 of 1998).


         (b)     Regulation No R.16 published in Government Gazette No
              21039 dated 31 March 2000, Commencement of certain sections of
              the Witness Protection Act, 1998 (Act No 112 of 1998).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 14 June 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (a)    Appropriation Bill [B 7 and 7A - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
         77) - (Select Committee on Finance - National Council of
         Provinces).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Appropriation Bill
     [B 7 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 15 June 2000:


         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined
         the Appropriation Bill [B 7 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 77)
         and other papers referred to it, reports that it has concluded its
         deliberations thereon.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Supplementary
     Estimate [B 7A - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 15 June
     2000:


         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined
         the Supplementary Estimate [B 7A - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
         77), reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

                            MONDAY, 19 JUNE 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the following
     Bill:


    (1)     National Youth Commission Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2000] - Act No
           19 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 15 June
           2000).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    The following private member's legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Chairperson on 9 June 2000, in accordance with
         Rule 178:


         (i)     Pan South African Language Board Amendment Bill, 2000 (Mr
              A E van Niekerk).


         The legislative proposal has been referred to the Select Committee
         on Members' and Provincial Legislative Proposals by the
         Chairperson, in accordance with Rule 179.


     (2)    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


         Bills passed by National Assembly on 19 June 2000 and transmitted
         for concurrence:


         (i)     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 38 - 2000] (National
               Assembly - sec 77) - (Select Committee on Finance - National
               Council of Provinces).


         (ii)    Meat Safety Bill [B 29B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
               76(1)) - (Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs
               - National Council of Provinces).


COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
     on the Protected Disclosures Bill [B 30 - 2000] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 19 June 2000:


     The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
     considered the subject of the Protected Disclosures Bill [B 30 - 2000]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
     Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
     proposed amendments, as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 4


     1.     On page 6, from line 47, to omit subsection (1) and to
         substitute:


           (1) Any employee who has been subjected, is subject or may be
         subjected, to an  occupational detriment in breach of section 3,
         may-
         (a) approach any court having jurisdiction, including the Labour
              Court established by section 151 of the Labour Relations Act,
              1995 (Act No. 66 of 1995), for appropriate relief; or
         (b) pursue any other process allowed or prescribed by any law.
           (2) For the purposes of the Labour Relations Act, 1995,
         including the consideration of any matter emanating from this Act
         by the Labour Court-
         (a) any dismissal in breach of section 3 is deemed to be an
              automatically unfair dismissal as contemplated in section 187
              of that Act, and the dispute about such a dismissal must
              follow the procedure set out in Chapter VIII of that Act; and
         (b) any other occupational detriment in breach of section 3 is
              deemed to be an unfair labour practice as contemplated in Part
              B of Schedule 7 to that Act, and the dispute about such an
              unfair labour practice must follow the procedure set out in
              that Part: Provided that if the matter fails to be resolved
              through conciliation, it may be referred to the Labour Court
              for adjudication.


                                  CLAUSE 10


     1.  On page 12, in line 10, to omit "subsection (1)" and to substitute
         "paragraph (a)".


