---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 November 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-11-01
---

WEDNESDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr N B FIHLA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the disciplinary action imposed on a member of this House for
       having abused his travel allowance;


  (2) believes that this step is important in ensuring that public
       representatives do not abuse their privileges, and that it
       demonstrates the commitment and will of the ANC to act against
       corruption wherever it occurs; and


  (3) welcomes steps taken by Parliament to uphold the highest standards of
       morality and honesty.

[Applause.]

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of
       Farouk Daniels, a Democratic Alliance candidate, who died after a
       short illness; and


  (2) acknowledges that Farouk was a hard worker, a true democrat and
       dedicated to the task of improving the lives of all the people in the
       community he served.

Mr J H SLABBERT: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock that a North West mother and stepfather have been
       convicted of and sentenced for prostituting their three daughters
       aged 12, 16 and 19 respectively;


  (2) is appalled to learn that some parents abuse the position of trust
       they have with children; and


  (3) applauds Magistrate Renier Boschoff for sentencing the stepfather to
       an effective 50 years and the mother to 30 years in jail for such an
       abusive act.

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the call by the DA's mayoral candidate to Christians to choose
       between the Bible and the Constitution because the latter was written
       by communists;


  (2) further notes that this grossly irresponsible statement was received
       with wide condemnation by the public and the press alike, as seen in
       the editorial of today's Business Day;


  (3) believes that Mr Peter Marais is a public embarrassment to
       Capetonians as a result of his most recent statement that reeks of a
       culture of discrimination, patriarchy and a narrow and intolerant
       brand of Christianity; and


  (4) calls on Mr Tony Leon and the DA to break its deafening silence and
       to inform the public of its stand in this regard.

[Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Demokratiese Alliansie sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Adv A H GAUM: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the Democratic Alliance:


  That the House -]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, we have agreed that if
you move a motion, you move it as an individual on behalf of your party and
nothing else. Can you please start from the beginning.

Adv A H GAUM: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van die spesiale polisiediens wat in Stellenbosch gestig
       is, wat dag en nag sigbare voet-, fiets- en voertuigpatrollies in die
       woonbuurte sal doen; en


  (2) ook daarvan kennis neem dat -


       (a)  die projek in 1998 begin is deur drie sakemanne wat die behoefte
           aan gemeenskapgesteunde polisiewerk besef het;


       (b)  misdaad in die sentrale gebied met 80% verminder is met die hulp
           van tien geslotebaankameras en twintig polisiereserviste;


       (c)  dié unieke buurtwag gesien word as die ``verwesen-liking van die
           ideaal van gemeenskapspolisiëring";
       (d)  die DA in sy plaaslike verkiesingsmanifes die instelling van
           munisipale polisiëring beklemtoon as een van die belangrikste
           prioriteite; en


       (e)  die DA nie net ten gunste van munisipale polisiëring is nie,
           maar ook in al die gebiede waar die DA oor die uitvoerende mag
           beskik, munisipale polisiëring sal instel.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Adv A H GAUM: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the special police service that has been established in
       Stellenbosch, which will undertake 24-hour visible foot, bicycle and
       vehicle patrols in the residential areas; and


  (2) also notes that -


       (a)  the project was initiated in 1998 by three businessmen who
           realised the need for community-supported police work;


       (b)  crime in the central area has been reduced by 80% with the aid
           of ten closed-circuit cameras and twenty police reservists;


       (c)  this unique neighbourhood watch is seen as ``the realisation of
           the ideal of community policing";


       (d)  in its local election manifesto the DA emphasises the
           introduction of municipal policing as one of the most important
           priorities; and


       (e)  the DA is not only in favour of municipal policing, but will
           also implement municipal policing in all the areas in which the
           DA has executive power.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) accepts the argument that the Government should not be the prime
       provider of additional jobs and therefore should not directly and
       artificially create employment if it wishes to promote job creation;


  (2) recognises the vital role that small and medium-sized businesses can
       play in terms of the creation and maintenance of employment;


  (3) notes the tendency amongst large service organisations such as the
       short-term insurance industry to curb the creation and growth of
       small and medium-sized businesses by acts of exclusion; and


  (4) urgently calls upon the Minister of Public Enterprises and the
       Minister of Trade and Industry to address the pre-democratic methods
       used by short-term insurers in distributing claims contracts for
       repairs to accident-damaged vehicles.

Mr S L DITHEBE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the ANC-led Government has built about 24 000 classrooms in the
           historically disadvantaged areas over the past six years; and


       (b)  the ANC Government has ensured that one million more children
           are absorbed by our transformed educational system;


  (2) believes that these achievements demonstrate the commitment of the
       ANC-led Government to a compulsory, free, nonracial, nonsexist and
       dynamic education system for all; and


  (3) commends the work done by the Government in ensuring that school-
       going pupils have access to a sound educational system, in pursuit of
       which our Government is making great strides.

[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the draft resolution by Dr R Rabinowitz printed in today's Order
           Paper;


       (b)  the nonpartisan and well-balanced approach she took in
           addressing the Middle East crisis; and


       (c)  the call on leaders who have close ties with Mr Arafat to
           encourage him to discourage violence among Palestinian youths
           and to embrace negotiation, compromise and nonviolence as the
           only solutions to Palestinian self-determination and Israel's
           survival; and


  (2) therefore calls on -


       (a)  all political parties to openly endorse this draft resolution as
           the ACDP is now doing;


       (b)  the South African Government to act impartially when dealing
           with the ongoing conflict between the Israelis and Palestinians;
           and


       (c)  members of this Parliament and civil servants to stop condemning
           those who react, while exonerating those who provoke the
           reaction and violence.

[Interjections.]

Mr G E BALOI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House notes that -
  (1) the IEC intends to hold its first voter education workshop to enable
       the electorate to make well-informed decisions when voting in the
       first democratic election;


  (2) the IEC is proposing to conduct local government election workshops
       on 2 November 2000 in Mafikeng in the North West province;


  (3) the objective of the workshops will be to empower councillors,
       representatives from CBOs and NGOs and other relevant stakeholders
       with the necessary knowledge to educate communities on elections; and


  (4) the IEC invites all stakeholders to participate in these workshops.

Ms N L HLANGWANA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -
       (a)  a National Public Works Anti-Corruption Conference was held on
           25 and 26 October 2000; and


       (b)  the theme of the conference was ``Corruption Kills Service
           Delivery";


  (2) believes that this is further testimony of the commitment and resolve
       of the ANC-led Government to fight corruption at all levels of
       government;


  (3) commends Minister Stella Sigcau for this initiative; and


  (4) calls on the department's officials at all levels to stand by the
       pledges they signed and to root out corruption wherever it occurs.

[Applause.]

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -
  (1) notes -


       (a)  the alleged environmental and health problems occurring in close
           proximity to 26 goldmine dumps stretching from Krugersdorp to
           Boksburg;


       (b)  that these problems, including silicosis and other debilitating
           diseases, are caused primarily by the effects of dust issuing
           from these dumps; and


       (c)  that this pollution, including large-scale pollution of run-off
           water occurring in the environment in which tens of thousands of
           people live, constitutes a violation of the constitutionally
           enshrined environmental rights of our people; and


  (2) calls on the various Ministers concerned to address this problem with
       the utmost urgency.

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the impasse between traditional healers and
       scientists on a herb called ``Green Gold'' because of its
       psychoactive qualities;


  (2) is amazed at the behaviour of two botanists for selling patent rights
       to Pharma Natura without the consent of the traditional healers in
       Namaqualand who discovered the herb's medicinal use before these
       scientists; and


  (3) requests the scientists to desist from such practices, as South
       Africa is a signatory of the convention saying that profits from the
       development of indigenous knowledge should be shared with indigenous
       people.

Ms F I CHOHAN-KOTA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  President Thabo Mbeki today opened a park in the area of
           Avonwood Park, Elsies River, pursuant to a promise that he had
           previously made to this community; and


       (b)  for the first time, the young people in this community will have
           a safe recreational area; and


  (2) commends -


       (a)  the President for honouring his promise; and


       (b)  the ANC Youth League which has been instrumental in bringing
           this project to fruition.

[Applause.]

Dr S J GOUS: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the World Health Organisation has approved and is advocating the
           use of antiretrovirals for the prevention of mother-to-child
           transmission of HIV;


       (b)  the Minister of Health misled the South African public and
           Parliament by creating the impression that there are no offers
           to accelerate access to HIV/Aids care and treatment in
           developing countries, as the Minister stated that ``drug
           companies have not tabled any substantive offer"; and


       (c)  the Leader of the Opposition, in a recent visit overseas, has
           determined that there are substantial offers on the table by the
           WHO, UNAIDS and multinational pharmaceutical companies, of which
           other developing countries have taken advantage; and


  (2) calls on the Government, the Department of Health and the Minister of
       Health to review their existing policy of not using antiretrovirals
       to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV by following the
       example of the DA in the Western Cape, where the DA is in a position
       to provide life-saving drugs, and is doing so.

[Time expired.]

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the shocking revelations made by a member of the Northern
       Province legislature, Tjol Lategan, that the Northern Province
       government kept shares worth more than R100 million invested in the
       Lebowa Platinum Mine secretly and that these shares are used for
       covert operations;


  (2) is appalled that the information on these shares, which were owned by
       the former Lebowa Government and transferred to the Northern Province
       government in 1994, is not reflected on the statement of assets and
       liabilities of the provincial government;


  (3) is dismayed and disappointed that these shares are not being utilised
       for the benefit of the entire province, given the general collapse of
       services and, in particular, the infrastructure in the province; and


  (4) calls on the Ministers of Finance and of Minerals and Energy to
       intervene and normalise the situation.

Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the ANC-led Government has embarked on a land redistribution
           programme; and


       (b)  through this programme, the dignity of thousands of landless
           people has been restored;


  (2) believes that the pace of land redistribution needs to be increased
       to meet the needs of the landless majority and address the skewed
       landownership patterns in our country; and


  (3) commends the Government for dealing with land distribution in an
       orderly manner.

[Applause.]

  APPOINTMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO NOMINATE PERSONS TO FILL VACANCIES ON
                       COMMISSION FOR GENDER EQUALITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr J H MOMBERG: Mr Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party I move the draft resolution printed in his name on the Order Paper,
as follows:


  That the House, in accordance with section 193(5) of the Constitution,
  appoints an ad hoc committee to nominate persons to fill the existing and
  pending vacancies on the Commission for Gender Equality, the committee -


  (1) to consist of 27 members in the following proportions: ANC 14, DP 2,
       all other parties 1;


  (2) to exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist it in carrying
       out its task;


  (3) to take into consideration the list of candidates proposed by
       interested parties which will be referred to the committee; and


  (4) to complete its task by 15 February 2001.

Agreed to.

                    SECOND ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Ms F B MARSHOFF: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, when the
Minister of Finance tabled the Adjustments Estimate in this House on 12
October 2000, he stated that the purpose of these estimates was to seek
Parliament's permission to raise the level of public spending from the
original amount of R233,5 billion as budgeted for in the Main Estimate that
was tabled in February this year to R235,2 billion.

As the Minister also indicated, these increased allocations to various
Votes are to provide for the unforeseen and unavoidable expenditure
experienced by the departments affected. This is unforeseen expenditure
owing to the fact that, at the time when the Budget was tabled in February,
nobody knew that they would have to deal with some of these specific
issues. This is unavoidable expenditure because even if we had known and
tried our utmost to circumvent these occurrences, they would have happened
in any case. We would not have been in a position then, and even now, to
wish them away. However, we must also acknowledge that some of these
additional allocations could have been and should have been foreseen. The
committee felt strongly that this type of behaviour is unacceptable.

We need to congratulate the national Treasury for the sterling work done,
especially with regard to increased revenue collection. I must specifically
mention here the SA Revenue Service for the extra work done with regard to
revenue collection. The increased revenue collection amounted to
approximately R1,8 billion more than the February estimates, thus reducing
the cost on servicing the debt by an estimated R142 million. This
translates into an unchanged budget deficit of 2,6% of the gross domestic
product, despite the increased expenditure of R1,9 billion.

I am sure that hon members have taken note of the details for the
Adjustments Estimate as set out in the explanatory memorandum that
accompanied the Bill. I do not want to go into details, save to mention a
few specific areas.

The amounts allocated under Vote 3 for Agriculture, Vote 8 for Education
and Vote 9 for Environmental Affairs and Tourism are really self-
explanatory. No one can dispute the fact that it is not just in the
national interest, but also in the interest of our neighbours, as well as
that of the international community, that we should be seen to protect
communities against the outbreak of diseases amongst our livestock. The
money spent on combating and containing the outbreak of foot-and-mouth
disease in KwaZulu-Natal is money well-spent.

The additional money allocated to Education for the incorporation of
colleges of education into institutions of higher learning is a policy
prerogative that has been effected into legislation. This money is to
assist the transitional arrangements to ensure that the incorporation is
managed in a smooth and very cost-effective way. A large proportion of the
money is earmarked for disaster and poverty relief, and for the newly
established local authorities.

Money is also allocated to provinces, and we all know that it is at this
level that service delivery takes place. It therefore comes as no surprise
to us that provincial budgets are under severe pressure, especially after
our country has been hit by natural disasters such as floods and outbreaks
of diseases such as malaria, cholera and foot-and-mouth disease in KwaZulu-
Natal.

But over and above this, there are also the demands made on the budgets for
health, education and welfare. In health alone, the impact that HIV/Aids
will have on service delivery is tremendous. We are aware that an
additional amount of R75 million for Aids prevention initiatives was voted
for in the Main Estimate. This, however, does not provide for sufficient
resources to cope with the epidemic and the impact it has on provincial
budgets. It is hoped that as the amount increases over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework period, more attention will be given to the overall
spending patterns of not only health, but also all the departments in
combating the disease.

One of the unforeseeable expenditures that we are addressing in these
estimates is the payment of birthday bonuses for civil servants celebrating
birthdays between January and March of each financial year. We are happy to
endorse the move taken to pay these bonuses in the month of their birth
rather than in April, as has been the practice up till now. I am sure it
will make our work much easier if we do not have to anticipate such
unavoidable and unforeseeable expenditure in the future.

The ANC will support this Vote and we will also vote for the adoption and
approval of the Adjustments Estimate before us. I would like to thank the
Department of Finance and all those who have put so much effort into the
work connected with this Bill. I would like to say to all departmental
heads that they have again proved to us that we have the skills and the
capacity to manage taxpayers' money and the finances of this country
effectively. We salute them.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Portfolio Committee on Finance, I would
just like to wish the hon Serake Leeuw - although he is not in the House
right now - lots of luck in his new endeavours - he has just entered the
House - after having been nominated as the executive mayor designate for
the Goldfields region in the Free State. We want to assure him that we will
miss his valuable input in the finance committee and we wish him well. We
also wish him a very joyous and successful campaign, and we will definitely
see him after he has become mayor. I wish the hon Mike Ellis would
reconsider his position within the DA. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Chairperson, it is always a pleasure to follow the hon Ms
Marshoff.

One needs to assess this Adjustments Estimate against three criteria.
Firstly, is the total amount reasonable in relation to the size of the
original budgeted expenditure? In this regard, the increased envisaged
expenditure of R3,9 billion is 1,7% of the original budgeted expenditure of
R231 billion. This is an acceptable level, particularly in the light of the
additional expenditure caused by the floods earlier this year and the fact
that the Minister is obliged to present his Budget before the public sector
salary negotiations are completed. These two items account for more than
half of the total amount.

The second question is whether particular items of expenditure or transfer
of funds within a Vote are desirable and prudent. I shall leave it to my
colleagues to deal with individual issues when the Votes and Schedules are
discussed in a few minutes' time. The third criterion is whether the Bill
complies with the law or not. On this score, we have serious reservations.

Section 30(2)(b) of the Public Finance Management Act requires that a
national adjustments budget may only provide for ``unforeseeable and
unavoidable expenditure''. It has to be both. There is no provision for
additional expenditure simply because the Cabinet or anybody else considers
it desirable. In our opinion, a number of the items budgeted for do not
meet this criterion, which was deliberately put into the Public Finance
Management Act to enhance the integrity and credibility of our budgeting
processes and to discourage Ministers and departments from thinking that
they had a second bite at the cherry after the Main Budget was passed.

Let me illustrate this with a couple of examples. Under Vote No 14: Home
Affairs, there is an amount of R318 million for the Independent Electoral
Commission. Everyone knew that there were going to be local government
elections this fiscal year, and the IEC had submitted budgets to cover what
it needed. Despite its request for much more, the IEC was only allocated
R450 million in the Main Budget.

We are now being asked to believe that its allocation needs to be increased
by R317 million, or 71%, because that expenditure was unforeseeable and
unavoidable. This is nonsense. This cannot be so. It is a result of the
National Treasury and/or the Department of Home Affairs playing games with
the IEC, which repeatedly indicated that it needed more money to do its
job.

A second example is the amount of just over R14 million allocated for the
National Conference on Racism, which was announced by the President at the
opening of Parliament. How this can be considered unforeseeable and
unavoidable is beyond me, and indicates that when it suits the Government,
they bend the rules to suit themselves.

The third example which I wish to highlight, although there are others, is
the National Treasury Vote itself. There is a provision for Sars to be
given an additional R28,6 million for the implementation of new tax
proposals, claimed to be unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure. This
gives rise to two possibilities. Either the Minister of Finance did not
tell his department what he was planning to do or he did not take the
trouble to investigate thoroughly what the costs involved in implementing
his new tax proposals were likely to be. In either case, this is an
indictment of the procedures followed and an extremely bad example for the
Minister of Finance to set for other departments, and certainly cannot be
categorised as unforeseeable and unavoidable.

Parliament can choose to ignore the laws of South Africa when it seems
convenient to do so, but the DP is not prepared to go along with this
approach. Either laws are there to be obeyed, whether they happen to be
convenient or not, or we pick and choose when we wish to obey the laws of
this country. We are of the opinion that a number of the adjustments
contained in this Bill are not in accordance with the law and we will
therefore be opposing this Bill.

Parliament, of all bodies in our society, should be setting an example and
adhering scrupulously to the letter and the spirit of the law. If we choose
to ignore the law when it suits the Government to do so, we can hardly
complain when others indulge in corrupt or improper practices in defiance
of the law.

Mr J H MOMBERG: Bring back some sanity, Dr Woods!

Ms M SMUTS: On the contrary, we are waiting to hear ... [Interjections.]

Dr G G WOODS: All these expectations! Chairperson, the size and vastness of
a country's budget, together with unexpected developments after its
production, make adjustments inevitable in the course of a fiscal year.

The main question that we therefore are meant to ask ourselves on this
occasion each year is whether the size and nature of the proposed
amendments are reasonable and acceptable. To keep this in context - and I
think the hon Marshoff did refer to this - we need to acknowledge that the
increased expenditure which necessitates these adjustments is more than
offset by revenue gains or the tax overruns for the same period,
representing an overall improvement of the budget deficit.

Regarding the actual adjustments, our view is that while there is an
increase of under 2% of total expenditure in a fiscal year, as it currently
is in this year, it indicates that expenditure levels are more or less
under control. However, we do see that this control is a somewhat heavy-
handed type of control by the Minister.

There is currently insufficient sophistication in the detailed expenditure
estimation techniques, and expenditure management methods used by
Government, we cannot realistically expect any significant lowering of this
percentage until the new Public Finance Management Act is fully
implemented. This, which is likely to take two to three years, will
introduce expenditure planning and management practices which will lessen
the incidence of unavoidable and unforeseeable expenditure, and will give
more accurate answers where such incidents exist. As such it will mean not
having to go through the somewhat pretentious ritual of scrutinising
adjustments which arise from a budget where large globular sums of money
are voted against vaguely desired outcomes and, further, where money is
randomly viremented between programmes during the budget period.

Notwithstanding the state of affairs, we have played the game and we have
looked at the individual adjustments as listed in the Bill, and there are
no adjustments with which we wish to take issue this year. We therefore
support the Bill.

Dr P J RABIE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the aim of this Bill
is to appropriate adjusted amounts of money for the requirements of state
in respect of the financial year ending 31 March 2001.

The total revised expenditure amounts to R235,241 014 billion, which
represents an increase of 1,68%. The Public Finance Management Act is
extremely important and must be taken into account when the revised
expenditure for the fiscal year is evaluated.

I want to come back to the main purpose of this Bill, which is to modernise
the present system of financial public management to enable public sector
managers to manage but, at the same time, to be accountable, to ensure the
timely provision of all quality empirical data, and to eliminate waste and
corruption in the use of public assets.

Dit is belangrik om te let op die doeleindes waarvoor dié geld aangewend
word en ek verwys hier pertinent na die landbou. Landbougerigte aktiwiteite
is veral in ons agtergeblewe landelike gebiede van sleutelbelang. Ek verwys
hier na enkele bedrae wat aangewend is om bek-en-klouseer en sprinkaanplae
in die noordelike grensprovinsies te bekamp.

Dit is baie maklik om hier sulke bedrae te noem, maar agb lede moet hul die
vraag afvra of dit daadwerklike, pro-aktiewe stappe is wat gedoen is en of
dit bloot reaktiewe stappe is. Soos agb lede weet, was daar onlangs gerugte
van verdere uitbrake van bek-en-klouseer in KwaZulu-Natal. Dit kan verder
versprei en ook die wolbedryf in die land beïnvloed wat in die buiteland
vir ons waardevolle valuta verdien. Ek versoek dat daar werklik indringend
na dié bedreiging vir ons landboubedryf gekyk word.
In dieselfde asem wil ek ook verwys na vroeëre berigte oor besoedeling deur
die chemiese bedryf waarby die Thor-fabriek betrokke was. Dit toon weer
eens die leemtes in en gebrek aan monitering van hierdie
vervaardigingsbedryf wat toksiese afval aan die omgewing vrystel. Daar word
weer eens reaktief aandag aan die probleem geskenk.

Die verspreiding van malaria van ons buurlande en aangrensende gebiede na
Suid-Afrika wek groot kommer onder buitelandse beleggers. Agb lede kan hul
weer eens die vraag afvra welke voorkomende maatreëls getref is om die
verspreiding van malaria te voorkom. Toerisme is een van die min bedrywe in
die land wat nog 'n groeipotensiaal toon. Soos die gebrek aan persoonlike
veiligheid bedreig die verspreiding van malaria die bedryf en die vraag wat
ons aan die agb Minister vra, is watter voorkomende maatreëls getref is en
of dit werklik voorkomend en pro-aktief of reaktief van aard is.

Die laaste aspek wat hier ter sprake kom, is die repatriasie van
vreemdelinge wat van ons buurlande afkomstig is. Weer eens word daar sekere
bedrae geld genoem. Die vraag wat ons vra, is op watter produktiewe wyse
hierdie geld aangewend word. Is dit nie net om die werklikhede te verdoesel
nie, of word hier werklik iets gedoen om die immigrasie van onwettige
vreemdelinge uit die buurlande doelmatig te bekamp?

Die laaste vraag handel oor die bedreiging van die MI-virus, wat ook ons
ekonomiese vooruitgang in hierdie land in 'n besondere mate strem. Dit is
nodig om te praat en nie die werklikhede te ignoreer nie. Hierdie
aangeleentheid bedreig elke persoon in hierdie land. Elke landsburger en
elke sektor van die ekonomie word bedreig. Die vraag wat ons onwillekeurig
moet vra, is of die Regering dit erns het met hierdie gevaarlike probleem.
Die Nuwe NP kan nie hierdie wetsontwerp steun nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is important to note the purposes for which this money is utilised and
here I am referring specifically to agriculture. Activities aimed at
agriculture are of key importance, particularly in our disadvantaged rural
areas. Here I am referring to certain amounts which were utilised to combat
foot-and-mouth disease and locust plagues in the northern border provinces.

It is every easy to mention such amounts here, but hon members must ask
themselves whether the steps taken were decisive, pro-active steps or
whether they were merely reactive steps. As hon members know, there have
been recent rumours of further outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease in
KwaZulu-Natal. This can spread further and also influence the wool industry
in the country, which earns us valuable revenue abroad. I request that we
look truly incisively at this threat to our agricultural industry.

In the same breath I also want to refer to earlier reports about pollution
by the chemical industry, in which the Thor factory was involved. This once
again indicates the shortcomings in and lack of monitoring of this
manufacturing industry which releases toxic waste into the environment.
Once again, the problem is receiving reactive attention.

The spread of malaria from our neighbouring countries and bordering areas
to South Africa is causing great concern among foreign investors. Hon
members can once again ask themselves what preventative measures have been
taken to prevent the spread of malaria. Tourism is one of the few
industries in the country which still has a growth potential. As was the
case with a lack of personal safety, the spread of malaria is threatening
the industry and the question we want to put to the hon the Minister is
what preventative measures have been taken and whether these are really
proactive and preventative or reactive in nature.

The last aspect which is at issue here, is the repatriation of aliens from
our neighbouring countries. Once again certain amounts of money are
mentioned. The question we are asking is how this money is being utilised
in productive ways. Is this not merely to obscure the reality, or is
something really being done here to combat the immigration of illegal
aliens from neighbouring countries?

The final question deals with the threat of the HI-virus, which also
hampers our economic progress in this country to a particular extent. It is
necessary to talk and not ignore the realities. This matter threatens every
person in the country. Each citizen and each sector of the economy is under
threat. The question we must involuntarily ask is whether the Government is
serious about this dangerous problem. The New NP cannot support this Bill.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson, we want to thank the Minister of Finance
and the National Treasury for another good set of quality and transparent
documents. To further improve the information provided in the Second
Adjustments Estimate, we would like to suggest the following: firstly,
reasons for unavoidable and unforeseeable expenditures must be provided in
these documents - in other words, a short motivation by the relevant
department as to why an expenditure is unforeseen and unavoidable. We
should therefore consider reshaping the Budget to explain why expenditure
is unforeseen and unavoidable.

Secondly, expenditures should not be clustered unnecessarily. For example,
in the adjustments of the Treasury, an amount of R800 million has been
clustered, in that salary adjustments and fuel cost increases have been
grouped together for no obvious reason. In the individual memorandums of
departments many departments have followed the same procedure. We think we
must change that. Thirdly, there should be a more user-friendly
presentation of the revised expenditure, as compared to the expenditure
provided for in the Main Budget, in the explanatory memorandum.

We have a few major concerns about amounts provided in the Adjustments
Estimate. For example, the SA Revenue Service requested an amount of R317
million, largely to implement new tax laws, but will receive less than R29
million. This will surely impact severely and negatively on their capacity
in this regard.

Some departments are obviously guilty of late budgets and late agreements
included in the Adjustments Estimate, for example the Department of Home
Affairs. The R12 million provided for the combating of foot-and-mouth
disease will probably not be sufficient to combat the recent outbreak of
this disease in KwaZulu-Natal.

The overconcentration of consultancy services in the Department of Public
Works has resulted in the single largest roll-over of funds of any
department in the current year. They will need superior quality financial
management to steer this ship clear of the rocks. Lastly, there is the less-
than-clear memorandum of the Department of Social Development, against the
background of a history of money not spent.

The UDM will not politicise the Adjustments Estimate for petty gain, but
intends to direct straightforward questions to certain Ministers.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, this Bill aims to
address the unforeseeable expenses of the Government. Although we would
agree with the hon Andrew with regard to the concerns he raised here, as
the ACDP we do not believe that we should vote against this Bill, but we
feel that we should just point out to the Government that the concerns
raised are, in fact, legitimate concerns.

In our country we had a projected forecast of about 3,5% as a growth rate
for this fiscal year. It is now widely accepted that the growth rate will
be about 2,4%. We do not discount the effect of global factors on our
economy. It is the vulnerability of our economy that is our concern. We
cannot continue accepting a situation where our economies in Africa are
seen as being on a life support system, supported by the world market.

The single most important imperative for economic stability, along with
fiscal discipline, is fiscal management. Perhaps this is the area where we
have to raise our concerns, and the concerns that have been raised are
legitimate.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I would like to thank those parties
that are supporting the Bill.

Let me deal with a few of the other issues raised. I think the hon Andrew,
as usual, tries to stretch the point. He is reading from a different Public
Finance Management Act, because mine, in section 30(2)(b), says:


  ... unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure recommended by the national
  executive or any committee of Cabinet members to whom this task has been
  assigned ...

He reads it differently. I do not know which version he has. He is trying
to make a point.

However, running a country is not the same as running a corner shop. He
will never get the experience of running a country, and he should get that
into his head. [Interjections.] It is stretching a point to suggest that
what is happening here is akin to corrupt or improper practices - that is
stretching the point and he should withdraw that without reservation.

In respect of the IEC, clearly there is a fair amount of budget that came
in. Part of the objective of constructing budgets is to bring them into the
realm of what is realisable and affordable, because some of the
extragovernmental agencies will set budgets that this country cannot
afford. And during the course of that these kinds of issues arise, and we
accept that. I will come to Sars in a moment.

In respect of the hon Dr Rabie's remarks, I regret that he gave no
motivation for his views, but it is very clear that his master's voice is
talking in the circumstances. [Interjections.] If, indeed, he followed the
issue of Thor Chemicals that he raised, he would realise that this had
arisen under NP rule. And in the detail of the memorandum mention is made
of a study to investigate the impact on ground water of the mercury
poisoning resulting from poor NP practices.

In respect of Sars, I think the point was correctly argued, and I would
like to thank Dr Koornhof for the position of the UDM on this matter. Sars
requires a lot more money, because we understand the importance of being
exemplary, especially for those departments that report to the Minister of
Finance. We explored the detail and, given the framework of the Public
Finance Management Act in the context of section 30(2)(b), realistically
they can make a claim in the circumstances. And that is where the R28
million arose. We could not fully anticipate the impact of the adjustments
on the capital gains tax or, indeed, the shift from source to residents -
that we will debate in this House later this week.

In respect of foot-and-mouth disease, we had the best estimates available.
The most recent outbreak could not have been foreseen. This has not been as
a result of the same stocks which were available for the piggeries. This
largely has been transported by humans. And so there were issues that could
not have been foreseen then. We are in very dynamic contact with the
Department and Ministry of Agriculture to try and understand. I think we
fully appreciate that we would like to restore South Africa to the position
where our meat exports are received all over the world, and we understand
that we have a responsibility to ensure that. I thank the House for the
discussion on the debate. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I am specifically addressing the two
hon members, hon De Beer and hon Cassim, and I am saying, Order!
[Interjections.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a first time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 247: Abrahams, T; Abram, S; Arendse, J D; Balfour, B M N; Baloi, G
  E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Belot, S T; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Bloem, D
  V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Buthelezi, M G; Buthelezi, M N; Capa, R Z N;
  Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chiba, L; Chikane, M M; Chohan-
  Kota,  F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C;
  Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T;
  Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Du
  Toit, D C; Dudley, C; Duma, N M; Dyani, M M Z; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C;
  Fazzie, M H; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi,
  G J; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; Gcina, C I; George, M E; Gerber, P A;
  Gillwald, C E; Gininda, M S; Gomomo, P J; Govender, P; Green, L M; Grove,
  S; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E;
  Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S
  P; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P;
  Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J
  J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z;
  Landers, L T; Leeuw, S J; Lekgoro, M K; Lobe, M C; Louw, J T; Louw, S K;
  Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabeta, M E; Madasa, Z L; Magashule, E S; Magazi,
  M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu, G L; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S;
  Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P; Malebane, H F; Maloney, L;
  Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I;
  Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Masala, M M; Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J
  N; Masithela, N H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbulawa-
  Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Meshoe, K R J; Mgidi, J S; Middleton, N S;
  Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana,
  S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mohai, S
  J; Mohamed, I J; Mohlala, R J B; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B
  G; Momberg, J H; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Moosa, M V; Moropa, R M;
  Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M;
  Mpaka, H M; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembi-
  Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi, F S; Mzizi, M A;
  Mzondeki, M J G; Naidoo, S; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, N B; Ndou, R S;
  Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, B S;
  Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwane, L B; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D
  M; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, N N; Ntshangase, I B; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B;
  Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Omar, A M; Pahad, A G H;
  Phala, M J; Phantsi, E; Pheko, S E M; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Radebe,
  J T; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C M P; Rasmeni, S M;
  Ripinga, S S; Routledge, N C; Saloojee, E C; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A;
  September, C C; September, R K; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sibiya, M S
  M; Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D J;
  Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H; Smith, V G;
  Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Southgate,
  R M; Swart, S N; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-Msimang, M
  E; Tsheole, N M; Tshwete, S V; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den
  Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F;
  Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vos, S C; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M T; Yengeni,
  T S; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.


  NOES - 46: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Bell, B G; Blaas, A;
  Botha, A J; Bruce, N S; Camerer, S M; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O;
  Delport, J T; Dowry, J J; Durand, J; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gaum, A H;
  Gore, V C; Gous, S J; Grobler, G A J; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; Le
  Roux, J W; Lee, T D; Maluleke, D K; Morkel, C M; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W
  A; Olckers, M E; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Schalkwyk, P J; Schippers, J;
  Schmidt, H C; Schoeman, R S; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J;
  Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smit, H A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Swart, P S; Van
  Deventer, F J; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M.

Question accordingly agreed to.

Bill read a first time.

                    SECOND ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                (Decision of Question on Votes and Schedule)

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the proceedings will
initially take the form of a question-and-answer session. I hope we all
understand this. We have done this several times. I shall put each vote in
turn, whereupon members will have the opportunity to put questions to the
relevant Minister. Honourable members should please wait until I recognise
them before putting their questions.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairperson, may I draw your attention to Rule 291, which
is headed `Consideration of Schedule to Appropriation Bill''. It says:


  When the First Reading of an Appropriation Bill has a Schedule which has
  been approved ...

Which is what we have just done -


  ... the Votes in the Schedule must be discussed.

There is no suggestion within this Rule that only questions and answers are
permitted. Discussion, comment is permitted. You will see under Rule 293,
``Approval of Votes in Schedule, that it refers to a debate. So I just want
to pre-empt potential problems. I just want to draw your attention to the
Rule, with respect.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, that is what the Rule
says, as the hon Andrew has read it. We have just discussed the Second
Adjustments Appropriation Bill. If you wish to make a comment you are
allowed to do so, but you must bear in mind that you are utilising your own
time. Remember that there is a certain amount of time allocated to each
political party and we will be strict about that time. Are you happy, hon
member? OK. [Interjections.]

Order! You are in too much of a hurry, hon Ellis. We are certainly coming
to the Vote you are looking for.

Vote No 3 - Agriculture:

Adv S P HOLOMISA: Chair, the question I have for the Minister is: Noting
that R12 million has been allocated for the outbreak of foot-and-mouth
disease in KwaZulu-Natal, how much of that amount has been used so far?
With the latest indication that a further approximately 4 000 head may be
slaughtered, does the Minister believe that she may need more? If yes, how
much more can I give you? I mean, how much more is estimated? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chair, I would really
appreciate it if Inkosi yamahegebe, Inkosi Holomisa, could give me more
money, not just for the foot-and-mouth disease but for the agricultural
programme in general. [Laughter.] As he has indicated, we have been given
R12 million to actually deal with the foot-and-mouth disease that has been
identified in Camperdown and also with new infections which have been found
in the Georgedale area and more specifically in Sankontshe and Mopela next
to Mpumalanga township.

So far the way we had calculated the use of that money was that R3 million
was going to assist us in the administration and other related costs for
the eradication programme, particularly to support some of those officials
who were sent to    KwaZulu-Natal from other provinces and the national
department as well as some of the universities. Of this amount R9 million
was actually going to cover compensation to those farmers who are affected.
Compensation has actually been paid out as from Monday to both commercial
farmers and communal farmers who have been affected in this area, and so
far about R1 million has been spent. We cannot estimate how much of that
will be spent at what time because we are paying out as we stamp out the
disease in that area.

As to how much we may require, at this stage we are not sure, but we are in
contact with the Treasury and with Cabinet as we undertake the programme of
the eradication of foot-and-mouth disease in this country.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, can I just ask you, sir: Are we going to be
voting on these Votes afterwards?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes, we will be voting.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I am sorry, but you are going too fast. The DP
wanted to ask a question on Correctional Services. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Ask the question, hon member.
Vote No 6 - Correctional Services:

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Mr Chairperson, I would like to pose a question to the
Minister of Correctional Services. In light of the estimated
overexpenditure for the item Administration to the amount of R718 million,
was the transfer of the funds pertaining to care, development and community
corrections the sole reason for the release of thousands of awaiting-trial
and convicted prisoners?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Mr Chairperson, the Department of
Correctional Services is one of Government's biggest departments. I am also
aware of the fact that because of the way in which it is growing, it is
going to become South Africa's 21st century of concrete villages for the
poor, whether we like it or not. [Laughter.]

However, to the hon member, the transfer to the item Administration is not
as a result of that but it is as a result of funds shifted from medical
budgets for personnel to the item Administration, as per request from the
national Treasury. So, it is not as a result of the released prisoners, but
it has to do with the medical budget fund for personnel.
Vote No 7 - Defence:

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Speaker, will the Minister give us a breakdown of the
specific professional services for which an additional budget allocation of
R71,8 million is sought. What are these payments specifically for? Where is
the transformation budgeted for in this programme? Has the determination of
the transformation Bill been budgeted for in this round?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, I would imagine that the
question refers to the allocation with regard to the joint support that has
been performed by the SANDF. These are the kinds of situations that the
SANDF is unable to plan for beforehand, because they are not anticipated.
This is in connection with the performance of our secondary role in terms
of emergency aid and support in terms of the floods that occurred earlier
this year. The allocation is mainly going towards the maintenance of our
helicopter fleet.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before we come to Vote No 8, I wish to inform
members that the hon the Minister of Education is unable to attend the
sitting today owing to a family bereavement. He has tendered his apologies.
The hon the Minister of Finance will respond on his behalf.

Vote No 8 - Education:

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, this is then directed to the Minister of
Finance. There is a 305% increase in the allocation for education, human
resource development and equity from R7 million to R28 million. Part of
this increase is attributed to the shifting of funds from Programme 3 which
is General and Further Education and Training. Now, my question is: How
does the Minister justify shifting funds from General, and Further
Education and Training, in view of the dire need for funds for the training
and in-service training of teachers?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, the training of teachers is not the
responsibility of the national Department of Education. If the hon member
were familiar with the Constitution, he would know that primary and
secondary education is a provincial function and therefore not covered by
the adjustment. [Interjections.] This is an internal arrangement within the
national Department of Education, which is, at the end of the day,
responsible for policy development and also for supporting tertiary
education, perfectly in line with the norms of the Constitution.
[Interjections.]

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, what is the purpose then of the budget item:
General and Further Education and Training? The Minister should note that
this does not relate to higher education, but indeed to primary and
secondary education.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, Further Education and Training is
that area of education that falls between the Department of Labour and the
Department of Education. It deals with school leavers, primarily pupils who
have left school early. Old style community colleges and technical colleges
would be converted into institutions of further education and training.
There have been a Green Paper and a White Paper that were debated in this
House. That is what further education and training covers.

Mr S J DE BEER: Madam Speaker, the Minister will note that in Annexure B of
the Memorandum, under Unforeseeable Expenditure, an amount of R85 million
is allocated for the incorporation of colleges of education into higher
institutions. In the memorandum of the department it is, quite rightly,
mentioned that this function shift is in terms of the Constitution. Can the
Minister then just explain why it was unforeseeable?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, what we know is that teacher
training colleges have been hitherto a provincial function. There have been
long negotiations to try and effect the shift from the provincial function
to the national function and, as part of the national function, they will
be taken as annexes of the tertiary institutions.

For instance, here in the Western Cape, the Cape College in Mowbray will be
attached to the University of Cape Town's education department and
Bellville Training College will be attached to the Peninsula Technikon.
That is the norm across the country. It has taken long and hard
negotiations. By the time we were drafting the Budget for this fiscal year
it could not have been foreseen.

At this stage, the big fight is for implementation on 1 January 2001. But I
am advised that there is still some difficulty with some provincial
education departments and some gaming around these things, but the Minister
of Education advices that he fully intends to implement it from 1 January
2001.

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, another question to the Minister: Can he
explain the 100% increase in the expenditure for consultant services; which
consultants were employed and for what services? Likewise, can the Minister
explain the 155% increase in the expenditure for other professional
services, and what professional services were used?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, I cannot explain which consultants
were used. I shall try and get the answer. Perhaps in the course of this
afternoon - and if we come back to that - I will reply to the hon Gaum's
question.

Vote No 11 - Foreign Affairs:

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, with regard to Programme 2, I would like to
ask the Minister a question in connection with the hostage crisis and the
costs incurred to resolve it. Are these the only costs? Are there any other
costs or is that the total amount; if not, what is the amount?

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: It is a very funny question, Madam
Speaker. The amount that we are asking for is indicated there. Now the hon
member is asking me whether we want more money. [Interjections.] Does the
hon member want to give us more money that we have not asked for? What is
the purpose of this question? [Interjections.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, I had no bad intentions when I asked the
question, and the Minister need not have reacted like that. I honestly only
asked the question in order to say we did a good thing and we solved a
problem, and here is extra money that was appropriated to solve it. It was
just interesting to know more or less what was the amount that we used
because it only says here ``Costs incurred to resolve the hostage crisis''.
We must now vote for that and we will do so. But what is the amount, more
or less? Is it possible to know that or not?

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, there is no additional
amount other than the amount that is indicated. [Interjections.] That is
not the question asked by the hon Mulder. If he wants to know that, he must
ask that question. That hon member should not sit there and talk for him.
[Interjections.] The speaker has not asked what the money was used for. If
he wants to know that, he should ask the question. I will answer it, and I
am quite happy to do so - that is why I am here. But, he must ask it. It
cannot be asked on his behalf by Sheila Camerer.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, perhaps I can assist the Minister to
understand what is being asked. Programme 2 states that an additional
amount of R39 million is being asked for. These amounts have been asked for
different items. One of these items is: Costs incurred to resolve the
hostage crisis. The question is: What exactly is the amount for this
specific item? That is a basic question. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, the amount is R1,513.
[Applause.]

Vote No 13 - Health:

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of Health
the following questions. In Programme 2, under the items, Professional and
Special Services and Transfer Payments, and in Programme 3, under the items
Inventory and Professional and Special Services, there is a total amount of
about R358 million which is reportedly donor funds that have been rolled
over. One of the functions under Programme 3: Inventories, is to purchase
condoms. My first question is as follows: In view of the fact that there is
a national shortage of condoms, why do we have a roll-over of funds, and
why are donor funds, which have been allocated for specific use, rolled
over to that amount?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, we had a combined budget for these
programmes in 1999-2000, and the total came to R106 million, of which R57
million was for HIV/Aids and STDs, and R49 million for Gaap. The R8,4
million rolled over in 1999 was for buying condoms and the funding of the
public awareness campaigns. An amount of R14 million was a roll-over for
the Government Aids programme and public awareness campaigns, and for pilot
home-based care and to pay for the provincial co-ordinators who had been
appointed.

Regarding Programme 2 and the donor funds that are being rolled over, one
has only to look at the decentralisation of hospital management that is in
progress. This cannot be completed overnight, but we are progressing very
well in that regard. Health facilities rehabilitation is the same. The last
funding that we are asking for this year is for the national school of
public health - Medunsa. We are hoping that they will be able to raise
their own funds next year.

With regard to the roll-over in Programme 3, there is indeed a roll-over
with regard to HIV/Aids, and I expected the member to ask a question
regarding that. Of course, we have placed an order for condoms, which means
that that money is already committed in a way. The hon member is perfectly
correct. Indeed, we do need additional money, in spite of what we have
asked for, because we really are running very short of condoms.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, arising out of the Minister's response,
could she tell us why there is a roll-over of R14 million in respect of
HIV/Aids programmes?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, the public awareness campaign
continues. We are very cautious about not wasting money. The programme is
there, it is continuing, and I did mention that the R14 million roll-over
is indeed for the Government Aids awareness programme, which is a
continuing programme.

Mr S NAIDOO: Madam Chair, with reference to Programme 2 on page 5, could
the hon the Minister explain the reason for the underspending of R328
million in the financial year 1999-2000 on important programmes, such as
the rehabilitation of the Umtata hospital, the Durban academic hospital,
specialised health services and poverty relief?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, regarding the two hospitals the
member referred to, I thought I had responded to the question on hospital
reconstruction and rehabilitation. That is under health facilities
rehabilitation. With regard to the Umtata hospital, in fact what has
happened is that we have given them 50% and they are going to meet the
other 50% of the amount required for the hospital. As the member knows,
these programmes really take a long time. One cannot build a hospital
overnight and be done with it.
Vote No 14 - Home Affairs:

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, an adjustment of R380 million, which is a net
increase of 70%, is requested for the Independent Electoral Commission.
Taking into consideration the fact that the conducting of municipal
government elections is determined constitutionally and the year of
elections known well in advance, could the Minister please tell us how this
extra R380 million can fall under unforeseen expenses?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, could the hon member please
repeat the question?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, could you please repeat the
question?

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, an adjustment of R380 million, which
represents a net increase of 70%, is requested for the Independent
Electoral Commission under Programme 4. When one takes into consideration
the fact that the conducting of municipal government elections is
determined constitutionally and the year of elections known well in
advance, how is it possible that this extra money is under unforeseen
expenses?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, I would like to answer with a
question: Why was the money not anticipated?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, I did not hear that.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, I said: Why was the money not
anticipated? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why was the money not anticipated? [Laughter.] Hon
Minister, could you just repeat your answer or your question? I did not
hear it.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, I said: Why was the amount not
anticipated?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why was the money not anticipated? [Laughter.] Hon
member, are you raising a further question?

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, I would like to know why the R380 million is
unforeseen?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You wish to know why the R380 million was unforeseen?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, quite clearly it is a matter
of common sense. It is just a matter of common sense. Putting together
things for an election is not something that one can know beforehand. It is
sheer common sense. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Madam Speaker, with the limited total amount of time that we
in the UDM have available for putting questions, I take it that the time
consumed by repeating the question twice will not come off our total. Am I
correct in that? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We do not deduct time if a question has to be repeated.
We do not take that time into consideration.

Vote No 18 - Justice and Constitutional Development:

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker, I suppose the question will go to the Deputy
Minister, as I do not see the Minister here. [Interjections.]

We refer to the item budgeting an amount of R4 million for the conference
on racism. I want to know what was unforeseeable about the conference - it
had been announced by the President - and why it was unavoidable. Or was it
simply a question of bad planning?

While the Deputy Minister is pondering her answer, let me point out that
the hon the Minister of Finance indicated that ``unforeseeable'' and
``unavoidable'' must be qualified by ``recommended by ... Cabinet''. I want
to make it quite clear to the hon the Minister that one can in no way
interpret ``unforeseeable'' or ``unavoidable'' ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, we are dealing with Vote No 18 on
Justice and Constitutional Development.

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker, I am just clarifying ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, you raised a question with the Deputy
Minister and I will allow her now to respond. Do not, in the same breath,
address a question to the Minister of Finance. [Interjections.] Proceed,
hon Deputy Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam
Speaker, quite frankly I think that the Minister of Finance answered very
adequately earlier. So it is the same question repeated. It is a waste of
time. The fact is that when an expense comes in midcycle in a budget, that
cannot be foreseen, and this came in midcycle. [Interjections.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, also under Justice, in view of the fact
that it was well known in Government circles and in Parliament for the past
four years that the Promotion of Access to Information Act and the
Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act had to be
passed by no later than 4 February this year, why is it that the admittedly
very modest sum of R1 million is included in this adjustments account for
the purpose of implementing these laws, presumably as unforeseeable and
unavoidable expenditure?

Arising out of that, there are one or two other points that I need to put
to the Deputy Minister. Does she really believe that this amount passes the
test in section 30 of the Public Finance Management Act? I would also like
to know what it is to be spent on, since these Acts remain unimplemented as
do many other Acts passed by the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development and by this Parliament. Nine months after we
passed them, they remain unimplemented.

If I may ask, why is this amount so low when we were briefed by her
department that it would cost some R50 million to implement the Promotion
of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act once it was passed.
I would also like to know if the implementation ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Camerer, please just ask questions. Do not go on
and on with a long speech.

Mrs S M CAMERER: This is my final point. Has the full implementation of
that been budgeted for at all?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam
Speaker, as the hon member is aware herself, the form of the legislation
changed quite dramatically during the time that it sat in Parliament, and
there was no way of estimating that.

The money that has been requested by the Human Rights Commission came via
us, but it is money that they anticipated they would be using and needing
in the current financial year. [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon the Deputy
Minister whether she will agree with me that the only conclusion we can
come to ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Dr J T DELPORT: ... is that all expenditure by this Government is
unforeseen because of its incompetence to plan ahead. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Do you want to say anything, Deputy Minister?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam
Speaker, I cannot be expected to answer such a silly question.
[Interjections.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr M A MZIZI: My question relates to whether the maintenance investigators
have been taken into account with regard to allocations, because there
seems to be a grey area there. We have had problems with the maintenance
investigators. If there is any allocation, how much is it?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam
Speaker, as the member is aware, that section of the legislation has not
been implemented because we also do not know the form and place. We are
implementing three pilot projects within months. We will get a sense of how
much these investigators will cost - whether we outsource them or not - and
then we will be able to budget for them in the next cycle.

Vote No 19 - Labour:

Mr R J HEINE: Madam Speaker, I do not know to whom I must put the question,
as I do not see the Minister in the House. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Put the question, hon member.
Mr R J HEINE: An amount of R276 million was allowed for personnel
expenditure. But then there is another item, professional and special
services, which has been allocated an amount of R41,380 million. Now there
is a request for another R27 million for professional special services. I
would like to know what this is for.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! We did not get any indication as to who was
going to handle the questions on Labour.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, may I come back to that question
later?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want to come back to this question later? OK, could
we then skip this question for now and come back to it in a few minutes, if
there is no objection to that?

Vote No 20 - Land Affairs:

Adv S P HOLOMISA: Madam Speaker, in terms of the new current policy on land
redistribution and the agriculture development programme, how many of the
intended beneficiaries have applied for the benefits and how much money has
been released in this regard?

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, even though
in my view that question does not arise in terms of the Adjustments
Estimate, one would say that so far no applications have been received with
regard to that programme. As we all know, that is part of the consultative
process with the various stakeholders on how that programme will be
implemented. What has been agreed is the policy position and the direction
in which we have to move.

However, within the land redistribution programme, as well as with the
agricultural support services, we will be able to get money for acquisition
as well as money for support. Also, some money will come from the Land
Bank, as the hon member would know.

Vote No 21 - Minerals and Energy:

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Speaker, I will let the Minister settle down. In
respect of the R20 million increase in the funds allocated, as far as
transfer payments are concerned, for the electricity distribution industry
restructuring project, that represents a 70% increase. I would like to know
from the Minister why that amount of money was not anticipated right at the
outset.

Secondly, in terms of the blueprint that is emerging there seems to be an
indication that electricity tariffs are going to go up by 30% to 40%. I
wonder if the Minister would comment. Finally, in terms of the allocation
before us there is no consideration given to fuel rebates in respect of the
agricultural industry.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, starting with the last
question, petrol and diesel rebates would not come from our budget as far
as the hon Minister of Finance is concerned. I think he should discuss it
with the Minister of Finance. [Laughter.] Regarding the money for the
restructuring of electricity distribution, that amount was unforeseen
because we had hoped that that would be an expense that we could share with
Eskom, but we were actually unable to work it out like that, so we were
forced to go back to the fiscus and request that money.

As to whether the tariffs would increase as a result of restructuring, the
tariffs in electricity would increase in any case in the course of time,
just like everything else increases. One of the reasons, as we know, we are
restructuring distribution is because it has been a long time since there
has been any investment, and there has been fragmentation. So part of the
increase over a period of 10 years has to do with the fact that there is a
lot of technology and restructuring expenses that we would need to pick up.
If we did not restructure, that increase would over a period of 10 years
actually be more than 70%. So this is a lesser evil, and if we do not do
that, we are going to make the sector unsustainable. [Applause.]

Vote No 22 - Provincial and Local Government:

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, the money that was voted for the 2000-
2001 financial year was R3,42 billion. I have noticed on the latest
information that we have received that there is a discrepancy because it
only shows R3,633 billion. I would like to know where the R75 million has
been allocated, because I do not see it reflected anywhere. Could the
Minister please explain that to me.

The MINISTER OF PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, one of the
items for which that specific amount was allocated is the programme for
local economic development.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! We now go back to Vote No 19 - Labour, with the
assumption that the Minister of Finance is ready. Are there any questions?
Yes, I think there was a question.

Vote No 19 - Labour:

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, in response to the question from
the hon Heine, it is essentially a virement between personal and
professional services. Unfilled posts, the need to bring in people, a
virement is required in terms of section 43 of the Public Finance
Management Act and the 8% rule - that is all that this is about.

Vote No 26 - Public Works:

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, the Minister is seeking to spend an additional
16,35% over and above the budget allocation. This is more than twice the
inflationary figure. What we would like to know concerns the item
Professional and Special Services. What percentage of this amount is to be
expended on consultancies and on tangible projects?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Madam Speaker, although I cannot speak of
specific tangible professional services, in order to get a tangible project
going, one has to consult to make sure that the planning for the project is
done.

Vote No 28 - South African Police Service:

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, I would like to put it to the Minister that in
light of the latest statistics on farm murders, in practice it means that
as we sit here, 400 of us, seven of the members here will be murdered
inside this House where they work in five years' time. That is a fact and
it is a statistical reality. Seven out of 400 people will be murdered in
five years' time. I want to ask the Minister whether he intends, with the
newly adopted budget, to intensify the battle to combat rural crime and
murders. I would like to know whether there is any allocation for that.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, the department and the
Government is very worried about the attacks on farms in the country. We
have incorporated farms, not just for the purposes of this budget, but in
terms of our crime-combating strategy. Farm areas fall within our crime-
combating zones. I am going to meet farmers next week, as has been
arranged, to intensify exactly that strategy. It is not necessarily a
matter for consideration today in terms of this estimate, but it is part
and parcel of my entire budget to see to it that the perpetrators of these
attacks on farms are apprehended and prosecuted.

Vote No 29 - Sport and Recreation South Africa

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, of the R105 million that was actually
applied for to the Minister of Finance, only R15 million was recommended. I
am a bit concerned because of the recommendations. It was said that no
sport facilities would be built and that that falls under local government.
I want to say to the Minister that my concern here is that it should not
actually fall under local government, because local government is bankrupt.
[Interjections.] There is no money. As we have seen on our provincial
trips, those sports fields are not maintained, etc. I know that they
applied for about R50 to R70 million for new facilities but they were
turned down.

The other thing is with reference to school sport. That has also been
transferred from the Department of Education to the Department of Sport and
Recreation. I feel that it should also fall within the ambit of education.
My question to the Minister is, and I hope he can answer me because it is a
concern: Why are they moving the function from one department to another?

An application for more money for the SA Sports Commission was also made.
Fortunately, it has been turned down. I am actually thankful that they did
turn it down, because I was led to believe that about R22 million and
another R2,5 million was given to the commission and they have not really
spent that money. Rumour has it that they are not performing.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister to tell us why
they are not performing, and the reasons for them not performing.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, I think the first two
concerns raised by the member are concerns that we also have as the Sports
department. We are trying to talk to the the Department of Education to
look into the issue of school sport. We will be meeting with them on that.
On the last issue, of the Sports Commission and rumours about it, I cannot
give the hon member an answer on rumours. But the fact is that they are
working very well and the SA Sports Commission is using all its resources
quite well. With regard to the rumours we can talk about them some other
time.

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it
proper to ``rumourmonger'' in this august House? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is definitely not.

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, I just want to ask the Minister of Sport and
Recreation whether he is able to tell us what the latest cricket score is
today? [Laughter.]

Vote No 31 - Statistics SA:

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Mr Green, I have actually just been informed
that the time of the ACDP is up, unfortunately.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, the question is that we voted R96 million
on the population census. We are now asking for another R40 million. Why is
it such a large amount and why is the hon Minister asking for it at such a
late stage?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, it is an internal virement. It is
essentially a virement and supported by the increases in personnel
expenditure. As members know, Statistics SA is a personnel-intensive
department. So the impact of the salary increase adjustments on
professionals is actually reflected in that amount.

Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry:
Mr N S BRUCE: Madam Speaker, it is not fair to try to trip up Ministers
over small disbursements, when they are quite capable of tripping
themselves up over the poor service that they provide. No additional
increase in the expenditure should be countenanced in a department that is
neglecting its core function of ensuring equitable competition and honest
trade.

The DTI appears to have shut itself off from business. Clearly, its
managerial capabilities are sparse indeed. This is really wing nut
management. If the Minister had been at last week's SACOB conference in
Bellville, he would have faced a barrage of complaints about his
department.

In these circumstances, the only sanction that the House has and the only
way it can express its dismay at this gross departmental ineptitude is not
to vote in favour of these increased funds.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, I presume that that is
not a question. It is just one of the usual rambles from the usual
quarters. [Interjections.] I think if the hon member would seriously apply
his mind - if there is any there ... [Interjections]
Mr J H MOMBERG: He has no mind.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: ... he would see that, in fact,
considerable improvements have been made in this budget. We are not
requesting a large amount of additional funds, and I am quite happy to meet
the hon Bruce early in the morning and we can have a sensible discussion.

Vote No 35 - Social Development:

Prof L M MBADI: Madam Speaker, could I ask the hon the Minister to give an
explanation as to why the R129 million was not utilised for poverty relief?
What were the difficulties?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Surely, Madam Speaker, we have
deliberated over this issue many, many times. I think this is the fourth
time I have answered the same question, and His Excellency over there was
one of those people that answered the question. We did explain to this
House that there were problems with the capacity within the department in
general and, secondly, that at the present moment we are doing our best to
ensure that that poverty relief is delivered to the people as fast as
possible. We are working very closely with the IDT to ensure that. In so
far as the money is concerned this year, we have agreed with the provinces
that the money should be devolved directly to each and every province as a
conditional grant so that each and every province is able to answer for
that money.

As far as I am concerned - and I think this applies to all my colleagues in
the provinces - the thing is on track as much as possible. I think when the
hon member gets to Qumbu he will tell them that I was there and I promised
them money.

Vote No 36 - National Treasury:

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Speaker, I would like to put a question to the hon the
Minister of Finance. I see that for Sars the implementation of new tax
proposals amounts to R28,6 million. I would like to know how much of that
amount of money was allocated for the new capital gains tax.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, one cannot break down allocations
to particular tax laws in that way. We have tax administration and tax
policy design within Sars, and this allocation is just due to the need to
take on additional staff in order to design the legislation between now and
31 March next year. It is quite impossible to break down tax policy into
that kind of disaggregated detail.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! May I just warn the hon Koornhof that the UDM
has 24 seconds left. [Interjections.] Order!

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, the increase in the adjustments over the
original estimate is 32%. Why this large increase and what is the R2,6
million for. [Interjections.] Can I repeat that?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, please repeat it.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, the increase of the adjustments over the
original estimate amounts to 32%. My question is: What is the reason for
this large increase, and what is the R2,6 million, or billion, to be spent
on?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson the National Treasury is responsible
for fiscal transfers to the provinces. In the course of this adjustment,
there were two sums to provinces. The one sum included the transfers to
assist in the post-flood reconstruction and the other was to assist
provinces to deal with issues such as the increased uptake in child support
grants and so on. Those amounts are reflected and that clearly works
through into the numbers.

Mr K M ANDREW: Chair, I would like to ask the hon the Minister, in respect
of the R28,6 million for assisting in writing the tax laws, whether what
has happened is that, in writing the residence-based taxation law in the
Revenue Laws Amendment Bill and preparing for the capital gains tax
legislation, he has found that it has turned out to be more complicated and
difficult than originally anticipated. If not, why does he need the amount?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I cannot be held responsible for Ken
Andrew's loss of short-term memory. When this matter was discussed in the
Portfolio Committee on Finance, all of this detail was placed there. Sars
was there and these issues were discussed. So there is not a failure to
anticipate. It is trying to work through these issues.

An HON MEMBER: You were not there.

The MINISTER: I was there. Of course I was there. We discussed these issues
in February and Sars was there and these questions were put on the impact
of capital gains tax. The terms ``backstop'' and ``wicketkeeper'' were used
during those discussions. I cannot be held responsible for the fact that
the hon Andrew cannot remember these things. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I am sorry, but the DP's time is up. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, I want to protest on his
behalf. Loss of short-term memory is an early sign of senility! [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the advantage of having a doctor in the House.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, I undertook to try and get a reply
to Adv Gaum's question on education. [Interjections.] Prof Asmal's father-
in-law is being buried right now, and the senior staff are at the funeral.
For that reason, I have not been able to secure it. I ask that the hon Adv
Gaum accept that. I am sure that Prof Asmal will be able to supply the
details to the House, probably by tomorrow.

Vote No 1 - Presidency - put and agreed to (Democratic Party and New
National Party dissenting).

Vote No 2 - Parliament - put and agreed to.

Vote No 3 - Agriculture - put and agreed to.

Vote No 4 - Arts, Culture, Science and Technology - put and agreed to.

Vote No 5 - Communications - put and agreed to.

Vote No 6 - Correctional Services - put and agreed to (Democratic Party and
New National Party dissenting).

Vote No 7 - Defence - put and agreed to.

Vote No 8 - Education - put and agreed to (Democratic Party, New National
Party and Freedom Front dissenting).

Vote No 9 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism - put and agreed to.

Vote No 10 - Finance - put and agreed to (Democratic Party and New National
Party dissenting).

Vote No 11 - Foreign Affairs - put and agreed to.

Vote No 12 - Government Communication and Information System - put and
agreed to.

Vote No 13 - Health - put and agreed to (Democratic Party, New National
Party, United Democratic Movement and Afrikaner Eenheidsbeweging
dissenting).

Vote No 14 - Home Affairs - put and agreed to (Democratic Party, New
National Party and United Democratic Movement dissenting).

Vote No 15 - Housing - put and agreed to (Democratic Party and New National
Party dissenting).

Vote No 17 - Independent Complaints Directorate - put and agreed to.
Vote No 18 - Justice and Constitutional Development - put and agreed to
(Democratic Party, New National Party and Afrikaner Eenheidsbeweging
dissenting).

Vote No 19 - Labour - put and agreed to (Democratic Party and New National
Party dissenting).

Vote No 20 - Land Affairs - put and agreed to.

Vote No 21 - Minerals and Energy - put and agreed to.

Vote No 22 - Provincial and Local Government - put and agreed to.

Vote No 23 - Public Enterprises - put and agreed to.

Vote No 24 - Public Service and Administration - put and agreed to.

Vote No 25 - Public Service Commission - put and agreed to.

Vote No 26 - Public Works - put and agreed to.

Vote No 27 - SA Management Development Institute - put and agreed to.

Vote No 28 - SA Police Service - put and agreed to.

Vote No 29 - Sport and Recreation South Africa - put and agreed to.

Vote No 30 - State Expenditure - put and agreed to.

Vote No 31 - Statistics South Africa - put and agreed to.

Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry - put and agreed to (Democratic Party and
New National Party dissenting).

Vote No 33 -Transport - put and agreed to.

Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry - put and agreed to.

Vote No 35 - Social Development - put and agreed to.

Vote No 36 - National Treasury - put and agreed to (Democratic Party and
New National Party dissenting).
Schedule agreed to (Democratic Party and New National Party dissenting).

                    SECOND ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Party and New National Party
dissenting).

   REDETERMINATION OF THE BOUNDARIES OF CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPALITIES BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 18:03.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


         (a)     Finance Bill [B 40 - 2000] - Act No 35 of 2000 (assented
              to and signed by President on 27 October 2000);


         (b)     Meat Safety Bill [B 29D - 2000] - Act No 40 of 2000
              (assented to and signed by President on 27 October 2000); and


         (c)     Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 57B - 2000] - Act
              No 41 of 2000 (assented to and signed by President on 27
              October 2000).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     The following paper was tabled on 31 October 2000 and is now referred
     to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on
     Finance:


     Explanatory Memorandum on the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, 2000 [WP 2-
     2000].

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    In response to a resolution adopted by the House on 26 May 2000
         recommending that a code of conduct for Local Government Employees
         be put in place by January 2001, the Minister for Provincial and
         Local Government has included as Schedule 1 to the Local
         Government: Municipal Systems Bill, 2000, a code of conduct for
         municipal officials.


     (2)    The following papers were tabled on 30 October 2000 and are now
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs, the
         Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report;


         (a)     the committees to confer; and


         (b)     the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs to submit an
              interim report by not later than 16 February 2001 and a final
              report by 15 March 2001:


              (i) The Constitutive Act of the African Union, tabled in terms
                    of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


              (ii)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Constitutive Act of the
                    African Union.

2.    The Speaker:


     (1)    Mr M U Kalako has been elected co-chairperson of the Mediation
         Committee with effect from 1 November 2000.


     (2)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Committees, viz:


         Agriculture and Land Affairs:


         Appointed: Van der Merwe, A S; Le Roux, J W (Alt); Zita, L (Alt).
         Discharged: Schoeman, E A.


         Home Affairs:


         Appointed: Mathebe, P H (Alt).
         Discharged: Zita, L.


         Joint Standing Committee on Defence:


         Discharged: Mathebe, P H.


         Labour:


         Appointed: Maphalala, M A (Alt).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal for 1999-
     2000, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 1999-2000.

2.    The Minister of Health:


     Memorandum of Understanding between the Department of Health of the
     Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Ministry of Health
     of the People's Republic of China on Public Health and Medical
     Sciences, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

National Assembly:

Bills:

1.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    Tweede Wysigingswetsontwerp op Chiropraktisyns, Homeopate en
         Verwante Gesondheidsdiensberoepe [W 66 - 2000].


         The Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
         Professions Second Amendment Bill [B 66 - 2000] (National Council
         of Provinces - sec 76) was introduced by the Minister of Health on
         22 September 2000 and referred to the Select Committee on Social
         Services.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws
     Amendment Bill [B 70 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 1
     November 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered and examined
         the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 70 - 2000] (National Assembly -
         sec 77), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism as a money bill, reports that it has concluded its
         deliberations thereon.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Chiropractors,
     Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions Second Amendment Bill
     [B 66B - 2000] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76), dated 1
     November 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the subject
         of the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
         Professions Second Amendment Bill [B 66B - 2000] (National Council
         of Provinces - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill without
         amendment.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the African
     Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund Bill [B 65B - 2000]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 1 November 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs, having considered the
         African Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund Bill [B
         65B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) and proposed amendments
         of the National Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and
         Committee Reports, p 927), referred to the Committee, reports the
         Bill with amendments [B 65C - 2000].

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
     Abolition of Lebowa Mineral Trust Bill [B 49 - 2000] (National Assembly
     - sec 75), dated 1 November 2000:


     The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
     subject of the Lebowa Mineral Trust Bill [B 49 - 2000] (National
     Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
     Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 49A
     - 2000].


     The Committee further reports as follows:


     1.     During its deliberations on the Bill, the Committee received
         extensive briefings from the Department of Minerals and Energy
         (the Department) detailing the reasons for the abolition of the
         Lebowa Mineral Trust (LMT). When the Bill was still in draft form,
         the Committee also received a request from the Beneficiaries Forum
         of the LMT to brief the Committee on its concerns with the Bill.
         The Committee afforded the Forum an opportunity to address it in
         Cape Town on 8 March 2000. Subsequent to this meeting, the
         Committee requested that the Department continue with its
         consultations with the affected communities to ensure that a lack
         of information regarding the content of the Bill would not create
         confusion or misunderstanding. To this end, the Department also
         published the draft Bill on 17 March 2000 and invited comments
         thereon.


     2.     On 17 August, the Bill was introduced in the National Assembly
         and referred to the Committee. The Committee, together with the
         Select Committee on Economic Affairs of the National Council of
         Provinces, held public hearings on the Bill in the Northern
         Province on 21 September. These public hearings were advertised
         nationally and locally, in the Northern Review Newspaper and on
         Radio Thobela. In addition, an invitation was also extended to the
         provincial governments, as well as to the relevant provincial
         committees, of the Northern Province and Mpumalanga to attend the
         public hearings and to give their views on the Bill, should they
         deem it necessary. This was done as most of the former Lebowa
         falls within these two Provinces, and there are also a few areas
         which now form part of the North-West Province.


     3.     The following persons made oral presentations during the public
         hearings:


         *  Mr Dennis Nkosi, on behalf of the Mpumalanga Provincial
              Government;


         *  Mr M G Ratlabala, on behalf of the LMT Board;


         *  Mr I W Modisha, on behalf of the staff of the LMT;


         *  Kgoshi M Lehwelere, on behalf of the LMT Beneficiaries Forum;


         *  Kgsohigadi M R Mothapo;


         *  Ms M M Ramoraswi, on behalf of Sefagafaga Mining Investments;


         *  Adv T P Moloto, on behalf of the Mineral Rights Association of
              Indigenous People of South Africa;


         *  Mr M H Malaza, on behalf of the Dilokong Land and Minerals
              Forum;


         *  Mr V Majolopa, on behalf of the Leolo Mining Corporation;


         *  Mr P G Betz;


         *  Adv T P Moloto, on behalf of the Bopedi Kingdom;


         *  Kgoshi T Setlamorago, on behalf of CONTRALESA;
         *  Mr T Boya, on behalf of NAFCOC (Northern Province);


         *  Mr M Mphalele, on behalf of Northern Resource Management and
              Maaparanke Holdings.


     4.     The Committee also received the following written submissions:


         *  Mr C Corser;


         *  Ms A Makhubedu;


         *  Mphalele Traditional Authority.


     5.     A key area of concern for the Committee during its deliberations
         was that the LMT is currently duplicating functions falling within
         the ambit of the Department. Many of the issues raised with the
         Committee during the public hearings were rooted in concerns of
         benefitting groups and individuals that they would lose the
         benefits accruing from the LMT. The Committee understands that the
         projects currently funded by the LMT Board will be taken over by
         the Department.


     6.     The ANC and the IFP agreed that the Bill constitutes an
         administrative adjustment intended to bring the administration of
         mineral rights in line with the Constitution, which declares
         mining and mineral matters an area of national competency.


         The Committee is of the opinion that a careful investigation into
         the matter of mineral rights ownership in the region should be
         undertaken. To this end, it should be noted that the Committee
         amended the Bill to the effect that the regulations to be
         prescribed by the Minister in respect of the nature of proof
         required when claiming ownership of mineral rights will only be
         made after consultation with the Committee. Furthermore, based on
         discussions with the Ministry of Minerals and Energy during
         deliberations on the Bill, the Committee was assured that this
         proof will not be confined to the presentation of title deeds. The
         various lists given to the Committee during its deliberations will
         also have to be consolidated before being used as a basis to
         verify the authenticity of claims.


     7.     It was also noted that the genuine concerns among the
         communities of the region about job creation, sustainable
         development, community input into the development process, poverty
         alleviation and the future of joint venture agreements, which were
         raised with the Committee during the public hearings, must be
         viewed in a serious light when decisions around the Bill are
         taken.


     8.     The DP and the New NP were opposed to the Bill. The basis of
         their opposition was one of principle. The following points were
         noted:


         (1)     Section 14 of the Lebowa Mineral Trust Act states: "The
              Trust shall, in respect of mineral rights and for the purpose
              of any legislation governing mineral rights and the
              exploitation of mineral resources be in the same position as a
              private holder of mineral rights". The Bill before Parliament
              seeks to take those rights currently vested in the LMT and
              vest them in the State. No compensation is offered. This was
              viewed as an infringement of the property rights of private
              mineral rights holders and therefore renders the Bill subject
              to a constitutional challenge, as the objective of the Bill is
              contrary to the property rights provision of the Constitution.


         (2)     Prior to the formation of the self-governing state of
              Lebowa, four categories of land owners existed in the area,
              namely land owned by -


              (a) the Government of the Republic of South Africa;


              (b) the South African Development Trust (SADT);


              (c) the provincial administration; and


              (d) private individuals.


         The Department advised the Committee that land held in these four
         categories was transferred to the former Lebowa and the mineral
         rights attached were under the jurisdiction of the LMT. These
         rights were to be administered for the material benefit and moral
         welfare of the people of Lebowa.


         Two points in this regard need to be made:


         (i)     There is a factual dispute as to whether there are private
                 holders of land rights, and therefore of mineral rights in
                 the first three categories mentioned above. Documentation
                 in this regard was supplied to the Committee, citing title
                 deed numbers evidencing private ownership of land by
                 individuals and tribes.


          (ii)    Land restitution claims in the three categories mentioned
                 are still outstanding. These land claims could well have
                 mineral rights attached thereto. Should any of the above
                 land have mineral rights attached thereto, the vesting of
                 such rights in the State would infringe the property rights
                 provisions of the Constitution.


     9.     The DP and the New NP had two further points of opposition
         related to process:


         (1)     Clause 3(1)(c) of the Bill empowers the Minister, on
              application by any person who claims any rights to minerals,
              to grant such rights to the person on production of
              appropriate proof. During the course of its consultation on
              the Bill, the DP and the New NP expressed concern at the way
              in which the Department had investigated claims of ownership.
              It could not be established whether the land cited in the
              title deeds had mineral rights attached. The DP and the New NP
              felt that an impartial tribunal should be established to
              facilitate the process and adjudicate ownership.


         (2)     Lastly, the DP and the New NP were of the opinion that the
              Bill was premature. It was felt that this Bill should have
              been presented to Parliament after the Minerals Development
              Bill, which is due to come before Parliament next year. This
              latter Bill will translate the White Paper policy into law.
              More specifically, that Bill will deal with the vesting of
              mineral rights in the State.


              The DP and the New NP accepted the fact that the LMT was an
              anachronism, and therefore believed that it should be
              transformed into a mineral development agency. This agency
              would be in a position to develop minerals in the Northern
              Province for and on behalf of its inhabitants, either
              collectively or individually, if rights are established.


     10.    The UDM rejected the abolition of the LMT. It adopted this
         stance mainly for the following reasons:


         (1)     The Minister of Minerals and Energy is the champion of
              this course of action, whilst she holds office as a delegated
              trustee of the LMT. Her essential duty in this capacity is to
              protect and further the rights of the inhabitants of the
              former Lebowa, not to deprive them of their rights and assets.
         (2)     The Bill effectively abolishes the LMT and thus deprives
              the inhabitants of the former Lebowa of the benefits accruing
              from the trust.


         (3)     The Bill has the effect of arbitrary confiscation of
              property and/or rights without compensation by the State.


         The UDM supported the inhabitants of the former Lebowa and their
         traditional authorities in seeking for a redress in a high court
         and the Constitutional court. The UDM did, however, support the
         restructuring of the LMT in order to make it compatible with the
         present Constitutional arrangements in the country.


     11.    The ACDP is, in principle, against State ownership of property,
         and on these grounds opposed the Bill. In addition, it felt that
         it was evident from the submissions made during the public
         hearings that the people in the area and those benefitting from
         the LMT are concerned that the Northern Province, despite its
         enormous mineral wealth, is one of the poorest provinces in South
         Africa and that it will be further deprived of what little hope it
         has of development and wealth creation. The ACDP did not see the
         Bill as giving any assurances to the people of the area that they
         would not be further disadvantaged. The ACDP supports
         restructuring and reformation of the LMT. The ACDP proposed that a
         new Bill, guided by the recommendations in the detailed
         submissions, be drafted and presented to the Committee. A primary
         objective of the new Bill must be to ensure that those who should
         rightly benefit, in fact do benefit.


     12.    The Committee will support the provincial Finance MECs in
         ensuring that further economic development through mining occurs
         in the region. The Northern Province Development Corporation,
         National steering committee programmes on mineral development and
         the integrated rural development programme should receive the
         necessary resources to continue to build the local economy.


     Whereas the majority of the members of the Committee are satisfied that
     it has ensured the rights of communities and individuals to claim those
     mineral rights to which they are legitimately entitled, it will
     continue to monitor the status of joint venture agreements in the
     former Lebowa and progress with regard to integrated rural development.
     In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Department of
     Minerals and Energy be requested to keep it informed on these matters.


     The Committee wishes to express its appreciation to all those
     stakeholders who made submissions to and interacted with the Committee
     during its deliberations on the Bill.


     Report to be considered.

5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Rome Statute, dated 1 November 2000:


        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
        having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Rome
        Statute of the International Court of Justice, referred to it,
        recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, approve the said Statute.


     Report to be considered.

6.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/USA Extradition Treaty, dated 1 November 2000:


        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
        having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
        Extradition Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the United States of America, referred
        to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, approve the said Treaty.


     Report to be considered.

7.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/USA Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty, dated 1
     November 2000:


        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
        having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
        Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
        the Government of the United States of America on Mutual Legal
        Assistance in Criminal Matters, referred to it, recommends that the
        House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the
        said Treaty.


     Report to be considered.

8.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the RSA/Australia Extradition Treaty, dated 1 November
     2000:


        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
        having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
        Treaty on Extradition between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Government of Australia, referred to it,
        recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, approve the said Treaty.
     Report to be considered.

9.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Public Protector Office Conditions of Service, dated
     1 November 2000:


        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
        having considered the Documents, in terms of section 3(11)(a) of the
        Public Protector Act, 1994, on remuneration, allowances and other
        conditions of employment determined by the Public Protector for
        staff in his office, referred to it, recommends that the House
        approve the determination by the Public Protector as set out in the
        said document.


     Report to be considered.

10.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
     Illegal Farm Evictions, dated 1 November 2000:


     The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
     considered the extent and nature of illegal farm evictions in KwaZulu-
     Natal, the Free State, Mpumalanga and North-West, reports as follows:


     1.     Introduction


         During June 2000 the Committee visited KwaZulu-Natal, the Free
         State, Mpumalanga and North-West. The primary objective was to
         investigate reported incidents of unfair evictions in these four
         provinces. The four delegations were led by Mr N Masithela, Adv S
         P Holomisa, Mrs B M Ntuli and Mr D Hanekom, respectively.


         In the Free State the delegation met with the MEC for Agriculture,
         the Free State department of land affairs, members of the
         provincial select committee on agriculture and land affairs, the
         South African Plantation and Allied Workers Union (SAPAWU), Agri-
         SA (Free State), the constituency office of the national Member of
         Parliament, members of the Transitional Local Council, the SAPS,
         farmers, farm-workers, magistrates and lawyers.


         In Mpumalanga the delegation met with farmers, farm-workers and
         the SAPS.


         In KwaZulu-Natal the delegation met with the MEC for Agriculture
         and Land Affairs, members of the provincial portfolio committee on
         agriculture, the regional office of the department of land
         affairs, AFRA, SAPAWU, the Esta monitoring project, farm-workers,
         farmers, the SAPS and attorneys.


         In the North-West the delegation met with officials of the
         regional department of land affairs, the MEC for Agriculture, the
         Mayor of Coligny, farm-workers, NAFU, Agri-SA (North West), the
         Transvaal Agricultural Union, farmers, farm communities, the SAPS,
         the Department of Justice, the Law Clinic, the Transvaal Rural
         Action Committee (TRAC) and the Association for Community and
         Rural Advancement (ANCRA).


         The multiparty delegations to the provinces would use the visits
         to -


         (1)     determine the extent and nature of the problem (i.e. on
              what scale evictions are occurring and under what
              circumstances);


         (2)     investigate the impact of the evictions;


         (3)     establish whether legal processes are being followed
              properly;


         (4)     establish whether the magistrates' courts are applying the
              laws properly;


         (5)     determine whether there are loopholes in the relevant laws
              which leave people vulnerable; and


         (6)     investigate any other matters related to the reported
              evictions which have occurred in some parts of our country.


         This is a consolidated Report from the delegations, and it
         highlights the commonalities in each province with regard to
         unfair evictions, whilst also including recommendations. For
         details of specific cases, kindly refer to individual delegations'
         reports.


     2.     Extent and nature of problem


         It is nearly impossible to attach a figure to the total number of
         evictions taking place throughout these provinces. This is due to
         the fact that only some provinces do data capturing of eviction
         cases. The monitoring of evictions is also hampered by human
         resource shortages, as well as the failure by evictees to report
         their cases to the police because of the perception that the
         police is favouring the farmers in eviction cases.


         A number of reported eviction cases in the four provinces were to
         an extent labour-related. Labour disputes between farm-workers and
         farm-owners were often used by the latter as a mechanism to evict
         workers. A large majority of farm-workers are not unionised
         because farm-owners often refuse union representatives access to
         their workers.


     3.     Shortcomings/loopholes in relevant laws
         Many of the problems that came to the fore during the provincial
         visits were implementation issues rather than loopholes in the
         law. Basic necessities, like access to drinking water, are often
         denied to farm-workers, as a form of punishment. This is clearly
         in contravention of the Extension of Security of Tenure Act, 1997
         (ESTA). Section 1(1)(vi) of ESTA defines eviction as depriving a
         person against his or her will of his or her right to "residence
         on land or the use of land or access to water which is linked to a
         right of residence".


         ESTA gives special rights to occupiers who are 60 years or older
         and who have lived on the land for longer than 10 years. The same
         rights are given to disabled people who were employed by the owner
         and who lived on the land for 10 years or longer (section 8(4)(a)
         and (b)). Despite the special rights for long-term occupiers, many
         cases reported concerned persons older than 60 years and who had
         lived on a specific farm for longer than 10 years.


         The eviction cases which were reported to the delegations, whether
         contested or not, showed that the biggest flaw in respect of ESTA
         is that it merely regulates tenure rights, without actually
         providing security of tenure.


         Investigations have also revealed that ESTA does not provide
         clarity on the rights of farm-workers and occupiers to bury their
         dead on the farms on which they live. Section 6(4) of ESTA simply
         states:


              "Any person shall have the right to visit and maintain his or
              her family graves on land which belongs to another person,
              subject to any reasonable condition imposed by the owner or
              person in charge of such land in order to safeguard life and
              property or to prevent undue disruption of work on the land."


         In spite of the above provision, certain farmers were reported to
         have barred persons, who had been evicted from their farms, from
         visiting or maintaining their family graves. In some cases graves
         were demolished by owners, who ploughed them over.


     4.     Impact of evictions


         Communication and trust between the police, prosecutors and
         magistrates, on the one hand, and farm-worker communities, on the
         other, have reached breaking point in some areas - as a result of
         a perception of those communities that the said State officials
         are siding with the farm-owners instead of implementing the law in
         an impartial manner.


         Squatter camps, which are an urban phenomenon in and around rural
         towns, are mushrooming due to the influx of evictees from
         neighbouring farms. This places a burden on state resources such
         as housing, water, health services, electricity, education, common
         land, etc. The evictions, legal and illegal, result in the
         disruption of children's schooling, a breakdown in the social
         fabric of the effected communities and deterioration in race
         relations.


     5.     Legal processes and magistrates' courts
         One of the impediments to the successful implementation of land
         laws such as ESTA and the Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Act, 1996,
         is the fact that most police officers are not familiar with them.
         This is evident from statements made by the SAPS personnel in the
         four provinces. The situation is further exacerbated by a lack of
         understanding on the part of farm-workers and some farm-owners
         regarding their respective rights and obligations, as provided for
         in ESTA and other related laws. Some farmers were reported to have
         displayed a tendency to call on the police to carry out evictions
         even when there were no court orders requiring them to do so.


         The position of the occupiers is worsened by the fact that, due to
         poverty and illiteracy, they are unable to gain access to legal
         assistance and the courts so as to either institute legal action
         or defend themselves.


     6.     General remarks


         Various forums, consisting of all major stakeholders, including
         the police, farm-workers, labour unions, agricultural unions and
         the Department of Land Affairs, have been established in the
         respective provinces to deal with eviction problems. These have
         proved successful in many instances.


         Evictions tend to take place when there is a change in ownership
         of farms. Some evictions are said to be racially motivated because
         of pressure applied by white farmers on colleagues who seek to
         make their land available to farm-workers.


         The delegations were also told of the confiscation of livestock
         and household properties during the course of evictions of farm-
         workers by land-owners. This happened illegally, and without any
         recourse to the law.


     7.     Recommendations


         The Committee wishes to make the following recommendations, for
         consideration by the House and appropriate action by the
         Executive:


         (1)     The role of commando's, the police and deputy sheriffs in
              respect of farm evictions must be investigated and brought in
              line with the law and the Constitution.


         (2)     The Department of Safety and Security must ensure that the
              police conduct thorough investigations of eviction and assault
              cases on farms in order to ensure proper and impartial
              implementation of the law.


         (3)     The Directorate of Public Prosecutions must pursue all
              cases of farm-worker abuse and victimisation which, though
              reported to the police, were not followed by investigations
              and criminal trials.


         (4)     The Department of Labour, and possibly the Department of
              Social Development, must continue to carry out regular farm
              inspections to ensure that the law is complied with and that
              the working and living conditions of farm-workers are being
              improved.


         (5)     Land reform programmes, including restitution and
              redistribution, must give priority to the land needs of farm-
              workers, labour tenants and occupiers.


         (6)     More land-owners must be encouraged to make more land
              available to the government for distribution to the landless
              occupiers.


         (7)     The government must ensure that the different organs and
              agencies of state, particularly those involved in the
              investigation, prosecution and trial of eviction cases, are
              given on-going special training on land-related laws.


         (8)     The State must provide adequate resources to ensure that
              the laws and policies aimed at the poor and the vulnerable are
              speedily and meaningfully implemented, and that legal
              assistance is provided for victims of eviction.


         (9)     The Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs, of
              Justice and Constitutional Development, of Safety and Security
              and of Labour and relevant stakeholders must continue to run
              information campaigns throughout the country for both farmers
              and occupiers, and co-ordinate their efforts to ensure that
              illegal and/or unfair evictions do not take place.


         (10)The Extension of Security of Tenure Act, the Land Reform
              (Labour Tenants) Act and other related laws must be reviewed
              and, if necessary, relevant amendments must be effected as a
              matter of urgency.


     Report to be considered.


