---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-10-12
---

THURSDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms N S MTSWENI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Congress of Traditional Leaders of SA held its 10th
           conference from 6 to 8 October, which also marked its 10th
           anniversary; and

       (b)  the traditional leaders held the conference with the theme
           ``Bridging the Gap between the Old and the New, Urban and
           Rural";


  (2) congratulates Contralesa on the successful conference and the
       unanimous election of Inkosi S P Holomisa (Ah Dilizintaba) as
       President;

  (3) wishes Contralesa success in its mission to restore the pride and
       dignity of the institution of traditional leadership; and

  (4) looks forward to the constructive role the organisation will play as
       we chart the way forward for a better life for all the people of
       South Africa.

[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP and the
Democratic Alliance ...

The SPEAKER: Hon Mr Gibson, please take your seat.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Certainly, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I am concerned about some of the proceedings in
the House yesterday. We agreed on new question time. We agreed on
allocation of notices of motion amongst political parties. It is something
that has been co-operated about, and members have agreed on it. I think it
has helped us to proceed in a way where everyone has an opportunity to
participate.

Notices of motion are always used by members, not only here, but
everywhere, to score political points. I accept that. I am glad, Mr Gibson,
that you are so surprised, but perhaps I have a perception which you may
not share. That is accepted, and I will not intervene there.

I am concerned that this is not done in a way which is unnecessarily
provocative and is going to endanger proceedings or undermine the House.
Notices of motion are given by individual members, but the slots have been
allocated on behalf of political parties.

I want to alert members here. I had a discussion with representatives of
the DP after the formation of the alliance, and it was clear that the
constitutional position was that there could be no Democratic Alliance
until the next election, unless legislation was introduced. That is the
constitutional position.

We discussed what would happen if members here raised it. At that time, I
said that I was sure parties were not going to score political points out
of this. Obviously, I was mistaken.

I want to appeal to members to not endanger proceedings that we have
striven to extend for a very long time to come to agreement on. This is an
appeal to the House. We can go on with points of order. We can go on being
provocative. I do not believe that it is going to assist the House.

Mr Gibson, please proceed.

Mr D H M GIBSON: I will have a very unprovocative notice of motion.
Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) has learnt with consternation that the cost of the arms acquisitions
       has escalated to beyond R43,8 billion, with no final figure
       predicted;

  (2) notes that there are serious allegations of impropriety relating to
       the awarding of the tenders and sub-tenders, and that there are
       further allegations that the countertrade benefits have been grossly
       exaggerated; and

  (3) resolves, in the circumstances, that immediately after the Public
       Accounts Committee has reported to Parliament, an all-party committee
       should be established aimed at reassessing the benefits to South
       Africa of continuing with the arms purchases.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the closure of a number of small-scale incinerators used to
           dispose of medical waste;

       (b)  the state of disorder that exists in the co-ordination of
           medical waste disposal procedures; and

       (c)  the absence of clear lines of responsibility and accountability
           between the Department of Health, the Department of Water
           Affairs and Forestry and the Department of Environmental Affairs
           and Tourism with regard to medical waste disposal; and

       (d)  the poor state of policing of unlicensed dumps


  (2) calls on the Ministers of these departments urgently to co-ordinate
       efforts to -


       (a)  achieve clarity with regard to medical waste disposal
           procedures;

       (b)  close the gaps that exist in waste transportation;

       (c)  investigate the most modern methods for the disposal of waste to
           replace incinerators; and

       (d)  find better interim solutions than that of requesting permission
           from Water Affairs to dump medical waste in landfill sites.

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move, without any other qualification, on behalf
of the ANC:

[Laughter.]


  That the House -


  (1) notes the admission by Banking Council of SA CEO, Bob Tucker, that
       South Africa's home loan market is dangerously limited, and is
       failing to meet the needs of hundreds of thousands of South Africans
       earning less than R4 000 a month;

  (2) recognises that millions of South Africans experience inadequate or
       no service from the banking sector, suffering redlining, racism,
       excessive banking charges and unregulated blacklisting by credit
       bureaus; and

  (3) calls upon all South Africans to support the ANC-Alliance October
       campaign for the transformation of the banking sector.

[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Mr Cronin, I do note, with appreciation, that you are
aware that there are other parties in South Africa who may not be
represented in the House as parties. [Laughter.]

Mr A BLAAS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes -


       (a)  the irresponsible remarks by Deputy President, Jacob Zuma, that
           has further thrown South Africa down the abyss of economic
           stagnation; and

       (b)  that his remarks have directly led to the rand reaching a record
           low against the dollar; and


  (2) urges the Government and Deputy President Zuma to take heed of Tito
       Mboweni's distress on the matter, stop the kowtowing to President
       Mugabe and directly condemn his land-grab policies that are
       detrimental to the whole Southern African region, for which South
       Africans are paying dearly in terms of rands, and does not give the
       slightest hope to any of the jobless and poor people of South Africa.

[Interjections.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay and disappointment the slump of the rand to a
       record low of R7,40 to a dollar as a result of the ambiguous and
       conflicting statements made by the Deputy President at a regional
       investment conference in Namibia about the land reform policies in
       Zimbabwe;

  (2) is concerned that the South African economy may also plunge into
       crisis as a result of the support given to the land reform policies
       of Zimbabwe by the Southern African leaders at this conference;

  (3) is concerned further that the International Monetary Fund and other
       key Western donors including the World Bank suspended aid to Zimbabwe
       a year ago over its economic policies;

  (4) notes that the US business group considers Southern Africa as a
       ``high risk'' investment region, and warns that the South African
       Government's continued support of the notorious land reform policies
       in Zimbabwe may result in political uncertainty and may also tarnish
       the image of this country, in spite of the good and acceptable land
       reform policies that are enshrined in our Constitution; and

  (5) calls on the South African Government to take all the necessary
       precautions to avoid the inheritance from Zimbabwe of a political
       infection, lack of confidence, credibility and economic instability.

[Interjections.]

Ms F HAJAIG: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the brutal attack on Betty Zuma and her 18-month-old baby by two
           pit bull terriers in Brakpan;

       (b)  that the baby was fatally savaged and the mother severely
           injured in this attack; and
       (c)  that this is one of many incidents involving attacks on humans
           by pit bull terriers;


  (2) reiterates our call for an in-depth evaluation of the practise of
       ownership and breeding of pit bull terriers; and

  (3) calls on the Government to deal with this problem urgently.

[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die AEB sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met sorg kennis neem van die voorval in Potgietersrus waar gepoog is
       om drie lede van die plaaslike kommando na ure te arresteer op 'n
       vermeende klag van aanranding teenoor 'n persoon wat van diefstal
       verdink is;

  (2) toegee dat hierdie drie manne onverhoord deur die pers veroordeel is;

  (3) daarvan kennis neem dat -


       (a)  'n woordvoerder van die ANC die wens uitgespreek het dat hierdie
           drie manne moet ``verrot in die tronk'', voordat die feite van
           die saak regtelik getoets is;

       (b)  dat die klag teen die vermeende oortreder aanvanklik teruggetrek
           is, maar later op meerdere getuienis heropen is; en


  (4) vra dat -


       (a)  alle betrokkenes, die pers ingesluit, versoek word om versigtig
           met vermeende feite om te gaan voordat 'n onverhoorde oordeel
           gevel word; en

       (b)  dat groter samewerking tussen die polisie en die plaaslike
           kommando's moet geskied ter beveiliging van die omgewing.
(Translation of Afrikaans motion follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the AEB:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the incident at Potgietersrus, where an after-
       hours attempt was made to arrest three members of the local commando
       on an alleged charge of assault on a theft suspect;

  (2) concedes that these three men have been found guilty without a trial
       by the press;

  (3) notes that -


       (a)  a spokesperson of the ANC has expressed the wish that these
           three men should ``rot in jail'', even before the facts of the
           case have been tested judicially; and

       (b)  originally the charge against the suspected thief was withdrawn,
           but that due to further evidence it was later reinstated; and


  (4) asks -


       (a)  that everyone involved, including the press, be requested to
           handle the perceived facts with care before passing judgement
           without a trial; and

       (b)  for better co-operation to be established between the police and
           the local commando so as to safeguard the area.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the death of the world's first woman Prime Minister, Mrs
       Sirimavo Bandaranaike, who was the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka,
       colonially known as Ceylon;

  (2) further notes that Mrs Bandaranaike was elected as Prime Minister of
       her country three times, and that she played an important role in the
       anticolonial struggle and in the Cold War between the USA and the now-
       collapsed USSR; and

  (3) notes that the PAC salutes the leadership of Mrs Bandaranaike which
       should be an inspiration to our women and demonstrates the capability
       of women as leaders.

[Applause.]

Ms T R MODISE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that the ANC Women's League has launched a campaign to highlight
           the plight of children in the northern suburbs of Cape Town; and

       (b)  that there has been a very high incidence of violence, abuse and
           brutal murder of little children over the past few weeks in
           these areas; and


  (2) calls on all peace-loving South Africans to unconditionally support
       the ANC Women's League's programme to campaign for the rights of
       children.

[Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) looks forward to the launch of the Democratic Alliance's national
       campaign for the local government elections on Saturday afternoon in
       Cape Town; and [Interjections.]

  (2) notes the fact that the Democratic Alliance will contest the ANC in
       over 2000 wards in the coming elections, and that the DA will take
       its message and campaign into all corners of South Africa without
       making empty promises, in stark contrast to the ANC's promises made
       in 1994, 1995, 1996 and 1999, without any meaningful delivery.

[Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) is appalled by reports that a substantial number of educators molest
       and even rape underaged school children;

  (2) notes that the Aids pandemic cannot be effectively dealt with when
       adults may possibly infest young and innocent children with the
       virus;

  (3) is of the opinion that -


       (a)  the police must act swiftly and diligently to bring perpetrators
           to book; and

       (b)  the Department of Education should take harsh measures against
           offending educators; and


  (4) appeals to parents and school governing bodies to engage in awareness
       programmes to alert children to take precautions and report
       unbecoming behaviour by educators.

Mrs M P COETZEE-KASPER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the escalating criminal acts against innocent citizens
       occurring in trains;

  (2) believes that trains are an important means of transport for less
       affluent citizens and that they have a right to use this means of
       transport without fear; and

  (3) calls on Spoornet to improve security on trains, and on rail
       commuters and citizens of South Africa to assist in stamping out
       criminal acts on trains.
[Applause.]

Mnr J SCHIPPERS: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem -


       (a)  van die nuwe samestelling van die Stadsraad van Ceres nadat 4
           stadsraadslede uit die ANC bedank het en die Witzenberg
           Onafhanklike Vereniging gevorm het wat nou saam met die Nuwe NP
           die Stadsraad van Ceres beheer; en

       (b)  dat die vier voormalige ANC-stadsraadslede ongelukkig is oor die
           gebrek aan deursigtigheid binne die ANC met die samestelling van
           kandidaatlyste en omdat daar volgens inligting van hoër gesag af
           ingemeng is om ander kandidate te akkommodeer; en


  (2) aanvaar dat die ANC nie die vermoë het om sy steun in die Wes-Kaap te
       behou nie en dat sy bestaande steunbasis besig om te verbrokkel as
       gevolg van beloftes wat nie nagekom word nie en dat net vriende en
       familie voordeel trek uit die ANC-regering.
(Translation of Afrikaans motion follows.)

[Mr J SCHIPPERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the new composition of the Ceres town council after four
           councillors resigned from the ANC and formed the Witzenberg
           Independent Association which now, together with the New NP,
           controls the Ceres Town Council; and

       (b)  that the four former ANC councillors are dissatisfied because of
           the lack of transparency within the ANC as regards the
           compilation of candidate lists and because, according to
           information, there was interference from higher authority in
           order to accommodate other candidates; and


  (2) accepts that the ANC does not have the power to retain its support in
       the Western Cape and that its current support base is crumbling
       because of promises that are not being kept, and that only friends
       and relatives can benefit from the ANC Government.]

                    SECOND ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, today I am introducing
the 2000 adjustments estimate before Parliament. Hon members are asked to
consider requests for funds for the 2000-01 that are in addition to those
appropriated in the main estimate which we tabled in Parliament in February
this year.

In the 2000 Budget we budgeted for a total expenditure of R233,5 billion
this year. The adjustments estimate before the House today seeks to raise
the level of spending to R235,2 billion.

This is the first time that the adjustments estimate is considered within
the ambit of the Public Finance Management Act. This Act, as we know,
stresses better management of Government moneys and assets, and introduces
stronger measures on accountability to Parliament and the public.

In terms of the Public Finance Management Act, adjustments to the Budget
are allowed only under certain narrow and specific conditions, the major
one being unforeseeable and unavoidable expediture that we could not
reasonably predict at the start of the financial year.

Thus, this exercise is not primarily about policy choices. Rather it is
about adjustments to the Main Budget.

The adjustments estimate also provides for the roll over of unspent funds
from the past year, and several shifts of funds or reallocations.

The 2000 adjustments estimate tells a promising story for national
departmental spending in the medium-term. Firstly, recent trends show that
certain national departments, including the Departments of Trade and
Industry, Water Affairs and Forestry, and Health, are beginning to overcome
the capacity problems that contributed to underspending on these votes in
previous years. Secondly, the additional allocations proposed in the
adjustment estimate show that, for most part, national departments are
managing their spending within the allocations voted by Parliament earlier
this year.

But, as I have mentioned, the Treasury Committee is empowered to approve
additional allocations if the expenditure is unforeseeable and unavoidable.
Let me give hon members an example of such expenditure, for which my
colleague, the hon Valli Moosa may be obliged to provide this House with a
more detailed account.

It involves the loss of six fuel storage tanks somewhere in the southern
oceans. Before hon members think that such a loss was evironmentally
insensitive, or just plain carelessness of Minister Moosa and his
department, they should allow me to explain the circumstances.

The tanks, admittedly, were hard to lose. They weigh 81/2 tons each and are
painted bright orange. Normally they sit on a huge ice shelf - about 300
kilometres long - that projects from the edge of the southern-most
continent into the Atlantic Ocean. When one of our ships arrives to refuel
the tanks before they are pulled across the icy wastes back to the South
African base in Antarctica by a caterpillar tractor, they are moved about 2
km from the edge of the shelf. Last summer, though, the unforeseeable, if
not the unthinkable, happened. The edge - all 17 km of it - broke off. An
iceberg the size of 17 rugby pitches and about 35 metres above the water
floated off with our tanks.

Fortunately, nobody was there at the time, so we did not risk any lives.
But when our ship arrived later, it spotted this floating ice platform and
the crew tried to retrieve the tanks. But the iceberg was higher than the
ship. A German ship in the area tried to help us, and so did a Russian
vessel. We tried cranes and winches but nothing could reach the iceberg,
which was being propelled, as it was, by strong winds and currents. Neither
South African nor Russian helicopters could lift the storage tanks, because
they were just too heavy.

The tanks were empty, as they always are when they await the ships - one
blessing! They are especially sealed to avoid contamination. But they are
gone. An unforeseeable expense? Perhaps Minister Moosa will say that we
could have predicted the global warming, but to pinpoint its effects to
time and place? We think not. Unavoidable? I am told that if one had been
on that ship looking up at the iceberg with the tanks sailing past, one
would agree.

How much did this adventure at sea cost us? A total of R1,2 million - a
small percentage of the Budget perhaps, but nonetheless we still require
Minister Moosa to explain this unforeseeable event in detail to the
Treasury Committee. I think Parliament, of course, has the right to ask for
even further details of this.

There were other such expenses too closer to home and affecting more of our
people. We propose additional amounts of R300 million to national
departments for flood-related expenditure. This includes extra allocations
to the Department of Transport, which received R41 million for the
reconstruction of flood-damaged infrastructure, and the Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry, which was allocated R153 million to repair water-
related infrastructure.
A further R50 million goes to the Disaster Relief Fund that is administered
by the Department of Social Development.

Other departments that were involved in the post-flood reconstruction were
Agriculture and Health. The Department of Agriculture also received an
allocation to deal with the break of foot-and-mouth disease, and the
Department of Health received one for combating malaria epidemic. Both
diseases were exacerbated by the floods.

Approximately R318 million is recommended for the Independent Electoral
Commission to run local government elections. A further R95 million is
allocated to the Department of Foreign Affairs for exchange rate
depreciation and for our UN commitment, as requested.

Other unforeseaable and unavoidable expenditure at national level amounts
to R265 million.

These allocations are set out in detail in the explanatory notes that are
tabled alongside the adjustments estimate for hon member's consideration.
For each vote, an explanatory memorandum is provided, outlining the
function shifts proposed, amounts rolled over from the past year,
unavoidable additional expenditure and other adjustments.

The adjustments Budget also takes account of the requirements of provinces
and local government. Some provinces were clearly severely affected by the
floods last summer. These caused extensive damage to roads, schools,
clinics and other social and economic infrastructure. An amount of R300
million was allocated in the main Budget for infrastructure spending to
four of the provinces that suffered the most damage - the Eastern Cape,
KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and the Northern Province.

The adjustments estimate makes available a further R595 million to
provinces to continue rebuilding infrastructures that were damaged in the
floods. This will be financed partly from unallocated funds that were
initially reserved for poverty relief and infrastructure investment.

The adjustments estimate further includes R600 million to cover other
unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure at provincial level. We should
remember that provinces are mainly responsible for the delivery of social
services in the country, and our Government puts heavy emphasis on this
social spending. This allocation assists provinces in accommodating
pressing spending pressures in education, health care and welfare services.

A substantial share of this allocation will go to the child support grant.
This programme was introduced two years ago at a rate of R100 per child
under the age of seven years. At the time it was projected that the grant
would cover just over 3 million children across the country and that the
target would be reached by 2002-03, which translates to just over R3
billion.

As people learn about the grant and the systems to register beneficiaries
improve, the take-up rate is accelerating. This has contributed to an
increased expenditure on welfare from 17,8% of total provincial expenditure
in 1996-97 to a budgeted level of 19% in the current financial year. It is
gratifying to note the improved service delivery capacity of provincial
welfare departments that has contributed to increased take-up of the grant.

We recognise that local authorities will incur additional costs owing to
demarcation and amalgamation of municipal areas following elections later
this year. An amount of R100 million is allocated to local government to
assist with these additional expenses.

Let me comment briefly on two adjustments by Treasury that affect
allocations to the provinces and all national departments. Firstly, we have
an estimated salary and fuel costs increases. The recent agreement with
public sector unions in the 2000 salary negotiations provides for an
average salary increase of 6,5%. The increase is higher than the budgeted
for provision of 5,5%, but is in line with the expected inflation for the
financial year.

We also recognise that high fuel costs will impact on departmental budgets.
An additional R820 million is therefore allocated to national and
provincial departments to accommodate improvements in conditions of service
and higher costs associated with rising fuel prices.

Secondly, there is the payment of birthday bonuses from January to March
2001. In the old days, there was no such thing as a thirteenth cheque in
the Public Service. Public servants, I am told, got holiday bonuses in
September - R240 if one was married and R120 if one was single. I am not
sure what would have happened if there were polygamous marriages, but this
was all that was allowed for. I suppose the assumption was that one could
keep a civil servant happy if one paid for at least one trip to Durban a
year. When the holiday bonuses were changed to a 13th cheque - about 20
years ago - this was conveniently announced after the holidays in January.
But there was no money left in the last three months of the fiscal year to
pay for those whose birthdays fell between January and March. So, everybody
born between January and April was paid in April. Of such details, our
history is made.

Now the Government is officially recognising that people can be born in the
last three months of the financial year. We were persuaded in this by
Minister Valli Moosa who does not qualify for a 13th cheque because he is a
Member of Parliament. But he was born, he told us, within the first three
years of the fiscal year. Sorry, the first three months of the calender
year, rather. We will now pay them their bonuses in their proper birthday
months, a system which employees have indicated they prefer. It will also
make our cash flow during the financial year a lot smoother. This will cost
us R975 million this year to bring that forward from April to this fiscal
year. I should point out that it is a once-off expenditure. It will save us
money next April, as we will only be paying bonuses to those who actually
have birthdays in that month.

There are other minor adjustments for self-financing expenditure.
Correctional Services, for instance, will be allowed to retain R2,2 million
obtained through the sale of products. Education received various donations
to fund the National Teacher Awards and the SADC Essay Competition, whilst
Enviromental Affairs and Tourism will receive R10 million to assist in
cleaning up the aftermath of the ``treasure'' oil spill, which we expect to
recover from the insurers, and which may go some way, in an ecological
sense, to off-setting the missing tanks.

The adjustments estimate provide for roll-overs of R2,077 billion from last
year. At this stage, we anticipate that about R2 billion will be unspent
this year, leaving a balance of R77 million to add to the expected level of
expenditure. In all, the adjustments estimate provides for R3,9 billion in
additional expenditure. At the time of the main Budget, we set aside R2
billion for these contingencies. The House will be pleased to know that the
shortfall of R1,9 billion will be made up without affecting the deficit.

Income tax is expected to amount to R1,3 billion more than budgeted, mainly
due to higher collection on companies, secondary tax on companies, and tax
on retirement funds. And greater consumption of imported goods over the
past year has meant higher VAT collections.

I am pleased to be able to report that we now expect total revenue to be
R1,8 billion higher than the February estimates, and the costs of servicing
debt would be R142 million less than the budget estimate. This leaves a
deficit unchanged at about 2,6% of GDP.

In conclusion, let me say that the changing weather patterns, both in the
Antarctic and Mpumalanga, account for several of the allocations the House
is asked to consider. Perhaps, again my colleague in Environmental Affairs
and Tourism can direct his attention to the global warming that causes the
ice shelf to crack up or the floods in the Lowveld. In fact, the cracking
of the ice shelf cause the floods in the Lowveld there. It is the same kind
of logic that says that something the Deputy President said in Namibia
yesterday must have caused the rand to move. It is the same kind of logic.
[Laughter.] But for the moment, such predictions are beyond the scope of
the Treasury.
However, we believe - and the Treasury committee aims to ensure - that
technical adjustments are minimised. We are proud of the fact that the
adjustments of the total expenditure level is modest - about 0,8%.

We know we cannot foresee everything and we also know that our duty, as an
elected Government, is to be flexible enough to meet the needs of our
people when they suffer severe losses, as was the case with the terrible
floods last summer. But we hope that through our planning, consultations,
and through the knowledge of our country - and indeed the world - we will
soon arrive at a st a:situation in which our contingency provision covers
the expenditure that is simply not possible to budget for.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the President, members of
the Treasury committee and my Cabinet colleagues for their support and
commitment to ensure fiscal discipline and targeted spending that gives our
country real value for money. [Applause.]

                            FIREARMS CONTROL BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, the new Firearms
Control Bill is a milestone in the criminal justice system of South Africa.
It introduces a new era in the battle against violent crime.

It would not have been possible to achieve the high standards set in this
Bill without the active involvement of South African citizens in the
consultation process. I would like to thank everyone who has made
representations to the portfolio committee. These contributions from all
the opposing perspectives on gun control have made it possible to achieve
the insight needed to produce a well-balanced result.

It is clear from the inputs received by the portfolio committee from the
variety of witnesses, including Gun-free South Africa and particularly the
women's groups, that there is an overwhelming support for our endeavour to
deal a decisive blow against firearm violence. [Applause.] I can assure
members that their support for our campaigns against criminal elements is
valued very highy.

A special word of appreciation must be given to Mr George and the portfolio
committee for their work on this Bill. The professional way in which this
committee has dealt with the opposing perspectives presented to them,
epitomises the value of true democracy. Many constructive changes were made
to the original draft, demonstrating an unequivocal commitment to the
values on which the new South African society is based. A special word of
sincere gratitude also goes to everyone who has assisted the portfolio
committee in its daunting task.

Firearms are almost, without exception, at the centre of all instances
involving serious violence in South Africa. In many of these instances
there is also a link with alcohol or drug abuse. These facts receive
special recognition in the provisions of the Bill.

The Bill is not aimed at law-abiding citizens. On the contrary, it embodies
their indignation against firearm violence and sends a strong message that
enough is enough. We will not tolerate the perpetration of violence any
longer and we shall fight it with all the means at our disposal. The Bill
is a decisive step to achieve this goal.

The Bill is aimed at strict and efficient gun control without sacrificing
legitimate needs of citizens to posses firearms. Its ultimate goal is to
disarm the criminals without compromising the rights of innocent persons to
defend themselves. Accordingly, severe penalties of up to 25 years
imprisonment may be imposed on criminals who are found guilty of illegal
trafficking in firearms, or who are caught with unlicensed firearms.

On the other hand, a legal firearm owner, without any special need for a
large number of firearms, will be allowed to licence a handgun or shotgun
for purposes of self-defence, and in circumstance where such a firearm
would not provide sufficient protection, he or she will also be allowed a
semi-automatic rifle or a shotgun for self-defence.

Furthermore, the legal firearm owner will be allowed to use any hunting or
sports shooting firearm licenced to him or her - ie up to three additional
firearms for occasional hunters or sport shooters - for self-defence.

That would give him or her a more than adequate choice of firearms to use
for self-defence in terms of this Bill. This fact demonstrates conclusively
that the Bill will ensure that legal gun owners are empowered to arm
themselves properly against any onslaught from criminal elements. There
are, accordingly, no grounds for any concern that the Bill might disarm
honest citizens.

The Bill introduces a variety of measures aimed at disarming the criminals
and ensuring that they will not escape from the new longer arm of the law.
The registrar will not be allowed to issue out firearm licences to
criminals. Furthermore, licenced gun owners who become criminals will be
declared unfit to own firearms and their firearms will be seized and
destroyed. This disqualification will not only be applicable to persons who
are guilty of violent crimes and sexual abuse, with special emphasis on the
evil of domestic violence, but also to those who are guilty of crimes
involving dishonesty, or the abuse of alcohol or drugs.

The Bill introduces a dispensation in which the competence of gun-owners
will be ensured. It provides for competency training and testing for every
person applying for a firearm licence, unfitness declaration by the courts
and the registrar, and for periodic relicencing, to ensure that persons who
are or who become incompetent are not allowed to have firearms in their
possession.
The Bill allows the police to obtain and examine fingerprints and other
body prints, as well as genetic and other bodily samples to include or
exclude persons as suspects. Investigative powers granted in the Bill go
beyond those presently at the disposal of the police in terms of the
Criminal Procedure Act and other empowering legislation. A hi-tech
information network linked to a comprehensive, up-to-date database will be
the cornerstone of the new infrastructure which will ensure the efficiency
of the investigation of firearm-related crimes. This will not only include
all the information which may be necessary for the efficient investigation
of crime, but will also feature ultramodern facilities such as the
electronic identification of fingerprints.

Although the Bill does not create reversed onus presumption, it limits the
rights of persons accused of possessing firearms without a licence. The
limitation is done in accordance with the provisions of section 36 of the
Constitution and with due regard to the judgments of our Constitutional
Court. The presumptions will level the playing field and empower the
prosecuting authority to prevent unwarranted acquittals.

No unjustified inbalance is created by these presumptions, because the onus
will be on the state to prove the guilt of the accused beyond all
reasonable doubt. However, the accused will, in appropriate circumstances,
be forced to produce evidence to create a reasonable doubt or to risk
conviction by remaining silent where a presumption of possession of a
firearm is raised against him or her in court.

The Bill recognises the need to involve every citizen in the fight against
the proliferation of illegal firearms. It places a duty on everyone to be
alert to the existence of illegal firearms and to provide the police with
all the relevant information to empower the criminal justice system to deal
with those offenders.

Anyone who wishes to shirk this responsibility and to side with the
possessor of an illegal firearm will also acquire the obligation to share
the punishment. Boontjie kry sy loontjie. [You reap what you sow].

Many legal firearms in South Africa have found their way into the hands of
criminals and have become illegal firearms. The Firearms Control Bill is
calculated to halt this unacceptable trend. Not only private individuals,
but also the state must ensure that firearms are kept out of the reach of
criminals. Accordingly, the Bill will ensure that private gun owners are
empowered, through competency training, with all the skills of a
responsible gun ownership.

In recognition of the fact that official institutions, including the SA
Police Service and the SA National Defence Force, share the blame with
private individuals for the current proliferation of all illegal firearms,
an entire chapter of the Bill is devoted to ensuring more efficient control
over state-owned firearms. These measures include a permit system, reliable
databases of state-owned firearms and a variety of other provisions aimed
at enhancing strict and reliable control over these firearms. I shall also
assume personal responsibility to promulgate regulations which will set
very high standards of competence for official employees who may be issued
with state-owned firearms.

In view of the fact that licenced firearms provide a pool of firearms that
may be stolen or otherwise acquired illegally by criminals, it is necessary
to restrict the number of these firearms by licencing only those firearms
for which a legitimate need exists.

Although the Bill does not restrict the number of firearms which may be
acquired by businesses which use firearms as tools of their trade, or by
dedicated hunters, dedicated sports persons and firearm collectors, the
test for the acquisition of every licence is the existence of a real need
for that firearm. Persons who do not comply with the requirements of the
Bill to fall within one of these categories will normally not be allowed to
acquire more than four firearms, of which a maximum of two may be handguns.

The Bill focuses on the limitation of the number of handguns, because it is
mostly handguns that are used in the commission of firearm crimes in South
Africa. Handguns are also the prime target of criminals who steal firearms
to use in the commission of crimes. I tender no apology for the severe
penalties that are imposed on those who dare defy the provisions of the
Bill.

People who facilitate the provision of illegal firearms to criminals or who
otherwise contribute to the development of a culture of illegal firearm
possession are dangerous criminals themselves and must suffer the
consequences of their socially destructive behaviour. The maximum penalty
of 25 years provided for in the Bill in appropriate cases should indicate
to potential criminals that we will not tolerate their deviant conduct and
that we shall not hesitate to remove them from society.

The Bill provides for administrative fines to be imposed by the registrar
in certain circumstances. These fines are very high in appropriate case and
will ensure effective punishment of offenders without overburdening our
courts. Designated firearms officers will be appointed at police station
level, to assume responsibility for all matters relating to the
implementation of the the firearm legislation. These officers will play a
pivotal role in the new despensation. They will represent the authority of
the registrar at local level and ensure compliance with the legislation all
over South Africa.

Gun ownership requires a very high level of responsibility. The appropriate
age of responsibility was debated extensively in the portfolio committee.
According to some of the witness who have made representations to the
committee, the age limit should be determined at 25. After due
consideration of all the representations, it was decided that persons of
and above the age of 21 will be allowed to obtain competency certificates
in terms of this Bill.

This age limit may be lowered if special circumstances require a younger
person to acquire the firearm licence. Such circumstances may include the
fact that such younger person is a dedicated hunter or a sportsperson, a
business owner or is fully employed and needs a competency certificate or a
firearm licence in his or her possession.

In conclusion, I would like to avail myself of the opportunity, once again,
to thank all those who have made the finalisation of this legislation
possible. They must be assured that they have contributed to a worthy cause
that will make a decisive difference in the fight against crime in our
country.

Then, just a small notice, on page 12, line 35, in clause 9(3) the word
``not'' must be inserted between the words ``is'' and ``unfit''.
[Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Speaker, hon Minister Tshwete, hon Ministers and hon
members, I rise to support this Bill which is an honest and serious step
towards bringing down the levels of crime in our country. There can be no
doubt that South Africa faces enormous challenges in its efforts to bring
down the levels of violent crimes which is our inheritance of decades of
injustice, underdevelopment, repression and revolution. We must accept,
from the very onset, that there are no easy solutions and quick fixes. No
one piece of legislation will solve the problems of crime in this country.

This Bill aims at making a contribution towards lowering the levels of
crime, but it is not a solution to all the ills of crime in this society.
The Bill is based on the premise that increased availability and abuse of
firearms and ammunition has contributed significantly to the high levels of
crime in our society, as it is put in our preamble. I know some members
were very set against that preamble, but that preamble states what is
happening in this country. It states the facts. It does not state what
people would like to know or hear.

The purpose of this Bill is to prevent the proliferation of illegal
firearms, and usher in strict control over legal firearms. The legal supply
of firearms is fuelled by losses and thefts of legally owned firearms from
both the individuals and the state. So, the argument that the people who
own firearms legally are all responsible people is false. [Interjections.]

Hon MEMBER: They are not!

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Speaker, when this Bill was introduced there were hues
and cries about the draft process. Some people alleged that there was a
conspiracy by the secretariat and some foreign countries to disarm white
people in South Africa. The pro-gun lobby groups repeated this, even
suggesting that there is a hidden agenda by the state to disarm law-abiding
citizens in order to embark on a genocide. [Interjections.] Some pro-gun
lobby groups even said our country is more like Burundi to the extent that
what we are doing is a black government which is aimed at killing people.
[Interjections.] Again, those remarks were unfortunate. [Interjections.]

Some of the members in this Parliament threatened to leave the country if
this Bill becomes law. [Interjections.]
Mr M E GEORGE: Mr Chairperson, I must say that we have traveled a long way
since those emotional outbursts. [Interjections.] During the debate, nobody
talked about leaving, and all the MPs are still in this Parliament.
[Laughter.] Nobody, in the process of debating and understanding each
other, even talked about the intentions of disarming whites. Almost all the
parties, in spite of their differences, did admit that this was an honest
endeavour to deal with crime, regardless of whether there were shortcomings
or not, it was agreed that the aim was to deal with crime.

I want to say that the passing of this Bill is a major victory for
democracy in South Africa. This Bill gives powers and simplifies the work
of the police to deal with violent crimes. We will, of course, as this
Parliament, exercise our oversight to make sure that these powers are not
abused. All parties in our portfolio committee agreed that there is a
firearm problem in South Africa. They also agreed that there is a need to
make sure that firearms are in the possession of highly responsible people.

To show how parties have moved closer together on these issues, Chapter 5
which deals with competency certificates was unanimously endorsed by all
parties. There were, in actual fact, few sections which some opposition
parties did not agree with. I hope that those who were not in our committee
will not come here and disagree with what we had agreed upon in the
portfolio committee. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

This, to me, is a positive development if one considers the negative
atmosphere at the beginning of the discussion. Let me state categorically
that the aim of this Bill, as the Minister said, is not to disarm whites or
law-abiding citizens. It is in the interests of the ANC that there is peace
and stability in this country, so that it can hasten its transformation
programme. There is no way therefore that the ANC can, on its own, create
destabilisation in this country, because disarming whites would create the
opposite of what we want to achieve.

Some opposition parties voiced strong opposition to powers given to the
Minister. The ANC is very clear about the role of different structures of
Government, especially that of the executive and the legislature. But we
must accept that it would be practically impossible for the Minister to
come to Parliament for every action as other parties would like us to
believe. [Interjections.] On key policy issues, ... [Interjections.] ...
Parliament must still approve the actions of the Minister, such as with
clause 140 which deals with amnesty.

People complained about relicencing and retesting for competency
certificates. But, strangely, all of us agreed that people do change in
terms of their behaviour, whether that is forced by circumstance or new
conditions of life. What harm does it cause if one is tested and found to
be still fit to own a firearm?

There were also allegations that the Central Firearms Register is in a
complete mess and will not cope with the new demands. Our visit, by all
parties on Friday, to the Central Firearms Register did not only reveal
that they are ready and well-organised, but that they are well in advance
in preparing for the new law. The designated Firearm Officer pilot project
is already in operation in the Western Cape, and 35 police stations have
been targeted.

There were comparisons with Canada which, to me, were ill-considered as
Canada had to start everything from scratch. It was because of this that
Canada had to spend huge sums of money. But South Africa is not like
Canada. Here we have a Central Firearms Register which has been operating
for years, and all members agreed that it is well-equipped.

While institutions will be exempted from the competency certificate, the
members of these institutions will not be exempted. The Minister, in the
regulations, will come with mechanisms testing these members and their
testing will be even stricter than that of members of society, as they are
supposed to be exemplary.

The question that the department must still consider seriously is: What do
we do with members who fail the competency certificate? That the national
commissioner must still consider seriously. I want to touch briefly on the
issue of firearms for self-defence. Anthony Altbeker's recent research,
which examined closed dockets, reveals that this thing of firearms for self-
defence is a myth. Victims in possession of firearms were nearly four times
more likely to have their firearms stolen than to use them in self-defence.
In only 4% of the cases examined was a firearm actually used by the victim
of a third party defence and in only 2% of cases was the victim able to use
his firearm in self-defence. So the question of people possessing firearms
for self-defence is a myth.

While a firearm can assist a potential victim to resist attack, the chances
of doing so are moderated by it being the attacker's privilege to dictate
the circumstances under which the crime will take place. As to why we do
not target handguns as some people suggested - that is pistols and
revolvers, which are used prominently to commit crime - the answer is
simple: We cannot make laws piecemeal. What happens when criminals change
to another firearm? Do we have to come to Parliament and make law for
rifles? That does not make sense. We must accept that firearms cause misery
and they are used in the killing of police officers, in the taxi violence,
in domestic violence and in other sexual abuses like rape.

While we would have liked the age limit to be raised to 25 years, we were
persuaded to accept 21 years as a reasonable age. Most people involved in
crime in South Africa are between the ages of 17 and 24, and that is why we
would have preferred 25 years. At the age of 25 years, one has reached a
maturity level and acquired responsibility that make crime less attractive.
What makes us comfortable is that reaching the age of 21 years does not
necessarily means that one will automatically get a competency certificate.
One will still have to go through competency testing procedures which will
help as a safeguard to make sure that firearms are in responsible hands.

I want to say to those people who will have excess firearms when this Bill
becomes law that they have five years to sell their excess firearms,
failing which they will have to surrender them to the state for
destruction. Unfortunately, if they cannot sell them themselves they cannot
expect the state to compensate them, as the state will only be taking them
for destruction. The transitional arrangements are fair and adequate to
cover any initial problems.

I want to thank all parties for their co-operation. I also want to mention
Dr Fangroff and his team for their sterling work and the legal team of the
department led by Adv Louis Kok. Without their assistance, finishing this
Bill would have been a complete nightmare. I want to thank the people who
supported this Bill and even those who did not support it, because, even
though they did not support the Bill, their arguments made us wiser in
drafting this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker and the honourable House, the Firearms Control
Bill is one of the more controversial Bills to have come before the
National Assembly in recent years. Over the past few months, members of the
portfolio committee have heard testimony from many members of the public
and from representatives of various organisations reflecting a wide variety
of attitudes towards the Bill. We have listened to them and we have learned
from them.

This Bill arises out of the alarming increase in illegal weapons in South
Africa. Illegal weapons come from many sources, but in recent years the
number of firearms falling into criminal hands as a result of loss, theft
and robbery of licensed firearms has dramatically increased. The IFP does
not doubt the need for tighter laws to address this serious situation.
Nevertheless, our approach to the Bill is to ensure that the legislation
strikes the right balance between reducing the number of firearms in
circulation and protecting the right of law-abiding citizens to possess
firearms for the purposes of self-defence, hunting and other leisure
pursuits.

The IFP listened carefully to the concerns expressed by the public during
the course of the public hearing into this Bill. The issues raised at the
public hearing and our own experience indicated that the Bill required
signicant amendments to ensure that its flaws were ironed out. Our main
concern has been to reduce the unreasonable bureaucratic burden that the
Bill placed upon the individual and the state. We have not been succesful
in every case, but the majority party has shown a willingness to listen to
arguments and make relevant amendments in certain areas, and we are
grateful for that. The Bill as a result is much improved.

Our key concerns during the committee deliberations were the minimum age of
ownership of firearms, the amnesty provisions, the rules on inherited
firearms as they affected senior citizens, the schedule of penalties
imposed by the Bill, the rules governing the implementation of different
restrictions, regulations for different parts of South Africa and the issue
of gun-free zones. The firearms Bill originally proposed the minimum age of
18 years. Our ANC colleagues, as Mluleki George was saying, raised this to
25 years. The IFP and some colleagues in the opposition parties agreed that
an 18-year-old was too young to own a lethal weapon. Nevertheless, we felt
that the ANC proposal of 25 years went too far. We all agreed, therefore,
that 21 would be the right age accordingly, and we are thankful to the ANC
for listening to that although, there were some hard blows.

We were also concerned not to place unfair requirements upon our elderly
citizens.

Kulabo abanezibhamu ezamukelekile abazithola koyise nakoyisemkhulu
kubonakale kungubuhlakani ukuba, uma sebekhulile ngeminyaka, izibhamu lezo
abacela ukuthi kube ngezabo baye kozibhalisa ngokusemthethweni bathole
namapheshana azo, bese bevuma ukuthi lezo zibhamu zilungiswe khona zingeke
zikwazi ukudubula ukuze zihlale kungezabo ngaso sonke isikhathi futhi ukuze
bakwazi ukuzigcina lezo zibhamu ngoba zisemthethweni.

Okunye esikhulume ngakho yilokhu kokuthi abantu mabaxolelwe ngokuthi
banezibhamu ezingekho emthethweni. Kuzokhumbuleka ukuthi sicele ukuthi
uNgqongqoshe angabaxoleli abantu engalulethile lapha uhla lwalabo bantu
abafuna ukuxolelwa ukuze beze sizobabona ukuthi bangobani bona labo
abagqiba izibhamu, nokuthi babezigqibelani zona lezo zibhamu bengazivezi
isikhathi eside.

Kufuneka ngisho kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi besikhathazeke kakhulu, njengeqembu,
sibona isikhathi sokuboshwa kwabantu sehlukene. Bekuthi lapho kuvela khona
ukuhlukunyezwa kwabantu kuthiwe isigwebo esikhulu kunazo zonke yiminyaka
emihlanu bese kuthi uma umuntu ekhohlwe ukutholela isibhamu sakhe imvume,
ayesinikwe nguyisemkhulu, kuthiwe yiminyaka engama-25. Kodwa mangithokoze
ngokuthi konke okwenzekile kuwulungisile lowo msebenzi ukuze kukwazi
ukuqondana kahle ukuhlawuliswa kwabantu.

Ngifuna ukusho futhi kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi kwenziwe ngawo wonke amandla
ukuthi uma uNgqongqoshe enza umsebenzi, akwazi ukuthintana nezifunda ukuze
izifunda zonke zibe semgqeni owodwa ekwenzeni ukuthi lo mThetho-sivivinywa
ukwazi ukusebenza kuwo wonke amacala. Ngakho-ke ngeke kwaba kuhle futhi
ngeke kwaba ngubuhlakani ukuthi uNgqongqoshe adumbe nje isifunda esithile
bese ethi kuleso sifunda izibhamu ezithile zizoqedwa kuso, uma engazange
axhumane kahle nabanye ozakwabo bakulezo zifunda ukuze bakwazi ukubambisana
naye khona izigebengu eziphethe izibhamu ezingekho emthethweni zizoboshwa.

Kufuneka ngisho futhi kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi siyathokoza kakhulu ngokuthi,
kulezo zindawo esithi ziyizindawo okungephathwe zibhamu kuzo, uNgqongqoshe
angakwazi ukubeka amandla okuthi bavikeleke abantu. UNgqongqoshe unelungelo
lokuzisho lezo zindawo futhi akhululeke ukuzisho. Kodwa, kulezo zindawo
ezifana nezikole namasonto, kuyoba kuhle indlela yakhe idlule kulabo bantu
abaphethe lezo zindawo, njengemikhandlu ephethe izikole kanye nabadala
bamasonto, kube yibona abamnika igunya uNgqongqoshe ukuze bakwazi
ukubambisana naye ekwenzeni lowo msebenzi.

Mangisho kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi, ekuphethweni kwawo wonke lo msebenzi omkhulu
kangaka, ngifuna ukubonga kakhulu kusihlalo ngokuthi uliyekile ikhanda
lakhe elibukhuni - leli alifunda ebholeni lombhoxo - walalela uma sikhuluma
ngenkathi senza lo msebenzi ukuze sikwazi ukwenza lo mThetho-sivivinywa ube
nempumelelo. [Uhleko.]

Mangisho futhi kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi mayelana nokusebenza kwethu ngalo
mThetho-sivivinywa, alikho nelilodwa iqembu eliphume lingenabo ubuhlakani
bokuthi kuyadingeka ukuthi zincishiswe izibhamu ezikhona ezigcwele
ezandleni ezingafanele. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[It will be wise of those who have inherited legal firearms from their
grandparents to obtain licences for them when they are adult. They should
accept that their firearms will be refurbished in such a way that they
cannot shoot. This will be done so that they will remain theirs legally and
forever.

Another thing that we mentioned was that people should not be forgiven when
they have illegal firearms. It should be remembered that we said the hon
the Minister should not forgive people without first bringing the list of
their names here so that they will appear before us. This will enable us to
know these people who hide guns and we will get to know why they are doing
that and why the have not disclosed their guns for so long.

We were worried when we saw the difference in period during which people
were arrested. When people had been victimised, it was said that the
highest sentence was 5 imprisonment. But when a person forgot to obtain a
licence of the gun that he inherited from his grandfather, he was sentenced
25 years in prison. I am happy that everything that has been done, involved
the rectification of that error so that the pernalisation of people will be
done in a correct manner.
I would like to inform the hon the Minister that all possible means have
been tried to ensure that when the hon the Minister does this job, is able
to contact with all provinces so that they will be on one line in ensuring
that this Bill applies in all cases. Therefore, it will not be good, and it
will also not be a wise move if the hon the Minister targets one province
and says he will confiscate all guns in that province, and doing this
without first consulting with his counterparts in those provinces. He must
first consult with them so that they will work together with him in
arresting criminals who have illegal firearms.

I would also like to say to the hon the Minister that in the provinces that
we termed as gunless, the hon the Minister can give certain powers so that
people will be protected. The hon the Minister has a right to pinpoint
those areas, and he must be free to do so. However, in institutions like
schools and churches, it will be better if he first consults with people in
those institutions, like school governing bodies and elders of the
churches. It should be they who give him permission so that they will be
able to co-operate with him in carrying out this task.

I would like to say to the hon the Minister that in concluding this big
job, I thank the hon chairperson for not being stone-headed just for a
change. He learned to be stone-headed when he was a rugby player. But in
this case, instead of being stubborn, he listened when we were doing this
job which enabled us to make this Bill a succeess. [Laughter.]

I would also like to say to the hon the Mininster that regarding the
implimentation of this Bill, all political parties realised that there is a
need to reduce firearms that are in the hands of the wrong people.
[Applause.]]

Mr M C J VAN SCHALKWYK: Madam Speaker, the debate about firearms in South
Africa is very different from the debate in other countries. In the United
States, the debate is between those who argue that there should be no
restriction at all on gun ownership and those who believe that there should
be no guns at all in that country. In South Africa, the debate is between
those, like the Democratic Alliance, the New NP, the DP and the FA, who
strongly support regulated and responsible private ownership and use of
firearms, and those who have naively misunderstood or intentionally
misrepresented the link between legal and illegal firearms. This debate is
not about burning emotions and sentimental attachment to firearms, as many
of the more right-wing parties in this House have argued, nor is it about a
rosy view of life held by the advocates of a South Africa free of guns.

It is about principles. The New NP, DP and FA's position on this Bill has
always been one that is based on principle. We support the right of South
Africans to defend their families and their property. We support competency
testing, responsible ownership and use of firearms, and we support strict
sentencing of those who abuse their firearms.

Om 'n wet te maak wat gebaseer is op fiksie is soos om 'n huis te bou
sonder 'n fondament. Dit is van korte duur. Hierdie wetsontwerp is gebaseer
op die aanname dat 'n vermindering in die aantal wettige vuurwapens
outomaties sal lei tot 'n vermindering in die aantal onwettige vuurwapens.
Soos die ontbrekende fondament ondermyn hierdie aanname alles wat hierdie
wetsontwerp wil bereik.

Daar is geen oortuigende bewyse om hierdie aanname te bevestig nie. Tog is
dit die argument wat die meeste gebruik word, soos weer vanmiddag, om
hierdie wetsontwerp te verdedig. Die regulering van wettige vuurwapens en
die vermindering van die aantal onwettige vuurwapens is twee heeltemal
aparte kwessies wat deur middel van verskillende metodes en instrumente
opgelos moet word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[To draft an Act which is based on fiction is like building a house without
a foundation. It does not last long. This Bill is based on the assumption
that a reduction in the number of legal firearms will automatically lead to
a reduction in the number of illegal firearms. Like the missing foundation,
this assumption undermines everything which this Bill seeks to achieve.

There is no convincing proof to confirm this assumption. Yet this is the
argument which is most frequently advanced, as was again the case this
afternoon, to defend this Bill. The regulation of legal firearms and the
reduction of the number of illegal firearms are two totally separate issues
which must be resolved by means of different methods and instruments.]

The chairperson of the committee, Mr George, publicly acknowledged that
this Bill is not aimed at illegal firearms but rather at making it as
difficult as possible to obtain a firearm. Making it difficult to obtain a
firearm legally and making it difficult to obtain an illegal firearm are
two very different things.

The sources of illegal firearms in South Africa are too numerous to
mention, and many of the largest sources of illegal firearms in our country
- the police, army and the Government itself - are not even bound by the
provisions of this Bill. It has been stated time and again that this Bill
has been drafted to address criminal violence and illegal firearms. Yet, Mr
George has also argued that the Bill focuses on legal firearms because it
is, and I quote ``impossible to make laws for criminals''. However,
followed to its logical conclusion, this argument would have us believe
that there is no reason to draft laws at all, other than to regulate those
who choose to obey them. The object of laws should be to bring criminals
under control and not to exclude them and overregulate law-abiding
citizens. [Interjections.]

This Bill will not be affordable or implementable. The R1 billion, over
four years, that has been set aside to cover the costs of its
implementation does not begin to cover the hidden costs of this Bill. The
conservative estimate is that the Central Firearms Register will have to
handle about 150 000 licensing and competency certificates every month. It
is currently managing about 9 000 a month, with a backlog of about 35 000.
Even assuming that the current budget of R1 billion over four years is
accurate, such resources could provide more than 8 000 new police officers
to patrol our streets and to tackle crime at the frontlines.

It is an indisputable fact that a person armed with a firearm - I have
listened in amazement to Mr George this afternoon - has a much higher
chance of surviving an attack than an unarmed person. This amounts to 250%
in the case of women in circumstances of rape. In our country, this is not
simply a nice-to-know statistic, it is a daily truth and fact. In some of
our provinces, there is only one police officer for every 240 km - only one
police officer. There is only one patrol vehicle for every 1 141 km. I have
listened to Mr George this afternoon. I say to him that, everyday in our
country, more than 60 people are being murdered and killed. More than 130
women are being raped, on average, everyday in our country. And he says
that legal firearms do not contribute to self-defence!
This Bill illustrates the alarming trend in that Parliament is more and
more being sidelined and that the Cabinet continues to seize
responsibilities and powers that rightly rest in this House. We were all
encouraged when the ANC members who are in this committee agreed with us,
the opposition, that the Minister should not have the sole power to outlaw
certain types of firearms without first getting the approval of this House.
But, at the very last minute, the ANC members of the committee caved in to
Cabinet pressure and sold out the power of Parliament. This is another
example of how we are moving away from parliamentary law-making towards
laws made by a select few in the Cabinet, the executive, who are not
accountable to the people in this country.

The DP, the New NP and the FA - the Democratic Alliance - will not and
cannot support such a Bill. It is time for the ANC Government to stop
attacking the easy targets such as legal firearm owners and to start to
deal with the root causes of crime and violence. What we really needed was
a Bill that addressed the issue of illegal firearms, which amount to more
than 2,5 million at this very moment in our country.

This Bill will not take a single illegal firearm out of the hands of one
criminal. This Bill will continue to tip the balance in favour of criminals
and against law-abiding citizens. [Applause.]

Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, members of the House, hon Minister, it is of
utmost importance that it is clear in the minds of all that the DP supports
the principle of fair, sound and logical gun control - control that is
capable of being implemented. In fact, we have never been against it. What
we are implacably against is government by stealth, as practised by the
ANC, and their attempts at misleading Parliament and the public.

Starting with the dubious origin of this Bill, which led to the pantomime
of the Minister denying, in this House, the very existence of the draft,
and right through the process, the ANC played games with a large number of
people who were serious about getting the best possible Bill before
Parliament. As late as Tuesday, this week, the ANC once again sprung
surprises on the committee by voting against excellent amendments that had
been unanimously accepted in the committee during the formal debate. The
ANC has tended to favour foreign sectarian advice whilst spurning excellent
domestic contributions. In this, they have struck at the very heart of
established traditions and value systems within South Africa.
[Interjections.]

AN HON MEMBER: Whose values?

Mr A J BOTHA: That hon member will hear in a moment if he listens. Let
there be no doubt in the minds of anyone what these traditions and value
systems are and were. From time immemorial, and in every culture that
comprises this wonderfully diverse society of ours, weapons were utilised
to hunt and guard against danger. Hunting is still very important as it
attracts considerable direct investment in the otherwise economically
depressed rural areas and it plays a significant role in the tourism
industry.

Anybody who claims that the citizens of this country are not exposed to
danger at present is, indeed, living on a different planet from the rest of
us. The members of our society most exposed to violent aggression are the
very poor, who live in shacks that afford little physical protection
against violent criminals and people living on isolated farms.

These categories of people are at least four times as exposed to violence
and murder as the average South African, but seventy times more exposed
than members of this House. Those people need means of self-defence as much
as, if not more than, our forebears did. Under these circumstances, it is
shameful that this Bill requires them to prove their need for firearms to a
Government that has failed dismally to offer them the most basic protection
against rampant criminality.

There are elements in this Bill which should horrify any democrat,
including democrats in the ANC, if they still exist there. From Chapters 2
through to 10, it was accepted, also by the ANC, that the Minister required
prior approval from Parliament in the exercise of certain powers. At the
last minute, the ANC did an about-face and shamefully voted down the
oversight role of Parliament, thereby granting the Minister legislative
powers.

Chapter 15 deals with presumptions. In section 120, there is a presumption
of guilt where the onus is placed on the citizen to prove that reasonable
steps were taken to prevent others from contravening sections of this Bill.
Presumptions do not belong in a sound legal system, and certainly not in
our country, where police tend to arrest suspects before completing their
investigations, rather than later. This can easily lead to innocents being
arrested and incarcerated with hardened criminals, with all the concomitant
horrors and dangers involved. In addition, it is very likely that this
section will not survive constitutional scrutiny, regardless of whatever
the Minister had to say about this here today.

Worse was however to come in Chapter 16, which deals with offences and
penalties. After playing musical chairs with regard to parts of the Bill,
the ANC shockingly voted in, again at the last minute, an amendment that
contained a fiction of what should be, and not what is. Fictionalising
reality appears to be their favourite ploy. This section then read:


  Any person who is aware or who ought reasonably to be aware of ... is
  guilty of an offence.

In other words, members of this party, which constantly claims to be for
our people, were quite happy to enact legislation that would punish these
very people for actions that never took place.
It is clear that this absurdity was finally hammered home to them
yesterday, possibly by a threatening Johnny de Lange, which then led them
to approach the opposition with a supposed compromise, so that the original
amendment could now again be in the Bill. This is no compromise. They were
made aware of the grossness of their error, one does not know how, and now
they are trying to scuttle out of a corner of their own making. Thankful,
as one is that this improvement is included, one is abhorred by the
spectacle of another last-gasp change printed in today's Order Paper so
that Parliament can proceed with its work.

Lastly, I would like to draw attention to Chapter 19 where provision is
made for the Government to rob law-abiding citizens. In this chapter,
provision is made for the Minister to compensate gun owners, not
necessarily at the actual market value of the item, but instead at such a
price as he and the Minister of Finance decide that they can afford.

Let me, in conclusion, restate the DP's support for the control of legally-
owned firearms and our recognition of the need to improve the existing
legislation. This cumbersome, onerous and dangerous Bill of the ANC does
not qualify on either count, and the DP will therefore vote against it.
[Applause.]

Mr Q J KGAUWE: Madam Speaker, there are a large number of firearms, both
legal and illegal, in the hands of South Africans, especially the youth.
The number of incidents of robberies, murder and domestic violence in which
firearms are used is high.

The current system is not adequate, and it has to be improved. We must
tighten the control of possession of firearms. We are saying that for an
applicant to qualify for a possession of a firearm, he or she should be 21
years of age. One may acquire a firearm for self-defence purposes, but only
one licence per individual should be issued.

We have a new mechanism that we are going to apply. We recommend the
provision of issuing competency certificates with regular renewals of
licences, and particularly welcome the inclusion of this requirement before
an application for a licence can be considered.

Re lemogile gore batho, go akaretsa bagolo, ba le bantsi ba tlhoka
boikarabelo. Ga ba fitlhe dithunya tsa bona mo go sireletsegileng teng. Fa
mogolo a beile sethunya fa tlase ga mosamo, ngwana a ka se tsaya mme a
bolaya motho ka sona. Setifikeiti sa bokgoni se a re fa o le botlhaswa, o
palelwa ke go šuba sethunya kowa go sireletsegileng teng gonne o sena
seifi, ga nkitla o fiwa sethunya mo isagong. Se ke nngwe ya ditlhagiso tse
di leng teng. Fa o paletswe go falola setifikeiti sa bokgoni se se nang
ditshwanelo tse di rileng, ga o ne o bona sethunya.

Re letleletse masole, mapodisa le bao ba leng kwa dikgolegelong, gore ba
seka ba amiwa ke diteko tsa setifikeiti sa bokgoni, ka gonne masole ka nako
ya tiro a tshwanetse go dirisa dithunya. Le gale fa lepodisa le tswa ka
jarata, le tshwanetse gore le nne le setifikeiti sa bokgoni, ka gonne le
tla be le dirisa sethunya se e leng sa gagwe. Ga re le thibele gore le
tseye teko ya bokgoni.

E ke tsela e mokgatlo wa ANC o bonang dilo ka yona. Re na le bothata.
Mapodisa a mantsi a bolaya masika a bona. Ga a kgone go tshwara maikutlo a
bona fa ba setse ba le mo maemong a a rileng. Ke ka foo re lopang gore fa
lepodisa le se mo tirong, le tshwanetse go tsaya teko ya setifikelti sa
bokgoni.
Jaanong ke batla go umaka ditiragalo tse di diragetseng. (Translation of
Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Q J KGAUWE: We have noted that many people, including adults, are
irresponsible. They do not put their guns in safe places. If an adult hides
a gun under a pillow, a child is likely to find that gun and use it to kill
somebody. The competency certificate states that if one is irresponsible
and unable to provide a safe for one's gun, one will not be allowed to own
a gun in future. This is one of the provisions that appears in this
certifcate. If one fails this test then one will not be allowed to own a
gun.

We have exempted soldiers, police officers and prison warders from these
laws, because in times of war soldiers are supposed to carry guns. But when
a policeman or woman leaves the premises of a police station, he or she
should have a competency certificate because he or she will be using his or
her own gun. We are not preventing police officers from taking this test.

This is the way the ANC is dealing with these issues. We are faced with a
problem. Many police officers who are unable to control their tempers when
they are under stress, kill their families. That is why police officers are
required to take a competency test for when they are not on duty.

I now want to quote a few incidents that have taken place.]

Comrade Bheki Mkhize, ... a member of this House, was cold-bloodedly killed
for no apparent reason. Yet the perpetrators are earning salaries at this
stage. An irresponsible police officer decided to kill him.

Maloba Eugene Terre'Blanche o beditse motho a be a mo gobatsa. Motho o
jaanong ga a kgone go tsamaya le go itirela. Molaon was setifikeiti sa
bokgoni wa re motho yoo tshwanang le Eugene Terre'Blanche ga a ne a bona
sethunya, ka gonne ka sejatlhapi ba re ... (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[The other day Eugène Terre'Blanche attacked and injured a person. Today
this person cannot move or work. The competency certificate clearly states
that a person such as Eugène Terre'Blanche is not fit to own a gun because
...]

... he is inclined to violence.
Motho yo o jalo ga a tshwanela go bona sethunya.

Maloba rrakgwebo mongwe kwa Tshwane o tshetse ngwana ka mahura a koloi.
Motho yo jalo ga a tshwanela go bona sethunya ka gonne ... (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Such a person is also not fit to own a gun. The other day a businessman in
Pretoria poured petrol over a child. Such a person is also not fit to own a
gun because ...]

... he is inclined to violence. He is also incompetent.

Ke ka moo re tlhomang melao e e tla thusang rona rotlhe le batho ka
kakaretso. Ka bomadimabe Philip Powell wa IFP o ne, mo nakong e e fetileng,
a tsaya dithunya tsa mmuso, mme a re ke tsa gagwe. Motho yoo, go ya ka
molao o montšha, ga a tshwanela go nna le sethunya, ka gonne ga a
tshepagale. A a dule fela jalo a sena sethunya.

Fa re sekaseka mabaka ao otlhe, o tla lemoga gore re leka gore batho ba nne
le maikarabelo fa ba tshotse dithunya mo go bona. Jaanong se se nkemisang
tlhogo ke gore re lemoga gore kwa dikolong motho o kgona go tsena ka
sethunya, mme a thunye morutabana, ka gonne ba ngangisana ka mosadi. Ka
jalo re re a teko ya setifikeiti sa bokgoni e tle. Seo se tla re kgontsa go
fokotsa palo ya dinokwane. Sethunya se tshwanetse go fiwa motho yo o nang
le maikarabelo. Ga re a ikemisetsa go tlogela dithunya di tsha meka mo
pepeneneng.

Batho ba bangwe ba ba buileng mo, jaaka ba New NP le DP, ba re re file
ditona maatla. Re dumelana le bona. Fa Tona e bona sethunya fale, ga re
batle gore a palelwe ke go se tsaya. Re mo fa maatla a go se tsaya. A seke
a tla mo Palamenteng pele, ka gonne fa a dira jalo, sethunya sona se ka nne
sa sala se timela. O tshwanetse go tsaya sethunya seo, mme a re bolelle
morago. [Legofi.]

Fa ke boela kwa dikolong, re batla gore Tona adirise melao e re mo fileng
yona. A seke a tlhola a re botsa gore a dire eng. A re bolele gore dikolo
tse di rileng mo Aforika Borwa di se dumelele dithunya mo mabaleng a tsona.
Go na le barutabana le bana ba ba yang kula sekolong ka dithunya. Fa re
tlogela kgang e gore e rarabololwe ke balaodi ba sekolo, Ha bo re sa dire
molao. Balaodi ba bangwe ba dikolo ga ba na tlhaloganyo, mme ba tla gana.
[Go tsenaganong.] Ka jalo re batla Tona gore e nne le maatla a go thibela
dilo di tshwana le tseo.
Maloba re etetse Firearm Registry kwa Tshwane. Makoko a kganetso a a
makatsa. Batho ba kwa Firearm Registry ba rile ba tla kgona gore ba fe
batho dithunya. Ba re bontshintse mokgwa o ba dirisang dithunya ka ona.
Bomadimabe ke gore laesense ya sethunya ke R50. Motho o tsena fela kwa
lebenkeleng, mme a reke sethunya ka R200. Morago o duela R50 ya lae sense,
e be le gore o duetse R250 go bona sethunya se a yang go bolaya motha ka
sona. Se ga se boikarabelo, mme gape ga re itse gore a motho yoo o kgona go
dirisa sethunya seo. Mme ka gonne a se rata, o se rekile.

Batho ba kwa Firearm Registry ba re boleletse gore ka nako ele ya tlhaolele
go ne go na le mokomisenara yo o rileng. Makgowa a ne a tla go ikwadisa,
mme morago a fiwe dilaesense. Jaanong ga re itse gore makgowa a a filweng
dilaelisense a kgona go le kae, ka gonne ka nako eo go ne go sa dirisiwe
dikomputara. Motho o ne a kwadisiwa fela a be a atswa a tsamaya. Ke
bomadimabe gore kah nako e, ra bo re tshwanetse go lebelela gore ke mang yo
o nang le sethunya se se mo molaong, maikaelelo a motho ke eng me ke mang
yo o tla dirisang sethunya seo sentle. Ka tsela eo re leka go thibela
dithunya tse diseng mo molaong. [Nako e fedile.] [Legofi.] (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[We are setting up these laws to help all people. Unfortunately Philip
Powell of the IFP took state arms and claimed that they were his own. This
person, according to the new law, should not own a gun because he is not
trustworthy. Let him remain without a gun.

When one looks at all these issues one will realise that we want people to
be responsible when they carry guns with them. What astounds me is the fact
that a student goes to school and shoots a teacher dead because they may
have been quarrelling over a woman. We welcome the competency test. It will
help reduce the number of criminals. A gun should be given to a responsible
person. We should not allow guns to be used carelessly.

People from the New NP and the DP claim that we have given powers to the
Minister. We agree with them. If the hon the Minister sees a gun somewhere,
he should not encounter difficulties when he wants to confiscate that gun.
We are giving him the power to confiscate that gun. He should not first
have to come to Parliament to be empowered because by the time he does
that, the gun will have disappeared. He should confiscate that gun and
inform us later. [Applause.]

Going back to schools we want the hon the Minister to use the powers that
we have given him. He should not ask us what he should do. He should tell
us that schools should not allow guns on their premises.There are students
and teachers who go to school with guns. If we leave this matter to the
school governing bodies we will be failing in our duty. Some members of
these governing bodies are irresponsible and I know that they will refuse.
We are empowering the hon the Minister to enable him to deal with matters
such as these. [Interjections.] These opposition parties are amazing.

The other day we visited the Firearms Registry in Pretoria. The staff at
the Firearms Registry said they would be able to provide people with
firearms. They showed us the way they use guns. An unfortunate part is that
a firearm licence costs R50. Any person can just go into a shop and buy a
gun for R200. After that he or she pays the R50 licence fee and all this
amounts to R250. He then uses this gun to kill a person. This is
irresponsible because we do not know if this person can use this gun. But
because he loves the gun he buys it.
Staff at the Firearms Registry told us that during the apartheid years
there was a certain commissioner who used to issue licences to white
people. White people came and registered and were later given licences. We
do not know how many white people benefitted from this because in those
days there were no computers. A person just registered and left. It is
unfortunate that at this time we should be looking at who has a legitimate
gun, what this person's intentions are and who is using his or her gun
responsibly. In this manner we are trying to prevent the proliferation of
illegal guns. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Ms A VAN WYK: Since the very first firearm entered South Africa, South
Africans adopted a culture of firearm violence in order to deal with their
differences. It was through the barrel of a gun that a policy of oppression
was kept intact and that the minority determined the living conditions of
the majority.

It is no coincidence that an end to that oppression was not achieved
through the barrel of a gun, but was arrived at by sitting together freely
and negotiating a democratic dispensation.

The adoption of this Bill today has the potential to lead South Africa away
from seeking solutions through violent means and embark upon finding
solutions through conflict resolution. The Minister of Education, we
believe, can contribute to achieving this by creating for learners the
opportunity to acquire conflict resolution skills.

The proliferation of firearms, especially small arms, has become a growing
problem in South Africa. In order to address this problem decisively and
with lasting impact, it necessitated that the new policy regarding firearms
control be developed and that a new Bill supporting this policy be drafted.
The current Act is more than 30 years old. It was drafted under the
previous dispensation and under the old constitution. It no longer caters
for the changing society that we live in.

I hoped that I did not have to say this, but opposition to the Bill
reflects a racial prejudice founded on the belief that the majority
Government cannot be trusted with the control of firearms. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: That is nonsense.

Ms A VAN WYK: That is the truth, Boy. The new Bill provides a legal
framework within which it will be possible for responsible citizens to
legally possess a firearm. Anything that takes place outside this framework
will be illegal and, thus, empowers the SAPS with the necessary tools to
address the problem of illegal firearms in a more effective manner. The new
Bill does not disarm legal firearm owners, nor does it detract from the
right of responsible and law-abiding citizens to own a legal firearm.

I want to repeat this: Despite propaganda to the contrary, the Firearms
Control Bill does not disarm legal firearms owners. Yes, it aims to reduce
the proliferation of small arms in South Africa. Through theft and
negligence, legal firearms find their way into the hands of criminals. We
cannot deny this.

This Bill provides the Government and all political parties with the
opportunity to demonstrate their commitment to improving the plight of
women and children. The Bill goes a long way to protecting women and
children against perpetrators of violence. In many ways, it makes it
impossible for such a perpetrator to own a firearm. However, the most
serious oversight in the Bill is the absence of a mechanism to deal with
final protection orders. As the Bill reads now, it states that if a person
who served with a final protection order applies for a licence, the
registrar may declare such a person unfit to possess a firearm. It is,
thus, left to the discretion of the registrar to determine whether a final
protection order would disqualify an individual from possessing a firearm.

Furthermore, if a person is already in possession of a firearm, it will not
be removed from that person after a final protection order is served. This
state of affairs is completely unacceptable. It means that we will have to
wait for such a person to contravene the order or, in fact, physically harm
or kill their partner before we will act. Through this huge loophole, we
are actually weakening one of the very basic pillars of the Bill.

The fit and proper test is a tool to identify high-risk individuals who
should not own a firearm. The courts do not grant a final protection order
lightly. A person with such an order against him or her has clearly
displayed signs of being unfit to possess a firearm. This debate again
raises the reality that little understanding of the seriousness of domestic
violence exists. We were even told that, surely if a person emotionally
abuses their partner, it does not justify them being declared unfit to
posses a weapon.

The UDM will continue, also through the NCOP, to remedy this situation. We
welcome the renewal of licences for firearms and their owners. The current
discrepency at the Central Firearms Register is precisely because of
firearms lost, stolen or change of ownership without the register being
informed.

We do not share the pessimism insofar as this process is concerned. More
than four million vehicles are relicenced every year and, in addition, the
registration of more than one million new and used vehicles takes place per
annum. We urge the SAPS and the Minister to consider outsourcing this
administrative process to local government. Not only are they already
successfully dealing with vehicle licensing and their registration, but
furthermore, it can provide the already cash-strapped local government
structures with much-needed income.

As the UDM committed itself in its 1999 elections manifesto to work
actively to stop the proliferation of small arms, we support this Bill.
[Applause.]
Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson and the hon the Minister, it is a fact that
the overwhelming majority of firearm-related crimes in South Africa are
committed with illegal firearms. The Firearms Control Bill will neither
reduce crime nor disarm owners of illegal firearms, but it will succeed in
disempowering law-abiding citizens who want to protect themselves.

The preamble of the Bill states that ...


  the increased availability of firearms has contributed significantly to
  the high levels of vident crime in our country.

This statement is misleading because it is the increased abuse of illegal
firearms and not the availability of legal firearms that is a problem.

Government must remove illegal firearms from society and punish those that
have them. They should strive to have a violence-free and not a gun-free
South Africa, and also enforce strict rules and guidelines pertaining to
the proper storage of firearms.

We find Sections 96(3) that states that:


  ``A member of a military force of another country visiting South Africa
  in terms of an agreement between that country and South Africa is
  exempted from the provisions of this Act

both ridiculous and suspicious. How is it possible that foreign soldiers
should be granted a right that citizens are being denied in their own
country?

The ACDP rejects Chapter 15 on presumption or possession of firearms or
ammunition on the grounds that it does not protect owners of properties who
may be set up by criminals. Many residential premises are left unguarded
during the day when both parents are at work and children are at school. If
someone comes onto those premises in their absence and hides or buries
firearms or ammunition on that land, then makes a claim later that there
are firearms on that land, how will the owners of those premises prove
their innocence when the Bill presumes them guilty until proven innocent?
We find this both unconstitutional and unfair. It would be unfair to
victims of this kind of abuse.
It is equally unacceptable to give the Minister of Safety and Security the
power to declare places such as schools and churches as firearm-free zones
when he cannot guarantee their safety. If he can guarantee their safety, we
will be happy.

Surveys on criminals show that they unanimously prefer unarmed victims and
that they are more afraid of an armed victim than they are of the police.
If the Government really wanted to prevent criminals from having guns and
ammunition ... [Time expired.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter en agb Minister, dit is moeilik on 'n
gepaste bydrae in twee minute te maak. Die VF stem teen die wetsontwerp.

Dit is weliswaar nie meer vir my nodig om die land te verlaat nie. Dié
wapens van my waaraan ek waarde heg, hoef ek nie meer aan my eertydse vyand
oor te gee nie. Daar is egter 'n paar stommiteite in die wetsontwerp wat
met meerderheidskoppigheid deurgedruk is en wat die wettige houers van
lisensies sal oorlewer aan die genadeloosheid van skurke.

Dit is 'n stommiteit om wettige wapenbesit te bemoeilik in 'n
misdaadgeteisterde land. My dank gaan aan die komitee omdat hulle geluister
het na my voorstel dat effektiewe hantering ook 'n voorvereiste moet wees
vir die bevoegdheid om 'n lisensie te besit. My hoop is dat meer
moordenaars só in die stof sal byt.

Dit is 'n stommiteit om te weier dat outomatiese wapens in sekere
omstandighede vir selfbeskerming toelaatbaar is. Soos die bloed van 'n
adjunkpolisiekommissaris wat onlangs met outomatiese gewere van misdadigers
gedood is aan ANC-hande kleef, so sal menige slagoffer graf toe gaan,
afgemaai deur outomatiese gewere, met slegs 'n powere pistooltjie wat die
ANC hom toelaat om teen outomatiese gewere mee te veg. Wat 'n stommiteit!

Dit is 'n stommiteit om net een wapen vir selfverdediging toe te laat en
glad nie eens semi-outomatiese haelgewere daarvoor nie. Menige boervrou sal
nog sterf met een pistooltjie in die hand onder die koeëlreën van
outomatiese AK 47-gewere wat hierdie ANC die land ingebring het. Is die ANC
aan die kant van misdadigers? Hoe anders verklaar 'n mens dit dan dat
hierdie wetsontwerp hulle bevoordeel?

Dit is 'n stommiteit om 'n duur beheerstelsel vir wetsgehoorsames in
werking te stel terwyl almal weet die probleem is onwettige wapenbesit. Dit
is 'n stommiteit om oorregulasie te hê waar die probleem die kleinste is.
Dit mors kosbare geld van die publiek op 'n versteekte doelwit van
geleidelike ontwapening.

Dit is 'n stommiteit dat die Minister die mag kry om wapenbesit verbode te
verklaar. Dit is nie demokrasie nie. Dit is magsbeheptheid. Onder hierdie
omstandighede kan die VF, ondanks verbeterings aan die wetgewing, nie
daarvoor stem nie. Ons stem daarteen. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson and hon Minister, it is difficult to make
an appropriate contribution in two minutes. The FF is voting against the
Bill.

It is true that it is no longer necessary for me to leave the country.
Those weapons to which I attach value, I no longer have to surrender to my
one-time enemy. However, there are a few ludicrous aspects in the Bill
which were pushed through by way of stubbornness on the part of the
majority and which are going to surrender the legal licence holders to the
mercilessness of criminals.

It is ludicrous to make legal possession of arms difficult in a crime-
ridden country. My thanks go to the committee because they listened to my
proposal that effective handling should also be a prerequisite for the
ability to own a licence. My hope is that in this way more murderers will
bite the dust.

It is ludicrous not to allow automatic weapons for self-protection under
certain circumstances. In the same way that ANC hands are stained with the
blood of the deputy police commissioner who was recently killed with
automatic weapons belonging to criminals, many victims will go to the
grave, mown down by automatic weapons, with only a miserable pistol with
which the ANC allows them to fight against automatic weapons. How
ludicrous!

It is ludicrous only to allow one weapon for self-protection, and not even
to allow semi-automatic shotguns for this purpose. Many farmers' wives will
still die with one small pistol in their hand under a hail of bullets from
automatic AK-47 weapons which this ANC brought into the country. Is the ANC
on the side of criminals? How else does one explain the fact that this Bill
benefits them?

It is ludicrous to implement an expensive control system for law-abiding
citizens, while everybody knows the problem is illegal arms possession. It
is ludicrous to have overregulation where the problem is smallest. This
wastes valuable public money on a hidden agenda of gradual disarmament.

It is ludicrous that the Minister has the power to declare the possession
of arms forbidden. This is not democracy. This is power-craziness. Under
these circumstances the FF cannot vote for the legislation, despite
improvements to it. We vote against it.]

Miss J E SOSIBO: Mr Chairperson, I rise to support this Bill. Owning a gun
is a privilege, not a right. This is how it is in Japan and many other
countries, and so should it be in our country.

I wish to focus on Japan because of its low crime rate which has attracted
the attention of numerous foreign scholars. While virtually all outside
observers acknowledge that gun control prevents crime, opinions are divided
over whether the Japanese example can serve as a model for other countries.
It may be exaggeration to say that guns in Japan have been regulated into
nonexistence, but not by much.

Would-be gun owners in Japan must prove that they can be trusted with
lethal weapons. The law permits adults to possess any number of shotguns
and rifles, but the conditions under which they can do so are exacting and
the relevant legislation is scrupulously enforced. One can own a gun and
shoot at regulated times and places. However, if there is an accident or
if, as a result of careless storage, the gun is stolen and used to commit a
crime, the owner faces penalties almost as severe as those the criminal is
faced with.

Our country has one of the highest firearms-related death rates, an average
of 31 people a day according to 1998 data. According to a report of the UN
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice of 1997, South Africa
also has the highest number of law enforcement officers. However, they are
murdered on a daily basis by criminal seeking ownership of illegal
firearms.

A report to the National Assembly by the Department of Safety and Security
in 1998 stated that a total of 29 694 firearms were reported stolen from
the legal owners during that year at an average of 2 000 guns a month. Of
this number, only 1 764 were recovered in the same year, with the rest
falling into criminals' hands. On the other hand, the number of firearms in
circulation is increasing annually with the Central Firearms Register
receiving about 18 000 to 20 000 new applications.

Various parts of the Bill address the many concerns around innocent and
defenceless women, children and disabled people who are terrorised on a
daily basis by gun-touting criminals in possession of legal or illegal
firearms. The increasing tendency by spouses, particularly husbands, to
resort to family murders when faced with domestic or finance-related
problems has to be curbed in order to prevent unnecessary loss of life. The
Firearms Control Bill seeks to protect innocent women, children and the
disabled from dominant and bullying husbands during domestic disputes. So,
the Bill must be hailed as a victory for vulnerable women and children.

There has been a well-ochestrated propaganda campaign to portray the
introduction of the Firearms Control Bill and the whole debate about
measures to reduce firearms with racial overtones. Some members of this
House, such as the hon Gen Viljoen, who claims to be speaking on behalf of
White African farmers, have gone to great lengths to lobby support against
this Bill by insisting that it is another attempt to disarm White farmers
of their only source of protection against criminals. Let us look at the
facts.

During the last quarter of 1997, for example, attacks on farmers took place
almost on a daily basis. Most farmers who were being attacked had their own
weapons stolen. Farmers are usually in possession of a large number of
firearms which attract thefts, and this actually serves as an additional
incentive for attacks.

A report was released by Nedcor and the Institute For Security Studies,
volume 3 of 1999, which looked at the crime index. A statistical profile
was compiled of farm attackers - young men, usually in gangs of six, and
their main demands were for guns and cash.

In the Aida Parker Newsletter released in spring in 1998, it is stated
that, during the attacks on farmers between January and August 1998,
firearms were stolen in 27% of reported cases. In 1997, 66,1% of attacks on
farms and smallholdings were committed with firearms. Farmers are isolated
and vulnerable to attacks where the police are not able to defend them.
They, more than anyone else, should be seen as a special category of people
owning weapons for self-defence, but they are targets because of their
guns.

By being isolated, farmers become targets for attacks and, in response,
they further arm themselves, thus adding to their arsenal. We have listened
to the farmers' concerns about this Bill, and they thanked us for the way
in which this legislation has accommodated their concerns.

It is evident that the hon Gen Viljoen is not talking on behalf of farmers
...

Mr T M GONIWE: He is speaking for himself.

Miss J E SOSIBO: ... In fact, he is not talking on behalf of anyone. He is
talking on behalf of himself, to himself.

With regard to the hon Tony Leon, who is making politics out of something
that everyone everywhere supports, and with regard to the desperate
alliance that opposes transformatory legislation for the sake of opposing
it, I would like to say that they do not want to see a change in the social
relations of society but rather a perpetuation of the past. It is the same
old bunch, with the same old prejudices.

While the murder rate in South Africa has decreased between 1994 and 1998,
the number of people killed by guns has steadily increased. In 1994, guns
accounted for 41% of murders. In 1998, it increased to 49%. This Bill seeks
to tighten control over the possession of firearms to prevent them from
becoming illegal firearms, and it gives more powers to the SA Police
Service to combat the proliferation of firearms. It promotes a nonviolent
and peaceful society, and is a victory for all peace-loving South Africans.

Ake ngilungise kancane nje lapho icishe yaphuma khona kumlingani wami,
uGatsheni.

Izindawo ezinjengamasonto, izikole, amabhange kanye nalo iPhalamende leli,
saxoxa ngazo kakhulu ngokuthi uNgqongqoshe angabonana nabaphethe lapho;
kodwa hhayi ukuthi kudingeka athole imvume kubona ngoba uma kungukuthi
uzocela imvume kubona, kukhona izindawo lapho angeke aze ayithole imvume
khona. Savumelana-ke ngokuthi uNggongqoshe nguyena oyogunyaza. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Let me make a minor correction of what Gatsheni has just said. We talked a
lot about the fact that the hon the Minister should meet with people who
run institutions like churches, schools, banks and even this Parliament.
It's not that he should get a permission from them. There are institutions
that will not give him that permission. We agreed that the hon the Minister
is the one who will authorise it. [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson, South Africa ranks high in the world in
terms of crimes committed through the use of firearms. The situation is
exacerbated by the easy access to and the availability of firearms. Perhaps
we may take a lesson from what Rev Martin Luther King Junior said:


  By our readiness to allow arms to be purchased at will and fired at whim,
  we have created an atmosphere in which violence and hatred have become
  popular pastimes.

A responsible government cannot and should not sit back and stare as people
are mowed down by irresponsible louts.

The past government may have had cause to issue firearm licenses
indiscriminately to some people. In the same way, it is no unreasonable
that the current Government has cause to ensure that it regulates the
possession of firearms. The nation is no longer perceived to be at war. All
that remains is to strive to educate those trigger-happy lunatics on our
streets.

The Bill does not purport to disarm law-abiding citizens but intends to
ensure that the ownership of guns is brought under control. There is
nothing wrong in laying down that the firearm owner must be competent in
that regard. After all, there is nothing wrong in laying down that a motor
vehicle driver has to be competent to drive. [Interjections.] Drivers;
licenses are renewed after some time. Why cannot firearms licenses be
renewed and reviewed regularly?

In 1986, just before Robert F Kennedy was killed, he had this to say:


  With all the violence, murder and killings we have had, I think you will
  agree with me that we must keep firearms from people who have no business
  with guns.

Many people in South Africa have died as a result of guns kept and used
unlawfully by rogues. Some perpetrators are invariably connected to certain
organisations or juristic persons. Why cannot such organisations expose
them for what they are worth? We appeal to civil society to do its utmost
to rid itself of the stalk borers in their midst. Juristic bodies and
Government should not live in the proverbial mode of the dark spot
underneath the candle, radiating light far away, yet having problems around
them. [Time Expired.]

Hon MEMBER: Uthethe kakuhle Mfundisi [You have spoken well, Mfundisi].
[Laughter.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Mr Chairperson, allow me to react briefly to some of the
remarks made by the previous speakers. The hon member, Mr George, said that
this Bill will definitely bring down the levels of violent crime in South
Africa. It will not. Why not? Because it does not target criminals, it
targets law-abiding citizens. [Interjections.] Mr George said that this
Bill will simplify the task of the SAPS. It will not. This Bill is far more
complicated than the present Act. This Bill creates 180 new offences. It is
a labyrinth of administrative red tape, and if the SAPS cannot currently
enforce the present Act, there is no way on earth that they will be able to
enforce this Bill.

The hon member from the UDM, Annelize Van Wyk, said that opposition to the
Bill had a racial undertone. [Interjections.] The opposite is true.
[Interjections.] Now that the bulk of new applications for firearms comes
from the black community, all of a sudden there is a need for
overregulation of gun ownership. [Interjections.] Better late than never!

The New NP and the DP welcomes the amendment printed in the Order Paper
today. We have constantly tried to persuade the ANC component that one
cannot report something that one ought to have been aware of. But our pleas
fell on deaf ears. Fortunately, good sense prevailed and they acknowledged
this. But it is a pity that good sense did not prevail regarding the other
clauses of the Bill as well.

Despite his partiality, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Safety and Security, Mr Mluleki George, conducted the deliberations in an
excellent manner. [Interjections.] The legal teams were extremely helpful,
but, unfortunately ``Theirs was not to reason why, theirs was but to do or
die.''

Yes, the New NP and the DP are wholeheartedly committed to the promotion of
responsible gun ownership in South Africa. [Interjections.]

Hon MEMBERS: Support the Bill!

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Yes, the New NP and the DP are convinced that only fit
and proper persons should be allowed to own firearms. [Interjections.] Yes,
the New NP and DP firmly believes that those who abuse firearms for
criminal purposes should be severely punished.[Interjections.] But the New
NP and the DP will not support this Bill and the main reason why we will
vote against this Bill is because the fundamentals underpinning this Bill
are totally flawed. The mere availability of firearms is not a contributor
to violent crime in South Africa. [Interjections.]

Someone once said: ``It is not necessarily the tyres, lights or brakes that
are the most dangerous part of a car. It is usually the nut that holds the
steering wheel.'' [Interjections.] The problem is not the gun, it is the
nut that holds the gun. Guns do not necessarily kill people. People kill
people. [Interjections.] If we want to address violent crime in South
Africa, overregulation of law-abiding gun owners is not the answer. We will
have to change the hearts and minds of our people and especially our young
people. [Interjections.]

Mrs B M NTULI: Change yours!

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Conflict resolution is a long-overdue compulsory school
subject. We should take cognisance of what the ANC said in 1993 in this
regard. I am going to quote the ANC:


  Without an improvement of the socioeconomic and other factors giving rise
  to criminogenic conditions in South Africa, there is only a slight
  prospect that the unlawful use of firearms can be substantially
  curtailed.

I cannot agree more with the ANC on this point. The emphasis in fighting
crime should shift from the present preoccupation with firearms control to
a more holistic approach which focuses on the moral and socioeconomic roots
of criminality. [Interjections.]

Unfortunately, the ANC abandoned this very sensible position they took in
1993. [Interjections.] Another presumption underpinning this Bill, and
previous speakers referred to it, is that a significant proportion of
violent crime is committed with licensed firearms. Wrong! It should be
remembered that Mr Mufamadi was the previous Minister of Safety and
Security. Now, he said that licenced firearms were only responsible for
0,5% of violent crime, and he said it in this Parliament. Now, I believe Mr
Mufamadi and I am convinced that he would not have misled this House.

Violent crime is primarily committed with illegal firearms, of which more
than 4 million were brought into the country during the years of the
struggle. The central focus of control measures should therefore be the
reduction of the number of firearms in the hands of criminals. I ask the
hon the Minister to target criminals and not law-abiding citizens. This
Bill fails to do that.

During our discussions, I detected a real fear amongst my ANC colleagues
that some people might be stockpiling weapons to overthrow the Government.
I want to put my ANC colleagues at ease. [Interjections.] I do not know of
a single legal gun owner with this objective in mind. Legal gun owners are
mostly law-abiding, upstanding citizens with respect for democracy. The
Government is, in any case, busy overthrowing itself through its position
on Zimbabwe and Aids. [Applause.]

Ek wil die Nuwe NP en die DP se teleurstelling boekstaaf oor die wyse
waarop die ANC hulle woord gebreek het oor 'n ooreengekome amendement. Daar
is ooreengekom dat die Minister enige vuurwapen slegs verbode sal kan
verklaar ná goedkeuring deur die Parlement. En toe, uit die bloute, is daar
weer teruggekeer na die eerste posisie, en nou kan die Minister die hele
land ontwapen by wyse van 'n kennisgewing in die Staatskoerant.

Dieselfde het gebeur met die getal wapens vir selfverdediging. Eers is
ooreengekom dat dit twee sal wees. En toe skielik uit die bloute is dit
weer een.

Met Gun-Free South Africa op die agtergrond het 'n mens nooit geweet met
wie jy onderhandel nie. Dit was 'n geval van Esau se hande, maar Jakob se
stem.

Tydens die bespreking van die wetsontwerp is te kenne gegee dat
belanghebbendes geraadpleeg sal word met die opstel van die regulasies.
Graag verneem ek by die Minister of dit wel die geval sal wees. Die
instelling van 'n nasionale raadplegende vuurwapenforum wat die Minister
van raad bedien oor vuurwapens behoort oorweeg te word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I want to place on record that the New NP and the DP are disappointed at
the way in which the ANC went back on their word with regard to an agreed
amendment. It was agreed that the Minister would only be able to prohibit
any firearm after approval by Parliament. And then, out of the blue, they
reverted to their original position and now the Minister can disarm the
entire country through a notice in the Gazette.

The same thing happened as regards the number of weapons for self-defence.
It was initially agreed that the number would be two. And then suddenly,
out of the blue, it was one again.

With Gun-free South Africa in the background one never knew with whom one
was negotiating. It was a question of Esau's hands, but Jacob's voice.

During the discussion of the Bill we were told that all interestd parties
would be consulted with regard to the drafting of the regulations. I would
like to know from the Minister if this will, indeed, be the case. The
establishment of a national consultative firearm forum to advise the
Minister about firearms, ought to be considered.]

In conclusion, the New NP and the DP want to pay tribute to the firearms
fraternity in South Africa. They do not only provide job opportunities for
80 000 people, but they also generate more than R1 billion in income for
South Africa annually. So there hon members have the reason.

Die Nuwe NP en die DP stem teen hierdie wetsontwerp. [Applous.] [The New NP
and the DP will vote against this Bill. [Applause.]]

Mr R P ZONDO: Chairperson, I want to focus on three chapters of this vital
piece of transformation legislation, but then I also want to remind the hon
Boy Geldenhuys about the historical background of this whole thing. Its aim
is to assist the transformation of our country from the mess of the
apartheid Act of the 1970s, written, enacted and enforced by B J Vorster
and Jimmy Kruger, and their successors P W Botha and F W de Klerk and the
so-called Democratic Alliance. Surely, B J Vorster, and Jimmy Kruger and
other late architects of the bad past must be turning in their graves as we
are about to vote for this vital Bill.

I will deal with the chapters dealing with search and seizure, presumptions
and offences, penalties and administrative fines.

Chapter 14 on search and seizure will ensure that the police are given
sufficient powers to search any premises, vehicles, vessels or aircraft, in
the course of policing operations such as roadblocks, where they believe
there are firearms or ammunition which is held in contravention of the
Bill. It also allows the police to take fingerprints and forensic samples
from suspects. In the past the police were not allowed to do this and
investigations were seriously hampered because this meant that criminals
literally got away with murder.

Another important provision of the Bill is the one which allows the police
to search premises without a warrant. This provision allows the police to
act speedily on information which they have reason to believe will assist
in the investigation of a crime. In most cases, the police requires a
warrant from a judge or magistrate, but in some critical cases, when time
is of the essence, they will now have the ability to act on this
information without a warrant. Of course, like any wide powers, this can be
misused and that means we must ensure that the use of this provision is
properly monitored.

The ANC is very aware of the sensitivity of including the principle of
presumption in the Bill. After thinking long and hard, we believe that this
is necessary. These presumptions limit the right to silence of a person
accused of being in possession of illegal firearms. This limitation is done
in accordance with the provisions of section 36 of the Constitution, and it
was drafted in terms of the latest decision of our Constitutional Court.

Chapter 16 of the Bill covering offences, penalties and administrative
fines, provides the teeth of this legislation. Severe penalties are
provided in accordance with the seriousness of firearms-related crimes. A
very important feature of this chapter is the introduction of
administrative fines imposed by the registrar. This will ensure that
certain categories of culprits will pay the price for their transgressions
without acquiring a criminal record, while at the same time alleviating the
burden on our courts.

It is also important to note that a duty is placed on everyone to be alert
with regard to the existence of illegal firearms and ammunition and to
report this to the police, as the Minister has said. In the same way that
we should stop buying stolen goods and take away the lifeline of thieves,
we must report illegal guns. We are duty-bound as a society committed to
fighting crime in our communities. The clause dealing with the reporting of
illegal arms provides disincentives for failure to comply. This provision
emphasises the importance of community participation in the eradication of
crime.

In the build-up to the new South Africa some irresponsible statements by
self-proclaimed, ultra-rightwing leaders encouraged certain sectors of the
community to arm themselves and to guard themselves against an ANC
government. This led to some of their guns being stolen from them, and guns
were also taken from the former TBVC states. This contributed to the
proliferation of arms in our country.

The hon Boy Geldenhuys said during the public hearing that he had travelled
from Randfontein to Mamelodi, where he had been invited to address a
workshop and where most members present had raised concerns about the
Firearms Control Bill. A follow-up was made in this regard and it was found
that this workshop was organised by people who ran kangaroo courts, and who
harassed the community with illegal firearms. [Interjections.] Let me put
the record straight: The majority of the community, as well as the
community police forums of that particular area distance themselves from
such groupings. Most of the hon Boy Geldenhuys' concerns came from those
who were involved in criminal activities and are facing criminal charges,
as I am saying now.

The hon member also raised a concern regarding infringing on the rights of
people, saying that the Bill is aimed at disarming people. It is against
this background that he is opposed to this Bill. I am afraid that the hon
Geldenhuys of the ``three blind parties'' cannot find the way out of the
political cul-de-sac they find themselves in now. As we are all aware, on
Monday, 2 October - hon members should listen to this - ten days ago,
Eugene Terre'Blanche appeared on the Morning Live TV programme and said he
was in the process of demilitarising the Afrikaner Weerstandbeweging, this
at a time when the so-called Democratic Alliance has positioned itself to
``fight back'' in favour of the mess of B J Vorster.

We have received huge support from across sections of social formation,
from religious bodies and NGOs from all the country. It is clear that sober-
thinking South Africans agree with us that there should be gun control, and
they are present here today in the gallery to witness the passage of this
historic Bill that will go a long way in ensuring that we reduce the number
of guns available in society. I do not think that the ANC is asking too
much in requesting other parties in this House to support the Bill that
aims to promote a better, safer and more peaceful life for all. The fact
is: We must support this Bill and peace.

Uma sengibeka kahle, ngamafushane, uMnu Boy Geldenhys ungizwisa ubuhlungu
ngoba unezwi elimnandi kodwa lezi zinto zakhe azishoyo zingizwisa
ubuhlungu. [To put it briefly and clearly, Mr Boy Geldenhuys causes me pain
because he has a pleasant voice, but the things that he says, causes me
pain.]

Ga ke tsebe gore monagano wa gagwe ka nako ye o reng ka tiragalo ya
malobanyana kua Silverton ya motho yo a ilego a tsena a ihlamile ka
dithuthupiši le dibetša. Lehono re bolela e le gore malapa a mantši a
dillong ka ge a lahlegetšwe ke meloko. Ka boikokobetšo ke kgopela gore
mohlomphegi Boy Geldenhuys a ke a gapeletše monagano wa gagwe go nagana
gabotse, gomme a tshediše bao ba lego mahlokong ka baka la dithunya.
[Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

I do not know what he thinks he is saying at this juncture in regard to the
incident that took place recently at Silverton, where a person suddenly
entered armed with grenades and ammunication. Today as we speak many
families are in mourning because they have lost their relatives. In
humility I therefore request that the hon Boy Geldenhuys be forced to
reconsiderhis views properly, and he should extend his condolences to those
who are in mourning because of firearms. [Applause.]

r S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairman, the Firearms Control Bill was shrouded in
controversy and suspicion from the beginning and when public hearings on it
drew to a close, tension between the pro-gun lobbyists and advocates of
firearms control had not subsided.

The PAC objects to several clauses in this Bill which give the Minister
powers which ought to be exercised only by the approval of Parliament. For
example, the Minister has the power to declare any weapon unlawful without
first getting approval from Parliament. The PAC is concerned about Chapter
15 which deals with presumptions. It shifts the burden of proof to the
accused. This is a violation of the fundamental principle of presumption of
innocence.

On the whole, the Bill seems to have addressed scores of concerns which
were raised regarding firearms control. Chapter 6 comprehensively deals
with licences to possess firearms and it, inter alia, includes separate
licences in respect of each firearm, additional licences and licences to
possess a firearm for self-defence. Chapter 18 deals with the right of
appeal to the appeal board by any person whose application for firearms is
refused by the registrar.

One of the primary duties of a government is to protect the lives of the
people. The PAC is concerned about an issue which has been totally ignored
during the discussion on this Bill, that is, political parties whose
members use firearms for political thuggery. Thousands of our citizens have
been killed through armed political thuggery.

The PAC supports this Bill on the clear understanding that illegal users of
guns who murder innocent citizens or advance demo-thuggery in this country
will feel the full force of the law without any favour of any kind.
Otherwise, it will not be easy to restrain members of political parties who
are attacked by armed thugs posing as politicians. [Applause.]

Mr E T FERREIRA: Chairperson, as has already been stated by my colleague,
the IFP will support this Bill as it has been improved considerably,
compared to the horrendous Bill we started out with. One has to be honest
and say that the majority party and the committee chairperson, in
particular, have been very fair and accommodative as far as this Bill is
concerned. They have moved on a number of issues on which they were
originally rigid in order to make way for a Bill that is much more
acceptable to most South Africans who have public safety at heart.

The IFP's experience in dealing with the majority party in recent weeks,
regarding this Bill, proves to us yet again that if one wants to talk sense
into the devil's head, one has a better chance of doing that if one is
standing next to him than if one is shouting from a distance.

There are still issues in this Bill with which we are not completely
comfortable but are prepared to live with. The presumption clauses in
Chapter 15 will always remain a thorny issue, and they were undoubtedly
unconstitutional in their original form. They have been improved
considerably to an extent that a fine balance has been achieved between the
state having to prove posession of a firearm and the individual having to
supply the court with a reasonable explanation. It still does affect an
accused person's right to remain silent but we believe that the
presumptions have more than a reasonable chance to pass the
constitutionality test.

The IFP strongly supports the amnesty provisions in clause 140 particularly
because, in this final version of the Bill, an amnesty period will only be
valid if approved by Parliament. When a member of the IFP handed over an
arms cache to the National Director of Public Prosecutions some time ago,
we as a party, for the sake of peace and reconciliation, challenged all
other organisations and political parties with arms caches to hand them
over to the state, but no one did so. We believe that the time has arrived
for people and organisations that are still aware of such arms to be
prosecuted. It is just too convenient for people to keep quiet about their
organisations' arms caches, just in case they might need them again in
future.

'n Kwessie wat die IVP ook graag anders sou wou sien in die wetgewing is
klousule 13 wat handel oor vuurwapens vir selfverdediging. Die
oorspronklike weergawe van die wetsontwerp het voorsiening gemaak vir twee
vuurwapens vir selfverdediging. Die finale produk maak slegs voorsiening
vir een.

Ons stem saam dat die publiek in die oorgrote meerderheid gevalle beslis
nie meer as een vuurwapen nodig het nie. Dit is malligheid vir 'n private
persoon wat in 'n digbewoonde gebied of selfs woonstelblok bly om 'n
haelgeweer vir selfbeskerming te wil hê. Daar kan egter geen twyfel wees
nie dat sekere kategorieë sakelui en boere wel 'n tweede vuurwapen mag
nodig hê vir selfverdediging.

Die laaste kwessie waaroor ons maar baie senuweeagtig is, is die verklaring
van wapenvrye gebiede. In beginsel klink dit absoluut pragtig en moreel kan
'n mens nie daarteen gekant wees nie. Ons hoop en vertrou egter dat die
regulasies voorsiening sal maak vir intensiewe polisiëring van sulke
wapenvrye gebiede, anders gaan hierdie gebiede 'n ope uitnodiging wees vir
kriminele en politieke ekstremiste, en dan sal ons met tragedies opgeskeep
sit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[An issue which the IFP would also like to see reflected differently in the
legislation is clause 13 which deals with firearms for self-defence. The
original version of the Bill made provision for two firearms for self-
defence. The final product only makes provision for one.

We agree that the public, in the overwhelming majority of instances,
definitely do not need more than one firearm. It is madness for a private
individual living in a densely populated area, or even a block of flats, to
want a shotgun for self-defence. However, there can be no doubt that
certain categories of businessmen and farmers might well need a second
firearm for self-defence.

The last matter about which we are very nervous is the declaration of
firearm-free areas. In principle this sounds absolutely wonderful, and in
moral terms one cannot be opposed to it. However, we hope and trust that
the regulations will make provision for intensive policing of such firearm-
free areas, otherwise these areas will become an open invitation to
criminal and political extremists, and then we will be saddled with
tragedies.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, daar is regdeur die land vandag groot
vreugde, groot vreugde in die geledere van misdaadsindikate, rowers en
moordenaars, van mense wat 'n skrikbewind voer met onwettige en
ongeregistreerde wapens, want die verdedigingspotensiaal van die slagoffers
van misdaad word vandag beperk.

Verkeerde medisyne is veel gevaarliker as geen medisyne, en dit is die
gevaar van hierdie wetsontwerp. In 'n tyd waarin die gewelddadige aanslag
op die lewens van alle Suid-Afrikaners hoogty vier, word wetsgehoorsame
burgers se vermoë om hulself te beskerm drasties aan bande gelê.

Alle syfers dui daarop dat verreweg die meeste moorde gepleeg word met
onwettige, ongeregistreerde wapens. Outomatiese en semi-outomatiese gewere
soos AK-47's is vryelik in die onwettige mark beskikbaar. Die moordenaars
en verkragters floreer, maar hierdie Regering maak dit hulle prioriteit om
te begin by die beperking van wettige wapens.

'n Wapenvrye Suid-Afrika? Honderd persent! Ek sal my voortande daarvoor gee
as dit bereik kan word, maar 'n eensydige aanslag op die wettige en
verantwoordelike wapeneienaar terwyl die onwettiges floreer, maak van
hierdie wetsontwerp die poort, nie tot 'n wapenvrye Suid-Afrika nie, maar
tot 'n weerlose Suid-Afrika.

Ja, ek weet dat talle van die aanvanklike drakoniese bepalings versag is,
maar nou het ek teen hierdie tyd ook al agtergekom dat dit die ANC se
taktiek is. Dit is soos 'n winkeleienaar wat 'n produk van R100 aanvanklik
R150 merk, en as hy dit dan afslaan na R120, dink die koper hy het 'n
winskopie gekoop.
Die grootste besware van die AEB is teen die beperking van een wapen per
persoon vir selfverdediging, die oorregulering van wettige wapenbesit en
die bykomende magte wat aan die Minister gegee word. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Hierdie Huis moet vandag daarvan kennis neem: hierdie is die sensitiefste
stuk wetgewing wat nog hier deurgevoer is.

Daar is sonder veel moeite 300 000 handtekenings daarteen bekom, sonder
effek. Gemoedere hieroor loop hoog. Die verset wat daar reeds teen hierdie
wetgewing bestaan, kan ontaard in 'n plofbare situasie die dag as hierdie
wetsontwerp toegepas moet word. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairman, there is great joy throughout the country today,
great joy in the ranks of crime syndicates, robbers and murderers, of
people who conduct a reign of terror with illegal and unregistered weapons,
because the defence potential of the victims of crime is being limited
today.

The wrong medication is much more dangerous than no medicine, and this is
the danger of this Bill. At a time when the violent onslaught on the lives
of all South Africans is the order of the day the ability of law-abiding
citizens to protect themselves is being dramatically curtailed.

All figures indicate that by far the most murders are committed with
illegal, unregistered weapons. Automatic and semi-automatic guns such as AK-
47s are freely available on the illegal market. The murderers and rapists
are flourishing, but this Government makes it its priority to start
limiting legal weapons.

A weapon-free South Africa? Hundred percent! I would give my eye teeth if
that could be achieved, but a unilateral onslaught against the legal and
responsible gun owner, while the illegal ones are flourishing, is making
this Bill the road not to a gun-free South Africa, but a vulnerable South
Africa.

Yes, I know that many of the initial draconian provisions have been
mitigated, but by this time I have also realised that these are the ANC's
tactics. It is like a shop owner who initially prices a R100 product R150,
and when he reduces it to R120 the buyer thinks that he is buying a
bargain.
The AEB's greatest objections is the limit of one weapon per person for
self-defence, over-regulation of legal gun ownership and the additional
powers that the Minister is being given. [Interjections.] This House must
note today that this is the most sensitive piece of legislation that has
ever been passed here.

Without much trouble 300 000 signatures were collected against it, without
any effect. Feelings are running high about this. The resistance that there
already exists against this legislation can develop into an explosive
situation the day that this Bill must be applied.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Chairperson, Azapo welcomes this Bill as a step in the
right direction. We would have been happier with a complete ban on the
ownership of firearms by civilians. The only persons carrying guns should
be the police and army.

The desperate situation that we face in this country calls for drastic
measures. There are roughly 4 million licensed guns in the hands of
civilians in our country. About 80 guns are lost or stolen everyday. The
number of illegal weapons is unknown, but it is just as easy for one to lay
one's hands on an illegal gun as it is to puff a ``zol'' of dagga.

Guns, legal or illegal, are a common denominator in a wide range of crimes
such as domestic violence, rape, robbery, taxi violence, car hijackings and
murder. In 1998, guns ended the lives of 12 300 of our citizens. This means
that 34 people are shot dead each day in our country. Is this not
intolerable? Why do we not prohibit the ownership of firearms by all, and
then command the security forces to go on a vigorous and thorough campaign
to clean our country of all guns? Let us see then how effective car
hijackers will be by using knobkerries for their purposes.

There is a pervasive gun ownership culture in our country that needs to be
eradicated. When we buy our little boys toy guns and our little girls
dolls, we are socialising them differently. The girls grow up to desire the
real baby that they will mother, love and care for, while the boys will
grow up with a tendency to own and worship a real gun. Are we then
surprised when our little boys grow up to shoot us dead in our cars? In our
antigun mentality campaign, we should encourage a ban on the manufacture
and distribution of toy guns.
Thirty four people murdered by guns everyday is intolerable. Let us
consider drastic action. Azapo will support this Bill as a step in the
right direction. [Applause.]

Mr M S BOOI: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and chairperson of the portfolio
committee, I am just sorry that when the hon Van Schalkwyk saw me coming to
the platform he disappeared. I know exactly why he had to disappear. That
is because he does not understand what he is arguing for. It is my duty to
lecture him on that, but now he has disappeared and I do not know to whom I
should now lecture. [Interjections.]

I hope that hon Gen Viljoen will not go away, because I have to lecture to
him as I have been loyally doing in the portfolio committee. I have said to
him that when we were arguing against the availability and abuse of
firearms in the preamble of this Bill, we were not arguing against any
white people or what: We were arguing about things that one could see. The
hon member himself has been quoting and giving figures, using what Chetty
has done in his investigations. We are talking about 4,5 million people who
have registered firearms in South Africa and who are roaming around this
country. That is the figure we are arguing about.

The attitude of the ANC is that guns do kill; guns do destroy families;
guns do create widows; and guns do make orphans. Having that
responsibility, what did the hon member expect the ANC to have done around
this Bill? Was the ANC supposed to stand up and govern over dead bodies?
Should the ANC not take the responsibility of introducing legislation that
could help the people of South Africa?

The ANC's point of view is that no irresponsible statements will resolve
the issue of crime. When the economy goes down the ANC, as the governing
party, will be called upon to take resposibility. It is with that
resposibility in mind that we have been arguing and trying to bring to hon
members' attention that it is very important for the Firearms Control Bill
to be brought before the House and voted for as one of the measures that
could help in fighting crime.

One other thing that I really wanted to lecture Mr Van Schalkwyk on is the
purpose of the Bill, which seeks to stem the proliferation of illegally
possessed firearms by providing for the removal of those firearms from
society and improving control over legally possessed firearms, to prevent
crime that involves the use of firearms. I am saying that 4,5 million
firearms are in the hands of different people. Since 1998 there had been an
increasing number of people who shoot each other, and that there was no way
in which the ANC could ditch that responsibility.

The general should note that most of us have promised our people a better
life, and we are saying that they have to enjoy part of that better life.
However, the difficulty is that, day in and day out, we come across
criminals. Now one does not formulate ``criminal'' by saying that ``we are
making this law for people who are criminals.'' We do not know who the
criminals are. We want to find the criminals, and they can only be found by
the police. One can become a criminal only when one transgresses the law.

The Democratic Alliance's formulation of criminals, which is very
problematic, amounts to creating criminals in our mentality and saying that
we are a society of criminals. That is where the hon Ms Van Wyk of the UDM
becomes relevant, because she argues in turn that one then says the
majority of our people, even up to the executive, are criminals and based
on that, one then creates a law. That is not how it works. We are saying
that criminals do exist, and that there are criminals who steal guns. If a
man shoots his wife, he becomes a criminal. But before then he was not a
criminal! He was a good family member, before he shot his wife. If he rapes
his kid, he becomes a criminal.

It is on this basis that we are saying that the opposition cannot then
expect us, in turn, to legislate for what does not exist. We legislate for
what exists, on the basis that there are firearms on the farms, and that
when criminals come they steal those firearms and use them against our
people in robberies and hijackings. [Interjections.]

Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson, will the hon member take a question?

Mr M S BOOI: Yes, I will take a question because I take the general quite
seriously.

Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson, will the hon member agree, on the problem
of the legal firearm owners, that Minister Mufamadi said that 0.5% of those
people can be regarded as criminals? So, will he then agree that there are
more criminals outside the ranks of the legal firearms owners?

Mr M S BOOI: Mr Chairperson, I am not disputing that statement. What I am
saying is, how does one arrive at that? There are committed criminals who
are crime day in and day out. But where do they get their guns? That is the
question we are trying to address here and, of course, what the Bill is
informing us to do. I am not saying that there are no rapists in our
country, and I am not saying that there are no people who are shooting
others and hijacking their vehicles. People who plot those hijackings
belong to gangs of criminals. We are saying that they do exist, but not
everybody is part of that. Not everybody in this House is a criminal.

So, on that basis, we are saying that those who own guns should take the
responsibility upon themselves for their safe storage. We are talking about
those that are out there. One of the statements that one often hear is that
there are many guns in the country that nobody knows in whose hands they
are. We are saying that unless we can go back to our database and capture
exactly what is happening, we will not be able to address the problem that
the hon member is bringing to our attention.
Let us go ahead and continue looking at this problem because it is not an
easy one to resolve. I am very amazed at what the DP is saying here - that
is that foreigners have been informing us as to what to do. Those are South
Africans, and very responsible citizens. They are people who have been
investigating and doing their research.

I agree that maybe Parliament has not been able to do a good job about the
type of lobbyists or people who come to this Parliament to solicit the
thinking of different members of Parliament, something which all of us have
been exposed to. Those are very responsible people who have been asking
questions such as: what does one do when there are no gun-free zones? And
they have gone out of their way to test and show us what it is like to have
a gun-free zone.

Those people have been able to show us what domestic violence is doing to
our people. They have been doing a very responsible thing, taking some of
the laws that we have put into place in the country to deal with domestic
violence and sexual abuse, and asking what the issues are that we are
confronted with. They say that guns are being seen as the bottomline that
has led to the huge outcry in our communities from people who die, families
that get disrupted and people children are orphaned. That is what we are
confronted with.

The hon Boy Geldenhuys knows this as a matter of fact, so I do not
understand his argument. If he was my relative, I would help him as I have
always done in the portfolio committee. It is my duty. We have been saying
- and that is what the hon Velaphi of the IFP has been arguing - that
nowhere in the Bill are we giving excessive powers to the Minister. We are
not giving excessive powers to the Minister. The Minister has been very
responsible: He has brought a lot of legislation before Parliament. We give
him powers so that he does not get hamstrung, as the hon member has been
commenting regarding the matter of presumption in Chapter 15. When a crime
is committed does the hon member expect the Minister to come here and ask
Parliament to give him a mandate while the criminals are taking the guns
and hiding them or running away crossing the borders into Mozambique or
anywhere else? Two things have happened. We have lost our best policemen.
When information is leaked, people die in the process. That is why we
cannot give the Minister excessive powers. The Minister has done a very
responsible thing. When the information gets into their hands, they have to
be very responsible. That is what the Minister and the executive are here
for: to protect the individuals that are giving that information.

And when he gets that information, it is in the interest of the country
that he acts. That is why we are given that responsibility. When he knows
that there are illegal guns that are being thrown around, he should, as the
Minister, take the decision and come and tell Parliament what exactly has
been going on in relation to that issue. That is how we understand it in
the ANC.

On the issue of implementation, there is no doubt that the police have
shown commitment and have put together a huge budget, which we all have
seen. We all have seen what exactly has been happening in relation to the
implementation of this Bill. They are very confident and sure that we will
be able to deliver around this Bill. They are not playing any dice.

Since they introduced Operation Crackdown, they have done their job very
well. Since the new commissioner came in, there have been such a lot of
arrests. He promised that he would put a million of them into prison.
Today, there is a problem and not a word is being said about it. Many of
those criminals are being released by the Correctional Services department
because the police have being doing their job so successfully that they are
getting the biggest criminals in their nets, and are taking them to
prisons. Nobody here in this House is able to stand up and say that
policemen are doing a good job. There are men and women who spend their
Sundays at work, while others are sleeping, men and women who do not sleep
for 24 to 48 hours, and who spend their lives running after criminals. Let
us respect them. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, just before I call on the
Minister, I wish to say that it is very astonishing that people can miss
out on such a wonderful debate by making such a noise in the House.

Can you please pay attention? We are conducting an important debate in the
House today. I have been listening very carefully to people making their
points. Can you just listen to the debate, please? There are people holding
conferences in the House, especially those who have just walked in. Please
take your seats and listen.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, once again, I would like
to thank the hon members who have stood at this podium to support the Bill.
It is an indication that there is a great future indeed for our country. At
the same time, I wish to thank them for successfully bearing the noise that
came from the Democratic Alliance about the purpose of this particular
Bill.

What has emerged from the DP's and New NP's arguments is a passionate
desire to stay with their toy guns. That is what has emerged. There is
absolutely nothing substantive, in the form of any argument, that they have
been capable of putting forward against this Bill, both here in House and
in the portfolio committee.

Boy Geldenhuys made a very ridiculous statement by saying that it is not
guns that kill, but people who kill. With what do they kill? What are they
using to kill? Why does he have to come here and make such a horrible
statement in the evening of his life that people kill people? People
certainly use weapons to effect such killings.

Another issue has emerged. One would expect a responsible person such as
the hon Martinus Van Schalkwyk to say that these are the ways and means by
which we could make this Bill implementable, because, as he said here, the
principle is fine. We should have responsible gun ownership and gun
control, but he has not been able to come forward, as the hon Gen Viljoen
did who engaged in discussions both with myself and members of the
department regarding this specific issue. I am still astounded that, after
those numerous meetings, we have not been able to convince him that this is
a desirable piece of legislation.

The issue here is that, in the absence of what other police services have
in the country in the form of highly advanced technology, we also have to
use our people. That is why he has voted for the passage of a Bill here in
this Parliament that came with the idea of the establishment of a community-
policing forum. There is nothing wrong in appealing to the people to say
that they must assist the SAPS, precisely for the same reason that he was
advancing here: that, for so many kilometres, there is only one
policeperson and one police van. What does he do to compensate for that
particular handicap?

We have an asset in South Africa. We have developed the concept of a
community-policing forum which is a new phenomenon in the entire continent.
I have not seen it elsewhere in the world in operation, as we are
attempting to do in South Africa. There is absolutely nothing wrong in
saying ``Let us form a grand conspiracy against the criminal elements,
mobilise the biggest possible number of our people and let them inform on
the activities of the criminals.'' There is nothing wrong with that. He
used informers during the struggle against apartheid to inform against the
people who were fighting for liberation then. Now he is reluctant to
endorse the idea of people in this country saying that their next-door
neighbours are hoarding illegal firearms. That would assist the police.
There is absolutely nothing wrong with that.

We are saying that the South African public cannot be spectators in the
fight against crime. We are agitating for the participation of the biggest
possible number of people against crime. So, there is nothing wrong with
that. We will be happy about it.

On the question of whether or not the Bill is going to be implementable, I
have explained it several times in answer to the questions that I fielded
from many people here. But I want to say, once again, that in the drafting
of this Bill, top police officers - one of them who is there in the Gallery
is an advocate and a police officer - at the head office in Pretoria were
involved. It is not something that was sucked out of the thumbs of
intellectuals outside the purview of police head quarters. They were
involved, and as they are sitting there, they are convinced that this Bill
is implementable, much as I am convinced that indeed it is implementable.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Amendment to the Bill put, as printed on the Order Paper (p740), namely:


  That, in subclause (2)(a) of clause 120, the words ``or who ought
  reasonably to be aware'' be omitted.

Amendment agreed to.

The Chairperson of Committees, in response to information provided by the
Minister of Safety and Security, drew the attention of the House to the
correction of a typographical error in clause 9(3)(a) on p12, line 35, by
inserting the word ``not'' between the words ``is'' and ``unfit''.

Question put: That the Bill, including the approved amendment and the
correction of the said typographical error, be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 217: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B
  M N; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Belot, S T; Benjamin, J; Bhengu, F;
  Bhengu, N R; Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W;
  Buthelezi, M N; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
  Chiba, L; Chohan, F I; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De
  Lange, J H; Dhlamini, B W; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dlamini, B O; Doidge,
  G Q M; Duma, N M; Ebrahim, E I; Fankomo, F C; Fazzie, M H; Feinstein, A
  J; Ferreira, E T; Frolick, C T; Gcina, C I; George, M E; Gerber, P-J A;
  Gillwald, C E; Gininda, M S; Gogotya, N J; Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D;
  Govender, P; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C;
  Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E;
  Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W;
  Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M;
  Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Leeuw, S J; Lekgoro, M K; Leshika, T
  E; Lobe, M C; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G;
  Magazi, M N; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L;
  Makwetla, S P; Malebane, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J;
  Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M S; Maphalala, M A; Mars, I;
  Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Masala, M M; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela, N
  H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M;
  Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mdladlana, M M S;
  Mfundisi, I S; Middleton, N S; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mndende, O N;
  Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Moeketse,
  K M; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mokaba, P R; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M
  A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
  Moosa, M V; Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I;
  Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S
  A; Msomi, M D; Mthembu, B; Mtsweni, N S; Mutsila, I; Mzizi, M A; Naidoo,
  S; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncinane, I Z; Ncube, N Z; Ndabandaba, L B G;
  Ndlovu, V B; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya,
  M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M; Nqakula, C; Nqodi, S B;
  Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, S B; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Phala, M J; Pheko,
  S E M; Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Ramakaba-
  Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P; Rasmeni, S M;
  Ripinga, S S; Routledge, N C; Saloojee, E C; Schneemann, G D; Scott, M I;
  Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; September, R K; Shilubana, T P; Sibiya, M
  S M; Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D
  J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H; Smith, V
  G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
  Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T
  J; Tshwete, S V; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe,
  S C; Van Wyk, A (Annelize); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Woods, G; Xingwana,
  L M T; Yengeni, T S; Zita, L; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E.

  NOES - 59: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Bell, B G; Beukman, F;
  Blaas, A; Borman, G M; Botha, A J; Bruce, N S; Camerer, S M; Clelland, N
  J; Cupido, P W; Delport, J T; Dudley, C; Durand, J; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M
  J; Gaum, A H; Geldenhuys, B L; Gibson, D H M; Gous, S J; Green, L M;
  Greyling, C H F; Grobler, G A J; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D;
  Le Roux, J W; Madasa, Z L; McIntosh, G B D; Meshoe, K R J; Moorcroft, E
  K; Morkel, C M; Mulder, C P; Nel, A H; Ntuli, R S; Odendaal, W A;
  Olckers, M E; Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Pretorius, I J; Schippers, J;
  Schoeman, R S; Selfe, J; Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smit, H A;
  Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Southgate, R M; Swart, S N; Van der Merwe, A S; Van
  Deventer, F J; Van Jaarsveld, A Z A; Van Niekerk, A I; Van Schalkwyk, M C
  J; Van Wyk, A (Anna); Viljoen, C L.

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

                   NATIONAL HEALTH LABORATORY SERVICE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson and hon members, the Bill heralds one
of the last components of the national health system to be restructured in
line with the vision of a ``Better life for All''.

Let me congratulate the old national party on initiating the transformation
of laboratory services in this country. It was in 1973 that the old
National Party government appointed the Meiring-Naudé Commission of Inquiry
to advise it on laboratory services.

This commission recommended the establishment of a single nationally
controlled and co-ordinated laboratory service. The NP did not have the
courage and the political will to implement these recommendations.
[Interjections.] Hence, they voted against the Bill.

Subsequently, two task teams, one under Prof Van Den Ende in 1995, and
another under Prof Kallichurum in 1998, were appointed by this Government
to advise it on the restructuring of these services. The two task teams
corroborated the Meiring-Naude findings, which are still as relevant today
as they were 27 years ago.

The Health Minmec considered three options for the restructuring of
laboratories. The options were nationalisation, privatisation and a state-
owned public enterprise. After carefully considering all the options, we
chose the latter. I know that some parties within this House are obsessed,
of course, with privatisation.

Health is a public good. Private health care in South Africa is the
privilege of a few, because more than 80% of the population depends on the
public health system. That is why we chose the public entity route. We must
set policy to ensure equitable access to accessible and affordable health
care services for all, whilst, at the same time, decentralising management
autonomy to the executive to run the enterprise on sound business
principles.

In order for hon members to appreciate our diagnostic and scientific
capability, let me highlight the merits of just two institutions that will
be incorporated into the National Health Laboratory Services. The SA
Institute for Medical Research was established in 1917 by the government in
partnership with the Chamber of Mines, primarily to conduct medical
research into diseases which were common in the mines. It now employs over
2000 people and provides almost 50% of all the laboratory services in the
public health sector, the rest being provided by the provincially owned
health laboratory services.

The department opened negotiations with the Chamber of Mines, with a view
to integrating all laboratory services into a public entity. When the
Chamber of Mines withdrew unconditionally from the SA Institute for Medical
Research, this then paved the way for the comprehensive restructuring of
all publicly owned laboratories.

I would like, at this juncture, to thank the Chamber of Mines for its
commitment to medical research, which was shown through its participation
in the SA Institute for Medical Research as joint partner with Government.

The National Institute for Virology, which came into being in April 1976
when the laboratories of the Poliomyelitis Research Foundation were
transferred to the Department of Health, serves as the national reference
laboratory for South Africa and the region for viral diseases of medical
importance. The institute is a WHO reference laboratory for viral
haemorrhagic fevers and for vaccine-preventable viral diseases such as
poliomyelitis. Scientists from the institute play a key role in diagnosing
and assisting in the control of viral haemorrhagic fevers in Africa and the
Middle East. One such initiative was the diagnosis of the Ebola virus in
the DRC.

An important component of the NHLS will be the possible creation, within
it, of a national institute for communicable Diseases which will be formed
from the National Institute for Virology, together with the public health
microbiology laboratories of the SA Institute for Medical Research and an
epidemiology unit. This new institute will play a crucial role in the
surveillance of communicable diseases for the SADC region.

This consolidation of health care resources will promote the harmonisation
of laboratory standards and quality assurance, efficiency, cost-
effectiveness and the rational use of resources, amongst others, through
benefits from economies of scale. It will also promote access to new and
appropriate technologies.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the NCOP Select Committee on Social
Services and the portfolio committee for carefully considering this Bill. I
was informed regularly by officials from my department about progress in
the discussions of the select committee, and was able to give guidance
wherever needed. As a matter of fact, yesterday, I attended the meeting of
the portfolio committee. I also personally attended some of these
consultations. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Portfolio
Comitteee, Dr Nkomo, and his staff for piloting the Bill up to this stage.
I sincerely hope that this House will approve this Bill. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I think it is
appropriate for me to refer you to the Rules of this House, which expressly
prohibit members from standing in the passages or in the gangways and
conversing. It is not becoming of the House to engage in that kind of
communication. I think, as we have ruled before, you are permitted to
converse sitting side by side, but, certainly, you cannot converse standing
in the passages with your backs to the Chair. I think it is most
unacceptable, and I would like to appeal to you to ensure that we keep the
decorum of the House.

Dr A S NKOMO: Mr Chairperson, I rise as Chairperson of the Portfolio
Committee on Health to report on the work of the committee with regard to
the National Health Laboratory Service Bill. The Bill was not amended by
the committee, that is, of the National Assembly, as the initial areas of
concern were very competently taken care of by our colleagues in the Social
Services Committee of the NCOP. The agenda of this Government has been to
systematically transform our institutions to meet the needs of our people
in the most effective and cost-effective way.

We have based our efforts on the principle of equity as we want to ensure
that every person in the rural and urban areas of our country has access to
crucial services. This Bill, then, amalgamates previously fragmented public
health laboratory services; co-ordinates services in a cost-effective
manner to do away with duplications and wastage of limited resources; and
ensures that the research agenda of laboratories has a direct bearing on
improving service delivery and the overall transformation of our health
system.

This Bill provides for cost-effective laboratory services to all public
sector health care providers and government institutions. And, in an effort
to improve and contribute towards the public/private partnership, provision
is made for the private health care providers to purchase services from the
service. But, we want to caution against encouraging the attainment of
profits to the detriment of service delivery, and we say this in the spirit
of ``health before profits.'' This service will support health research
and, very importantly, provide training for health science education.
Within this Bill, there is a very strong emphasis on capacity-building,
which is in keeping with the President's call to extend our skills base,
for example, the promotion of training of laboratory and associated
personnel; and granting of bursaries and loans for studies, of course, in
the field of laboratory services.

This Bill involves 6 000 health workers employed in public health
laboratory services. They mainly include pathologists, medical
technologists, and technicians, research scientists, professional nurses,
administrative staff and general assistants.

The committee has receive the assurance from the department that matters
relating to conditions of service, salaries, transfer of staff and the
inevitable retrenchment of staff have been dealt with in the most effective
way, through processes in the bargaining chamber, with the stakeholders.

Given our progressive labour laws, we expect the transition and transfer of
personnel to the new public entity to be as smooth as possible.

I want to report to the House that the unions also have supported this Bill
and in fact have very regularly attended briefings and so on. This is a
process, as the Minister has already indicated, that has been happening for
quite some time. Allow me to congratulate the Minister and the team for the
extensive groundwork which they did before the passage of this legislation
through Parliament. As the Minister indicated, she has actually personally
also attended sittings of the select committee in the NCOP.

Although the Bill makes provision for transitional arrangements, an in-
depth audit of the assets which will be transferred to the new entity to
ensure a smooth transition has already been completed and, to prevent
chaos, different dates have been stipulated for the commencement of
different provisions of the Bill.

I want to take this opportunity to applaud the creation of a National
Institute for Communicable Diseases, which will form part of the new
service. This initiative is crucial as we witness the sharp increase in
communicable diseases and related deaths in our country. This new unit has
an absolutely crucial role to play in the surveillance of communicable
diseases, especially monitoring new and re-emerging diseases, through a
robust and integrated national disease survellaince system.

This Bill brings us closer to our objective of accessibility, affordability
and efficiency, and it is therefore without reservation that I commend this
Bill to the House. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, the DP will not be supporting this Bill despite
the Minister's somewhat biased history of the process which established the
single laboratory service. The truth is - and I am sure the Minister will
agree - that when previous governments looked at this matter they realised
that it was fraught with difficulties and therefore dropped it, but not
this Government, and certainly not this Minister.

I certainly believe that Dr Nkomo's speech greatly exaggerates the
potential for the new laboratory service that this Bill creates. To be
frank, there really seems no reason for this legislation. The department
gave a very frank briefing to the portfolio committee last Tuesday. The
Minister was there. I was grateful. I really was very grateful for the very
frank way in which questions were answered. But on further analysis I must
say that, really, no valid reasons have been given for the abolition of the
existing laboratories in the public health sector in favour of this new
body. One must therefore presume that there is little more behind this
legislation than a further attempt on the part of the department to
centralise all control of public health services - something that we have
seen happening over a period of time, with the resulting deterioration in
health services in South Africa.

The DP opposes very vigorously the centralisation process, especially when
existing structures are working perfectly well and there is no need to make
this change. But we are also concerned that, at the time when the
Government has a declared policy of privatisation of parastatals, what this
Bill is actually doing is creating a new parastatal. This makes no sense.
The hon the Minister says that the DP is paranoid about privatisation. Let
me say to the Minister that she is quite right, because at the end of the
day the only way we are going to make this country work is to start
privatising our parastatals. I want to say to her that, without any shadow
of doubt, the DP is fully committed to the process of privatisation and we
certainly cannot support a Bill which is in complete contradiction of this
principle.
We were told at the portfolio committee that the question of whether the
laboratory services should be privatised was discussed during the
negotiation process, but eventually this concept was rejected because the
unions and staff associations were opposed to it on the basis that public-
sector control would lead to greater cost-effectiveness and efficiency than
private-sector control. Of course, this is rubbish, and no doubt such a
point of view was based more on the hope of job preservation on the part of
the staff and the unions than on any real concern for cost-effectiveness or
efficiency.

The truth of the matter is that quite clearly this new laboratory service
will not necessarily do anything to preserve jobs. It may, in fact, have
the opposite effect. Privatisation would have been a far better option,
because privatisation leads to cost-effectiveness, efficiency,
profitability and jobs. Obviously cost-effectiveness, efficiency and
profitability will create jobs, another point that I think the hon the
Minister missed. Let us ask the Airports Company whether this is not the
truth.

Further, other than the comment in the memorandum that the service ``will
be funded from the current sources and it is not envisaged that the costs
will be more than the current level of expenditure'', no information has
been provided to the portfolio committee regarding, among other things, the
actual cost implications for the establishment of the single body, what the
current level of expenditure is and the financial implications, which will
have an effect on a variety of bodies, including provincial health
departments. These are serious problems. These are serious shortcomings in
this Bill. They have to be addressed and they have not yet been.

Furthermore, we have been told the transitional process that will have to
take place between what exists at present and the establishment of this new
service will take approximately 18 months. In fact there is no deadline set
for this particular matter to be settled. It is therefore anticipated that
there will be many staff disputes and many staff changes that will have to
be dealt with over the months ahead. So much, then, for a new and settled
centralised body that the unions and staff associations believe they will
become part of. It is just not going to happen.

The DP believes that this new national health laboratory is ill-conceived
and badly implemented. Time will tell whether it will work and how
successful it will be, but the odds are against it, and we certainly cannot
support it.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Mr Chairperson, major structural changes will be
introduced by this Bill. They will be complex and costly, but, if the
legislation achieves its stated aims of providing efficient and effective
laboratory services, supporting health research and providing training for
health science education, they will be justified. When one thinks of
laboratory services and the relationship of public to private sector, one
cannot help remembering the following two facts. Firstly, the Human Science
Research Council's report of professional salary scales showed that private
pathology professors were the most highly paid professionals in the
country. Secondly, kickback schemes between private practitioners and
private labs led to the exposure of bloodsuckers who benefited financially
by doing excessive tests, putting a strain on medical schemes.

These facts are indisputable, but people are people. There are rogues in
both the public and the private sector. The answer would not be to shrink
or destroy the private pathology sector, but to ensure that it is regulated
in terms of minimum standards and well monitored and policed. The best way
to narrow the gap between services to the wealthy and the poor is to
establish private-public partnerships: for Government to provide essential
services where no one can be contracted to provide them, but to foot the
bill to pay private providers on a transparent competitive basis when
suitable and competent private services exist.

In fact the Government must compete with the private sector because, as the
largest stakeholder, it would bring down prices. The Bill provides for this
to happen. It allows the National Health Laboratory Service to enter into
contracts and to enter into partnerships. If the board established in terms
of the Bill attempts to monopolise all laboratory services in the country,
the dangers are that we will establish another inefficient bureaucracy,
swallow money and add nothing to the existing services.

The IFP is opposed to a national socialist health service, but we recognise
the value of a co-ordinated national laboratory service. Already we have
excellent institutions in the form of the SA Institute for Medical Research
and the National Institute for Virology. There is no reason why they should
be compromised by this Bill and we support the Bill in the expectation that
they will not be. There are overlaps and gaps in laboratory services in the
country and, over the long term, rationalisation and co-ordination of
services can only be to our benefit.

The country is bedevilled right now by series of crises that require rapid,
co-ordinated initiatives, like the foot-and-mouth outbreak, cholera, the
state of our polluted rivers and the small number of people who are tested
for HIV. One hopes that the board will also take the initiative to forge
links with other departments such as Water Affairs, Environmental Affairs,
Public Works and Local Government to cope with such matters as disposal of
medical waste and the provision of sewerage, together with improved water
supplies to rural areas.

The IFP is particularly eager to see expansion of Aids testing services in
rural areas. International and local organisations that exhibited at the
13th International Aids Congress said that they had made an offer to
Government to provide full mobile testing units for rural areas. To reduce
the stigma of offering Aids tests, these mobile testing units offer
screening tests for infectious diseases using saliva and discreet
confirmation of HIV-positive results using a drop of blood. One would like
to see these possibilities investigated, providers accredited, partnerships
struck and such teams rolled out to work with community health workers who
would offer family support.

I have no doubt that this national service is going to encounter problems
transporting specimens to laboratories for testing. [Time expired.]

Dr S J GOUS: Mnr die Voorsitter, nie alleen poog hierdie wetgewing om 'n
regspersoon te skep om laboratoriumdienste aan die staat te lewer nie, dit
poog terselfdertyd om die Grondwet van die Republiek van Suid-Afrika te
verander en te hersien. Die Grondwet sê duidelik dit vereis dat toegang tot
gesondheidsdienste verseker word, maar die aanhef tot hierdie wetgewing
bepaal dat gesondheidsdienste as sodanig 'n reg is en nie alleen die
toegang daartoe nie.

Hierdie wetgewing skep 'n splinternuwe staatsinstelling. Dit is nou op
dieselfde tydstip wat die Regering hulle koppe breek om ander
staatsinstellings met mag en mening te privatiseer. Is dit nou nie tipies
van die Departement van Gesondheid om totaal uit pas te wees met die res
van die land nie? Klousule 15 diskwalifiseer en elimineer die hele private
sektor effektief om enigsins deel te hê aan die verskaffing van
laboratorium- of patologiese dienste aan die staat.

Ons weet mos nou almal dat die staatsmasjien op sy beste nie kan kers
vashou by die private sektor nie, veral nie met hoogs tegniese en
gespesialiseerde dienste soos patologie nie. Die gevolg hiervan gaan
doodeenvoudig wees dat sekere hoogs gespesialiseerde dienste eenvoudig
afgeskaal gaan word, of nog erger, heeltemal gaan verdwyn.

Hierdie wetgewing gaan ook die ongeveer 5 000 werknemers by die
geaffekteerde instellings ernstig blootstel en moontlik baie van hulle
benadeel. Ongetwyfeld gaan heelwat werkgeleenthede in die proses van
oorskakeling en rasionalisering verlore gaan. Hierdie reëlings is geensins
uitgespel nie en vakbonde kan dus met baie goeie rede onrustig voel. Feit
van die saak is, heelwat persone gaan hulle werk verloor in hierdie proses.

Soos ons reeds met hospitale ondervind het, gaan die sogenaamde
rasionalisering beteken dat sekere laboratoriums gaan sluit. Dit beteken
vir die mense op die grond eenvoudig dat dienslewering gaan verswak of
verminder. Dit is nou weer eens op 'n tydstip wat die klem val op
dienslewering. Die verhoogde finansiële las op provinsies sal eweneens 'n
negatiewe effek op dienslewering hê. Soos met alle ander
gesondheidswetgewing loop die onaanvaarbare mag van die Minister van
Gesondheid soos 'n goue draad deur hierdie wetgewing.

Laastens is daar ook ernstige kommer uitgespreek oor die lewensvatbaarheid
van laboratoriums by opleidingsinstellings wat nie meer hulle navorsingsrol
sal kan vervul nie. Soos gewoonlik was die konsultasieproses ook weer onder
verdenking. In die geheel is dit dus ongewenste en ondeurdagte wetgewing.
Die Nuwe NP en die Demokratiese Alliansie sal dit teenstaan.
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr S J GOUS: Mr Chairperson, not only does this legislation attempt to
create a juristic person to deliver laboratory services to the state, at
the same time it attempts to change and review the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa. The Constitution states clearly that it demands
that access to health services is ensured, but the preamble to this
legislation stipulates that health services as such are a right, and not
only access to them.

This legislation creates a brand-new state institution. This is now at the
same point in time in which the Government is breaking their heads to
privatise other state institutions with all their might. Is it not typical
of the Department of Health to be totally out of step with the rest of the
country? Clause 15 effectively disqualifies and eliminates the entire
private sector to have any part whatsoever in the provision of laboratory
or pathological services to the state.

Now surely we all know that the state machinery at its best cannot compare
to the private sector, particularly not with highly technical and
specialised services like pathology. The consequence of this is simply
going to be that certain highly specialised services are going to be scaled
down, or even worse, disappear completely.

This legislation is also going to seriously expose and possibly be to the
detriment of many of the approximately 5 000 employees at the affected
institutions. No doubt many job opportunities are going to be lost in the
process of conversion and rationalisation. These arrangements have not been
spelt out at all and trade unions therefore have good reason to feel
uneasy. The fact of the matter is, a significant number of people are going
to lose their jobs in this process.

As we have already experienced with hospitals, the so-called
rationalisation is going to mean that certain laboratories must close. This
means for the people on the ground that service delivery is simply going to
deteriorate or diminish. This is once again at a point in time in which the
emphasis falls on service delivery. The increased financial burden on
provinces will also have a negative effect on service delivery. As with all
other health legislation, the unacceptable power of the Minister of Health
runs through this legislation like a golden thread.

Finally, serious concern has also been expressed about the viability of
laboratories at training institutions which can no longer fulfil their
research role. As usual, the consultation process was once again under
suspicion. On the whole this is therefore undesirable and ill-considered
legislation. The New NP and the Democratic Alliance will oppose it.
[Interjections.]]

Mr S NAIDOO: Chairperson, the National Health Laboratory Service Bill
facilitates a very objective alignment and, in other words, it focuses in
the right direction.

It certainly gives life to our new Constitution wherein every South African
is guaranteed a right to basic health care. In this regard, the Bill seeks
to consolidate and establish a national health laboratory, thereby making
the service cost-effective and incisive. It is also based on sound business
principles and in this regard, I wish to quote Kenfield Morely:


  In investing money, the amount of interest you want should depend on
  whether you want to eat well or whether you want to sleep well.

I believe that this Bill attempts to do both.

This Bill is a well-calculated one and does not have a top-down approach.
It provides for one establishment of a fully representative board. With the
enabling framework and powers vested in the board, it allows sufficient
flexibility to perform such additional functions in the event of any
epidemics.
The UDM supports the Bill, and I wish to raise two concerns. Firstly, the
board does not seek to elect its own chairperson and deputy chairperson.
Secondly, whilst this Bill provides for foreign governments to acquire
services from our institutions, what happens in the event of nonpayment?

Ms C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the ACDP is opposed to this Bill because it
constitutes centralisation and the effective nationalisation of our
forensic chemistry laboratories and all provincial health laboratories.
This includes laboratories from the SA Institute for Medical Research and
National Centre for Occupational Health.

This Bill is retrogressive in that centralisation will not bring services
closer to the people, and will certainly be not more efficient or cost-
effective. In fact, centralisation of services could create endless
transport problems, thus causing delays in doctors and hospitals receiving
results on tests. Many of these services could well be privatised but,
instead, the Government is nationalising and promoting the existence of a
monopoly. Coercion is another factor, as the public health sector is now
compelled to purchase from the national health laboratory service.

Also of great concern is the fact that Government is passing this Bill
without having reached an agreement with the eight teaching hospitals which
are acutely affected. National scientists and highly qualified people who
train our medical graduates and are involved in research projects will be
negatively affected, and this will impact on future generations.

Due to the closure of the provincial laboratory at the University of Orange
Free State, the total personnel component will cost the university an
additional R30 million a year. There is a great risk of marginalising
medical faculties as far as research is concerned. Losing top scientists
and professionals is another risk, as people are expected to relocate
families, etc at the dictate of the Government. These people are in demand
worldwide and easily poached.
 
The ACDP is not satisfied that there has been proper consultation with
relevant people in regard to this Bill, which runs counter to all
international practices. The ACDP will therefore not support it.
Dr E E JASSAT: Mr Chairperson and hon members, I want to commend the
Minister and her department for a job well done.

As a medical doctor who has suffered much frustration related to laboratory
support, especially in rural areas, this Bill is nothing but good news. In
fact, the establishment of a new laboratory service to support the national
health system is long overdue. Of course, the process entails the abolition
of the SA Institute for Medical Research, the National Institute for
Virology, the National Centre for Occupational Health and the forensic
chemistry laboratories. These institutions, together with provincial health
laboratory services, are amalgamated under this Bill we are debating this
afternoon.

We hope that this initiative will provide for an integrated, co-ordinated,
affordable, accessible and equitable health laboratory service which will
primarily support the public health sector. The streamlining of this new
service is in line with international developments which promote health,
harmonisation of laboratory standards and quality assurance, efficiency,
cost-effectiveness and the optimal use of national resources.
This new environment is ideal to promote access to new technologies. The
Bill extensively deals with issues related to intellectual property rights,
discoveries, inventions, improvements in medicines and so on.

This Bill enables the provision of services beyond our country's borders,
and it is an opportunity to harmonise laboratory standards throughout the
SADC region and lend support to those neighbours who require such support.
We are aware that we cannot function optimally if we do not support our
neighbours.

The Bill does not confine the service to the SADC region only. In fact,
partnership with counterparts throughout the world is encouraged to ensure
that we develop and enhance best practices and excellence.

I wish to differ with the hon Mr Ellis and hon Ms Dudley. I cannot agree
with them when they say that privatisation is the answer. Privatisation
leads to kickbacks, as recently revealed in Johannesburg, where doctors
were perversely rewarded for sending samples to some private laboratories,
resulting in increased costs to both patients and medical aid societies.
We in the ANC wish the new service well, and call on them to ensure that
the objective of the Bill, ie improved service delivery, is at all times
paramount.

The ANC supports this Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, before I make my concluding remarks,
let me acknowledge in the gallery out there Prof Johnny Sacks, who was part
of the task team, and thank him for a job well done. [Applause.]

Obviously, I cannot, and will not thank the DP, the New NP and the ACDP.
Who was Dr Gous speaking for? Mr Ellis stood here and spoke on behlaf of
the DP, and Dr Gous spoke on behalf of the Democratic Alliance. Is there a
party in this Parliament known as the Democratic Alliance? I did not know
that it exists. Of course, I can understand that change, in most cases, is
very threatening, and that sometimes it causes pain and is very
frightening. But that does not mean that we should not move on or that we
should do nothing and continue to nurse the feelings of the likes of Mr
Ellis, Dr Gous and Ms Dudley.

Who on earth would not want to promote harmonisation of any services, in
this regard the laboratory standards, quality assurances, efficiency, cost-
effectiveness and the rational use of resources? Who would not want to
promote access to new and appropriate technologies? It is only the DP. Or
is it the Democratic Alliance?

I should like to thank Dr Nkomo very much for supporting the Bill. Indeed
it is true that we have taken all steps to ensure its smooth
implementation. I think that this is the result of extensive consultation
with stakeholders and the fact that the implementation will be phased in.

Of course, Mr Ellis, also did not support the Bill, knows very well that
the previous government did not implement the recommendations because
different services were planned for different races. Therefore, a single
laboratory service would not have worked indeed. I think he should get this
straight into his head: Health is public good and cannot be privatised
carte blanche, full stop! We will not privatise health.

A proper situation analysis and an audit of assets has, indeed, been done
with due diligence, to plan for the implementation. We are, therefore,
really confident about the implementation.

I do not know about the mobile units that Madam Rabinowitz kept on talking
about. I do not have before me any offers of the mobile units to do rapid
HIV tests. All I know is that we are working very closely with the National
Institute for Virology, which is validating these tests. As she knows - and
I have said this repeatedly - we have done an audit of our voluntary
counselling and testing sites, and we are now in a position to expand
those. But I do not know about the mobile ones - I have not heard of them.
Maybe she can share the information with me in my office. Let me also ask
her, how does one privatise in the face of the kickback that she is
pointing out? [Interjections.] Competition is good. But how does one
protect the interests of the public in the face of irresponsible
privatisation? I hope she will answer those questions for me.

Dr Gous also prefers privatisation. Of course, the public sector could not
compete with the private sector, precisely because of the horrible state in
which the NP left it. We could not. This gives us an opportunity to do
that. It is not true that this Bill gives too much power to the Minister. I
am sure he has not even seen that the board of the professionals will,
indeed, be appointed to oversee the operations of the National Health
Laboratory Services on behalf of the Minister. So, I do not know where the
Minister will get the powers Dr Gous is talking about.

I would like to thank Mr Naidoo very much for supporting the Bill. Let me
just say to him that the Minister appoints the chairperson precisely
because the Minister, Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, is an accountable person
with regard to health services delivery.

Ms Dudley was not here yesterday. I do not understand how she can stand up
here and debate this Bill. [Interjections.] She just does not understand
what we were talking about yesterday. So I am not surprised about the
remarks she has made. Is it the view of her church members that we should
privatise? [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Party, New National Party and African
Christian Democratic Party dissenting).

The House adjourned at 17:27.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 12 October
         2000 took a decision, in accordance with Joint Rule 216, that the
         Marine Living Resources Amendment Bill [B 68 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 76(1)) be fast-tracked by, where necessary,
         shortening any period within which any step in the legislative
         process relating to the Bill must be completed, in order to make
         it possible for the Bill to be passed by both Houses of Parliament
         before adjournment in November 2000.


         In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in both
         Houses for ratification.


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 12
         October 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Marine Living Resources Amendment Bill [B 68 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism - National Assembly).


     (3)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bill:


         (i)     Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B
              51D - 2000] - Act No 33 of 2000 (assented to and signed by
              President on 11 October 2000).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The President of the Republic:


     Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "Presidency", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

2.    The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
     National Council of Provinces:


     Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

3.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

4.    The Minister of Education:


     Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Education", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

5.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs:


     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

6.    The Minister of Defence:


     Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Defence", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

7.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Statistics South Africa",
         Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

     (2)    Memorandum on Vote No 36 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.

     (3)    Memorandum on Adjustments Estimate for 2000-2001.

     (4)    Adjustments Estimate of Expenditure to be defrayed from the
         National Revenue Fund during the financial year ending 31 March
         2001 [RP 1-2000].

8.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Provincial and Local Government",
     Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

9.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Arts, Culture, Science and Technology",
     Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

10.   The Minister of Transport:


     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

11.   The Minister of Public Enterprises:


     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Public Enterprises", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

12.   The Minister of Public Works:


     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Public Works", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
     2001.

13.   The Minister of Social Development:


     Memorandum on Vote No 35 - "Social Development", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

14.   The Minister of Safety and Security:


     Memorandums on -


     (1)    Vote No 17 - "Independent Complaints Directorate", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.

     (2)    Vote No 28 - "South African Police Service", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.

15.   The Minister of Housing:


     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Housing", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

16.   The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

17.   The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Justice and Constitutional Development",
     Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

18.   The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Environmental Affairs and Tourism",
     Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

19.   The Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Memorandums on -


     (1)    Vote No 24 - "Public Service and Administration", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.

     (2)    Vote No 25 - "Public Service Commission", Adjustments Estimate,
         2000-2001.

     (3)    Vote No 27 - "South African Management Development Institute",
         Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

20.   The Minister of Communications:
     (1)    Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Communications", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.

     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
         Institute of South Africa for 1999-2000.

21.   The Minister of Labour:


     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Labour", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

22.   The Minister of Correctional Services:


     Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Correctional Services", Adjustments
     Estimate, 2000-2001.

23.   The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     emorandums on -
      
     (1)    Vote No 3 - "Agriculture", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

     (2)    Vote No 20 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

24.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry", Adjustments
     Estimate, 2000-2001.

25.   The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Minerals and Energy", Adjustments Estimate,
     2000-2001.

26.   The Minister of Health:


     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Health", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.

27.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation:


     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Sport and Recreation", Adjustments
     Estimate, 2000-2001.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
     Life and Status of Women on Police Crime Statistics on Rape, dated 10
     October 2000:


         The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
         and Status of Women has noted the fact that crime statistics
         reported by the SAPS at present do not disaggregate rape
         statistics by sex.

         Rape, as defined in South African law, is a crime which can only
         be perpetrated against women. Yet, the police present their crime
         figures routinely per 100 000 of the total population (ie men and
         women), instead of presenting those figures per 100 000 women.
         Since women make up approximately half the population, the burden
         of rape faced by women is essentially twice that faced by the
         total population. Presenting figures per total population
         diminishes the seriousness of the problem, especially in the
         calculation of the rate of rape.

         The editor of "The World's Women 1995: Trends and Statistics" has
         reported that most countries define rape in relation to the female
         population and therefore present data only for the female
         population, per 100 000 women.

         The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
         and Status of Women therefore calls on the SAPS and Statistics SA,
         during the review of crime statistics that is currently under way,
         to ensure that -


         1) rape statistics are disaggregated by sex; and
         2) all crime statistics are routinely presented in a manner which
              is sex-disaggregated.


         The above will bring South Africa in line with the commitments
         made by Government in respect of the Beijing Platform for Action
         and CEDAW.


